PHH Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Judge Studies a Run For Top Legal Post
Karen Burstein, a Family Court judge in Brooklyn who once served in the State Senate and was head of the State Consumer Protection Board, said yesterday that she is considering running for State Attorney General.
Ms.
Burstein said that she has been encouraged to run by friends and colleagues and that an announcement could come within the month.
But she said speculation in political circles that she had already decided to run was inaccurate.


Giuliani Tries Electronic School-Spending Freeze
Without warning the Board of Education, the Giuliani administration last week loaded software on a computer accounting system to block spending on school supplies.
But the administration reversed the spending freeze yesterday after the Board considered legal action, and the Mayor's lawyers said the Mayor may have the computer power but not the legal power to cut off the spending.


Money for Magellan
Additional Federal money will allow the Magellan spacecraft to continue studying the interior and atmosphere of Venus at least through September, say officials at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
NASA promised a $1.7 million increase, which will come from unspent funds in its 1994 allocation, Jim Doyle, a spokesman for the lab in Pasadena, said last week.
The additional money brings the total for the project to $6.2 million for this year.


Huskies' Demons Run Out Of Time
This seemed to be the worst place for the Connecticut Huskies to head after a serious weekend party.
Not a game at Georgetown, or more precisely, an evening within the dark, antiseptic atmosphere of the rechristened USAir Arena.
Not the push-comes-to-shove assertiveness of the Hoyas, who had never lost to Connecticut in the former Capital Centre, and who had already begun the late-season surge that has symbolized the John Thompson era.
For Connecticut, the afterglow from the clinching of first place in the Big East last Saturday night, with its extended lovefest at center court at the Hartford Civic Center, had to be extinguished, and fast.
"We've had balls bounce off heads," said Jim Calhoun, the coach of the Huskies.
"Foul shots with three seconds to go. We've got demons here."


Newsday Hires Lupica
The Daily News sports columnist MIKE LUPICA has joined Newsday, that paper's publisher, ROBERT M. JOHNSON, said yesterday.
Lupica, 41, had been a columnist at The News since 1977, except for a 14-month stint at The National, a defunct all-sports daily.


Mariners' Mane Man Is 'Effectively Wild'
Two reasons for American League hitters to fear the sight of Randy Johnson this year: He expects to pick up where he left off last season and he doesn't think he received the proper recognition for what he achieved last season.
"I haven't got a whole lot of respect from my peers," Johnson said.
"I don't need to be respected by them, but they have to face me."


Syntex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


First Lady Visits Hospital, and Sidesteps Budget Dispute
Surrounded by New York Democratic politicians, Hillary Rodham Clinton went to Kings County Hospital Center for an hour yesterday morning and left without saying a public word about the bitter construction controversy that has embroiled it, or indeed about the national health-care proposals that were her ostensible mission for coming.
With Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Representative Major R. Owens and Assemblyman Clarence Norman Jr. as eager escorts, Mrs.
Clinton met with doctors and toured a trauma unit, a nursery and an old-fashioned 14-bed general medicine ward whose scuffed red linoleum floors had been waxed and buffed just hours before.
But reporters were confined to one corner of the ward, and she took no questions.


Omnicom Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
The Italian Symphony Orchestra of Bergamo  Carnegie Hall
In Italy, where operatic culture is central and the symphonic world is a poor cousin, orchestras tend to be adjuncts of either opera houses or radio stations.
The vast administrative machinery and year-round schedule of an American or Northern European orchestra is rarely encountered.
But nature abhors a vacuum, and in 1986 a group of recent conservatory graduates banded together as the Italian Symphony Orchestra of Bergamo.


Toll Brothers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Canadian Agrees to Buy The Chicago Sun-Times
A company controlled by Conrad Black, the Canadian financier who has been building an international newspaper empire, has agreed to buy The Chicago Sun-Times for $180 million, representatives of Mr.
Black and the newspaper announced yesterday.
The acquisition of The Sun-Times, a tabloid, is expected to keep newspaper competition alive in Chicago, the city that helped to invent ferocious newspaper battles.


Lieut. Gen. Laurence Craigie, 92, First Military Jet Pilot for the U.S.
Laurence C. Craigie, a retired Lieutenant General in the Air Force who was the first military jet pilot for the United States, died on Sunday in the hospital at March Air Force Base in California, the Air Force reported.
He was 92 years old.
General Craigie's career in military aviation began when the Army had a fleet of propeller-driven biplanes and there was no separate Air Force; it ended in the age of supersonic jets.


FEDERATED DEPARTMENT STORES INC. (N)
Federated Department Stores Inc.'s unexpectedly strong performance in fiscal 1993 demonstrated the importance of paring expenses.
Although the company's comparable-store sales crept ahead just 2.1 percent in the fourth quarter and a slim 1.9 percent over the entire year, profits soared as Federated shed unnecessary expenses and kept inventories reined in tight.


Nordson Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


State Accuses Lilco of Deception in Ads Touting a Rate Freeze
The Long Island Lighting Company and one of its longtime critics, the state consumer protection chief, clashed today over whether a recent advertising campaign by the utility accurately represents the effects of the company's proposed rate freeze for 1995 and 1996.
At a news conference today, Richard M. Kessel, executive director of the State Consumer Protection Board, said that even with the rate freeze Lilco would still be charging more because of increased "fuel adjustment" charges, which are authorized to compensate for lower electric sales and other expenses.
He complained that Lilco's advertisements failed to mention these increases and were misleading.


Sir Harold Acton Is Dead at 89; Prototypic Esthete of the 1920's
Sir Harold Acton, a scholar, poet and historian who was legendary as the consummate esthete of his generation, died on Sunday at his family's Renaissance villa on a hillside overlooking Florence.
He was 89.
He had been in frail health for some time, friends said.


CBS Emerges as the Biggest Winner
Howard Stringer has a poor sense of drama.
The president of the CBS Broadcast Network broke his left leg falling on the ice outside Northern Lights Hall last Wednesday before the ladies' figure skating short program.
A more theatrical scenario would have had Stringer kicking up his leg doing a triumphant can-can in Hamar, Norway, a day later upon hearing that Nancy, Tonya &amp; Company had propelled CBS to a record one-day Olympics rating of a 48.5.


Dr. Stuart M. Berger, Health Advice Columnist, 40
Dr.
Stuart M. Berger, an author of best-selling diet and health books, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 40.
A spokeswoman for the New York City Medical Examiner's office, Ellen Borakove, said that an autopsy had been performed but that the cause of death had not yet been determined.


By Design; Getting Rough With Fabric
Think pleats.
Not box pleats, accordion pleats or umbrella pleats, but random, wrinkled pleats that look as if they've been crushed in the hand.
Issey Miyake made pleating modern by using synthetic fabrics with irregular crinkles.
Many women took to them because they covered minor figure flaws and were practical for traveling.
Now, designers and manufacturers at lower price points are playing with new ways of pleating cotton, polyester, rayon and silk.


Sports of The Times; Another River Jordan for the Knicks?
AN hour before he made his debut as an Atlanta Hawk in Philadelphia on Sunday, Dannny Manning sat in the locker room preparing to have his ankles taped.
As he climbed on the table, Jim O'Toole, the Hawks' trainer since 1969, described the team's training table etiquette.


No Chemical Arms Used by Iraqi Forces, U.N. Inquiry Finds
Investigations into the Iraqi military's reported use of chemical weapons last September against the Shiite Muslims in its southern marshlands has turned up no evidence that the weapons were used, the United Nations' Special Commission in charge of disarming Iraq reported today.
The Commission, which began the investigation in November, took animal, plant, water, air and soil samples during an inspection.
The samples were brought back for laboratory analysis in the United States and Britain.


Judge Grants Immunity In U.S.-Iraqi Loan Case
A Federal judge here granted immunity from prosecution today to an already convicted official of an Italian bank to prompt his testimony to a grand jury, the banker's lawyer said.
Judge G. Ernest Tidwell of United States District Court here signed an order granting immunity to Christopher P. Drogoul, a major figure in a case involving billions of dollars in American Government-guaranteed loans to Iraq made by Mr.
Drogoul's former employer, the Atlanta branch of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro.


Hirsch Could Slip Healy Off Bench
Two weekends ago when the Rangers were playing the lowly Whalers in Hartford, goalie Glenn Healy walked into Civic Center and was greeted by a Whaler player, who noted that Healy wasn't in the starting lineup for the second consecutive night.
"They won't even let you play against us?" said the player.


Folic Acid Emerges As a Nutritional Star
FOLIC acid, long unheralded even by health food enthusiasts, has suddenly been thrust into the nutritional limelight.
A series of recent studies suggest that this B vitamin may be a major player in warding off heart attacks, strokes and certain common cancers.
Even in people not now considered deficient in the vitamin, a less than optimal intake can double or triple the risk of developing one or more of these killer diseases.
Often called folacin or folate (its biologically active form), folic acid is already well established as critically important in preventing spina bifida and anencephaly, both devastating birth defects of the neural tube.
A nationwide effort is under way urging women to take supplements containing folic acid and to increase their intake of folate-rich foods, like dark green leafy vegetables, before becoming pregnant as well as during the first months of pregnancy.
This is especially important for women who have been taking oral contraceptives, which interfere with the body's use of folic acid.


WEST BANK MASSACRE: The Settlers; Settlers Say the Arabs Can Now Know Fear Too
Seven days before Dr.
Baruch Goldstein opened fire on Muslim worshipers in Hebron, a Jewish settler from here, Zipora Sasson, was cut down in the fifth month of her pregnancy by a Palestinian ambush while she was driving home with her husband and two children.
The two episodes may have been completely different in magnitude, but many of the inhabitants of this Jewish settlement repeatedly drew a connection today as they tried to come to grips with Dr.
Goldstein's personal act of terrorism.


Surgery Today for Simms
Giants quarterback Phil Simms will undergo diagnostic arthroscopic surgery on his right (throwing) shoulder this morning at the Hospital for Special Surgery-Cornell Medical Center.
The surgery will be performed by Russell F. Warren, the team's doctor.
Simms, 38, was bothered by soreness in his shoulder during the latter part of last season and did not play in the Pro Bowl because of it.
He has been resting and rehabilitating the shoulder since the end of the season, but the soreness has not subsided.
In a statement released through the team, Simms said the rest hadn't helped and he wanted to find out what was wrong so that it could be corrected in time for him to participate in training camp.


Tibet Couldn't Lose What It Never Had
To the Editor:
James D. Seymour (letter, Feb. 15) chooses to concoct his own Chinese "national past" to correct the supposed "destruction of Chinese history" in China.
Ironically, it is Mr.
Seymour who is carrying a "rewritten history" in his head.


Times's Financial Listings Are Expanded and Revised
The New York Times introduces new tables of foreign stock transactions today, as well as revised tables covering bonds, futures and options on futures.
The daily foreign stock tables now cover 24 foreign markets.
In addition, the tables provide information on stock indexes in more countries.


Corrections
A dance listing in the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday misstated the telephone number for Mikhail Baryshnikov's White Oak Dance Project.
It is (212) 307-4100.


A Jury Judges Waco
The jury's mixed verdict in the deaths of four of the Treasury agents who raided the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., has dealt another mortifying blow to Federal law enforcement.
Just about the only person who does not view the verdict as a rebuke to the massive and unnecessary police action is Attorney General Janet Reno.
The raid, a year ago yesterday, was botched, as were most of the Government's efforts to arrange the surrender of the heavily armed cultist David Koresh.
Along with dozens of his followers and their children, Mr.
Koresh perished last April in a fiery response to a final raid, by the F.B.I.


Accounts
*
Cole-Haan Inc., Yarmouth, Me., to Weiss, Whitten, Stagliano, New York, to handle the shoe company's account, previously at Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss, New York.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $4 million. *
Frank's Nursery and Crafts, Warren, Mich., to W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Southfield, Mich., to handle the retail chain's account, previously at Stone, August, Baker Communications Cos., Troy, Mich.
Billings were estimated at $3 million. *
Home Goods, Framingham, Mass., to Doyle Advertising and Design Group, Boston, to handle the discount chain's account, previously at Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, Boston.
Billings were estimated at $1 million.


WEST BANK MASSACRE: Diplomacy; Clinton Praises Rabin for His Tough Stance on Militant Settlers
The Clinton Administration today praised the steps Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin took on Sunday to curb radical nationalist settlers.
Mr.
Rabin announced the measures a day after the President urged Israel to take action to keep negotiations with the P.L.O. alive.
In an important gesture intended to induce Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, to keep his pledge to resume talks in Washington, Mr.
Clinton told Mr.
Rabin in a telephone call on Saturday evening that it was crucial to curb militant settlers, a senior Administration official said.


Tax-Cut Bill Gets Support In Trenton
The Republican-dominated Assembly, with wide bipartisan support, today delivered on the first installment of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's campaign promise to make the largest tax cut in state history.
Before the $1.5 billion tax cuts become law, the three-bill package that includes legislation to reduce the state income tax by 5 percent for everyone must win approval on Thursday from the Senate.
But that body, which is also under Republican control, has been much more restrained in its support of the plan.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.23
3.65
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.40
3.36
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.61
3.58
3.05
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.13
6.19
5.94
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.65
6.71
6.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.49
7.53
7.79
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.77
5.77
5.84
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Amnesty of Foes Brings Disarray To Yeltsin Team
President Boris N. Yeltsin suddenly dismissed the chief of the secret police today and canceled a nationwide television address amid signs that his Government was in deep disarray over a parliamentary amnesty for his opponents.
Nikolai M. Golushko, the spy chief, was apparently fired for refusing Mr.
Yeltsin's orders to delay the release of prisoners after Parliament granted them amnesty, Russian officials said today, speaking on condition of anonymity.


TREASURY IMPOSES NEW REGULATIONS ON SOME SHOTGUNS
With a new Federal law requiring background checks on buyers of handguns now in effect, the Clinton Administration today announced new restrictions on semiautomatic shotguns, favorite weapons in the drug trade.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said three types of shotguns, one of which can supposedly fire 12 shells in three seconds, were being reclassified as "destructive weapons," a class that includes machine guns.


Bonds Buoyed by an Inflation Index
Prices of Government securities moved higher yesterday, buoyed by the Chicago purchasing managers index, which showed an easing of inflation in February, and by more reassuring comments from Federal Reserve officials.
The purchasing managers' report is not the best barometer of future inflation, traders said, but because Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, said last week that the report was something the Fed paid attention to, the market did also.


Ecolab Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Peripatetic Chancellor
Ann Reynolds, Chancellor of the City University of New York, spent 65 days away from her office last year attending meetings of corporate boards and professional groups, according to an investigation by New York Times reporters.
This is an unacceptable absentee rate for the highly paid leader of a troubled university system that badly needs her full-time attention.
Dr.
Reynolds insists that her participation in these outside activities conformed to university rules and even benefited the institution.
Her publicists contend that everything she did was perfectly legal.
But this is less a matter of legalities than of judgment and common sense.


Handleman Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


The Road to Salvation Gets an Express Lane
TIME does seem to stand still here.
The tallest buildings in sight are silos.
The general store on Main Street is the only store on Main Street.
Houses were built for the ages, ages ago, stone by stone.
People are as harried as in any Commuterville, though.
Maybe more.
Weekday mornings, it's rush-rush by 5:30 to beat the traffic and troopers to midtown Manhattan, more than an hour away on a good day.
And drivers heading to eastern Pennsylvania, a hop on Interstate 78, keep the roads stop-and-go until almost 9.
No one seems to have much time any more, for heaven's sake, which is why the Rev.
John D. Kleist's "Express Worship" is such a hit.


'I Am Shamed,' Rabin Says
Following are excerpts from the speech to Parliament today by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin:
Today I stand before you, members of Knesset, and before the citizens of the State of Israel -- and in front of the entire world -- and as a Jew, as an Israeli, as a man and as a human being, I am shamed over the disgrace imposed upon us by a degenerate murderer.
. . .
This murderer came out of a small and marginal political context.
He grew in a swamp whose murderous sources are found here, and across the sea; they are foreign to Judaism. . . .


Westvaco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Thinning Ozone Layer Implicated in Decline Of Frogs and Toads
SCIENTISTS investigating a worldwide decline in frogs and other amphibians have found the first strong evidence identifying a likely global culprit: the rise in ultraviolet radiation caused by the thinning of the atmospheric ozone layer.
Researchers from Oregon State University say a new study shows that a form of radiation in sunlight called ultraviolet B is killing off eggs of frogs and toads known to be in decline in the Cascade Mountains of Oregon.
Biologists found that the species that are in decline appear to have relatively limited abilities to repair damage from this natural radiation, which alters the structure of the genetic material, DNA.


Observer; The Recovery Room
We spent three weeks where it never snows and there lost touch with the news, which is often fatal to journalists.
In journalism survival requires a zealot's belief in the importance of the present moment, and three weeks of refuge from present moments can leave that faith in tatters.
Three weeks without immersion in the millions of absolutely vital present moments that constitute journalism's definition of three weeks -- Ah reader, would you believe how little of consequence really happens in three weeks?


City Council Vote Delays A Public Toilet Contract
New York City's troubled effort to award a contract for public toilets seems likely to drag on even longer after a City Council committee advanced a measure yesterday that will delay the signing of a contract for up to two years.
In a busy day filled with emotionally charged hearings, the Council also approved legislation yesterday to regulate horse-drawn carriages.
The new guidelines would extend the carriages' hours of operation and increase their range farther from Central Park.


Wellpoint Health Networks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Whittle Ends Venture In Waiting-Room TV
Whittle Communications L.P., the company that produces an advertiser-supported daily newscast for students in schools, announced yesterday that it had suspended another program -- television programming for doctors' waiting rooms.
The company, based in Knoxville, Tenn., said it could not continue to offer its sponsored Special Report videos, which were started in 1989, because the cost of delivering them by truck was too high.
Also suspended were Whittle's two other waiting-room projects, Special Report magazine, which began in 1988, and Special Report brochures on different medical subjects, which was started in 1979.


Brady Law Goes Into Effect; Some Gripe but More Shrug
Rod Weinberg, a 51-year-old middle school science teacher, walked into New Hampshire's largest gun shop today and bought a .50-caliber LAR Grizzly semiautomatic handgun for $953.95.
But he was unable to leave the store with it.
The Brady law, mandating a five-day wait and a background check, went into effect today, and Mr.
Weinberg, like gun buyers around the nation, now faces a legal hurdle with every handgun purchase.


Value Health Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Obstacle-Strewn Road to Rethinking the Numbers on AIDS
Determining how many Americans are infected with the virus that causes AIDS is an imprecise science at best.
But Federal health officials are trying again, and it appears that the current estimate of one million will be lowered.
The estimate, made in 1989, represents the midpoint of the range reported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.
It set the figure at 800,000 to 1.2 million.
The widely cited one million midpoint figure has been attacked as too low or too high, depending on the critic's point of view.


Classical Music in Review
Orpheus Chamber Orchestra  Avery Fisher Hall
In a benefit for the Shaare Zedek Medical Center in Jerusalem, the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra offered Handel, Mozart and Dvorak on Sunday evening.
The most heartening playing came at the beginning, where modern instruments made the Handel B-flat Concerto Grosso from Opus 6 shine with elegance and energy.
One also admired the group's fineness and warmth in two Dvorak Waltzes after intermission.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A glimpse of television's future is here now -- on the screens of millions of home computers, some experts say.
Computer disks known as CD-ROM's are offering an eclectic array of video clips, animation, sound and text.
The disks have made their way into the home office and rumpus room as the fastest-growing segment of the $29 billion annual software industry.  [ Page A1. ]


CHRONICLE
JACK NICHOLSON has been charged with misdemeanor assault and vandalism for allegedly bashing the car of a motorist with a golf club, the city attorney's office in Los Angeles said yesterday.
The actor, 57, is to be arraigned in Van Nuys Municipal Court on March 31.
Each count carries a maximum six-month jail term and a $1,000 fine, Mike Qualls, a spokesman for the city attorney, told The Associated Press.


SOCCER
The Name Game
In an attempt to make the players more easily recognizable to the American public during the World Cup this summer, FIFA, the sport's worldwide governing body, has decided to put the names of the players on the back of their jerseys for the first time in the history of the tournament.


Review/Fashion; In London, 'Dress for Excess' and Other Diversions
London fashion, at a crucial moment in its waning importance to the press and buyers, seems to be trying to seduce by slipping into something more comfortable.
Suddenly, London runways were steaming with negligees and nighties, bras peeping from chiffon, garters and brightly colored underwear flashing beneath miniskirts, tiny corset hooks closing vests and jackets.
Coats were cut like bathrobes, skirts were often fringed like boudoir curtains, and the prevalent colors were baby blue and pale pink, baby-doll shades for "Pretty Baby" clothes.


The Bytes Of the Past Emerge As a Book
SINCE 1975, Byte magazine has informed, inspired and entertained enthusiasts of the personal computer.
Like Scientific American, which is where paleontologists hear about developments in cosmology, Byte is where a programmer hears about sound cards, a sound-card expert sees spreadsheets, a database specialist gets the news on networks.
The cover story of the March issue, for example, is "Building the Data Highway," 28 consecutive pages, including advertisements, on the political, social and technological ("Should the transport protocol be ATM? TCP/ IP? TCP/IP over ATM?") factors in constructing the broadest-yet wide-area network.
There are also reviews of 46 portable computers with 80486 processors; an article, "Teutonizing the Newton," on the German version of the Apple P.D.A. (Personal Digital Assistant); a piece on Opendoc ("a new vendor-neutral document standard"); a commentary on "Virtual Legality," the knotty legal issues raised by on-line communications, and Jerry Pournelle's immodest monthly musings on practically everything.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  MINNESOTA TWINS -- Agreed to terms with Ron Caridad, Larry Casian, Jose Correa, Eddie Guardado and Juan Pulido, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
National League  MONTREAL EXPOS -- Agreed to terms with Tim Laker and Tim Spehr, catchers; Sean Berry, Wil Cordero and Mike Hardge, infielders; Rondell White and Lou Frazier, outfielders; and Tavo Alvarez, Miguel Batista, Jeff Fassero and Gabe White, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Agreed to terms with Trevor Howard, pitcher, on a three-year contract and Ricky Gutierrez, shortstop, on a one-year contract.
Eastern League  ALBANY YANKEES -- Named Matt Liscum assistant general manager.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Activated Gerald Madkins, guard, from the injured list.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK RANGERS -- Added Corey Hirsch, goalie, from Team Canada.
Signed Todd Marchant, center, and assigned him to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
Assigned Barry Richter, defenseman, and Jean-Yves Roy, forward, to Binghamton.
East Coast Hockey League  DAYTON BOMBERS -- Announced the resignation of Les Crooks, assistant general manager.


Clinton Travels for Rostenkowski, and Major
President Clinton divided his time today between two leaders in political peril, flying to Chicago to offer an effusive tribute to Representative Dan Rostenkowski and then moving on for a rendezvous here with Prime Minister John Major of Britain.
Both stops were preceded by some tension.
Mr.
Rostenkowski, a Chicago Democrat who faces a difficult primary election on March 15, is the subject of a Federal criminal investigation.
White House officials had debated whether Mr.
Clinton should be seen as taking sides in the race.


Knicks Get Away From It All In Reno
In an attempt to escape the pressures of their four-game losing streak, Pat Riley whisked the Knicks on an off-day trip to Reno.
Neither the coach nor the players wanted to confirm their whereabouts earlier today.
But several players, along with several employees at the Knicks' hotel here in Sacramento, revealed that the Knicks flew directly to Reno from Phoenix after Sunday's 92-78 loss to the Suns.


3 Child-Size Safaris In Animal Territory
CREATING software for children carries the same burden as creating toys.
From Lincoln Logs to CD-ROM's, manufacturers must come up with a way of pleasing both the children who play with the goods and the adults who buy them.
One relatively safe way to please both audiences, experience has shown, is to rely on animals.
Oh-h-h, aren't they cute?
And software companies have clearly learned the lesson, for animals from the extinct (dinosaurs) to the nearly human (Berenstain Bears, Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtles) inhabit an extraordinary range of children's software.


The Silver Disk May Soon Eclipse the Silver Screen
Even as the recent collapse of the planned merger of Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications Inc. has raised new doubts about the promise of interactive television, some experts are saying that a glimpse of television's future is here now -- on the screens of nearly two million home computers.
From the instructional, like the "Mayo Clinic Family Health Book" and "Art Gallery," a guided tour of the National Gallery in London, to the sheer escapism of shoot-'em-up games with lifelike gore and pornography, computer disks known as CD-ROM's are offering an eclectic array of video clips, animation, sound and text.
For the Microsoft Corporation, a best seller has been its $99 Encarta multimedia encyclopedia, which a company executive said sold by the "hundreds of thousands" at Christmas.


Kunstler Accepts Rail-Shooting Case
Colin Ferguson, who has been accused of killing six people aboard a Long Island Rail Road train on Dec. 7, has retained William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, to handle his case, Mr.
Kuby said today.
Mr.
Kuby said that in a 45-minute meeting this afternoon at the Nassau County Jail, Mr.
Ferguson "asked us to represent him, and we agreed to do so."


Enter the Melting Pot and Meet the Mayor


Novell Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Oklahoma Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
'Cavalleria Rusticana' and 'Pagliacci'  Amato Opera 319 Bowery, at Second Street East Village Through March 20
The suspension of disbelief is an important faculty for an operagoer, and sometimes it is drawn on heavily.
At the Amato Opera, the scenery is slender, the orchestra, led by Anthony Amato, comprises an electronic keyboard and a few wind players, and the singers come to their roles with an eagerness that is not always matched by polish.
The double bill of Mascagni's "Cavalleria Rusticana" and Leoncavallo's "Pagliacci" that is running weekends showed the best and worst sides of this inventive little company on Saturday night.


TakeCare Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bringing More Ice to New York -- But This Time It's Art


Sherrod Memorial Service
A memorial service will be held in Washington on Thursday for Robert Sherrod, the author of books on World War II who had been the editor of The Saturday Evening Post and a correspondent in World War II.
The service will be at 1:30 P.M. at St.
Albans Church at Massachusetts and Wisconsin Avenues N.W.
Mr.
Sherrod died on Feb. 13 at his home in Washington.
He was 85.


Meeting Set for Coaches
The Black Coaches Association and the National Collegiate Athletic Association will speak tonight, their first full discussion since the coaches' group threatened to disrupt the college basketball season.


Classical Music in Review
Leontyne Price  Soprano Brooklyn College
The thought of American singing without Leontyne Price is hardly imaginable, and judging from her recital on Sunday afternoon, we may not have to imagine it for some time to come.
Quite naturally, the distinguished American soprano, well into her seventh decade, no longer has the instrument that made her famous 35 years ago.
What remains, however, has been husbanded with care.
The wobble that affects older voices is scarcely to be heard.
The sense of pitch is absolutely true, the control over material firm.


Southam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Latvia's Worry: What to Do With All Its Russians
Whenever Valda Liepa hears talk that Russians in Latvia are the victims of discrimination, a poor and oppressed minority being refused basic civil rights in their new land, she shakes her head and mutters.
"It was a Russian who just evicted me from my shop, so he can rent to another Russian," said Ms.
Liepa, whose toy store is one of the few in central Riga owned by a Latvian.
"If the Russians are so poorly off, as everyone says, then let me ask you: Why do they control most of the businesses in Riga, and have the biggest apartments?"


Patterson Dental Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Supreme Court to Consider Constitutionality of 1977 Child Pornography Law
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the Federal law against child pornography requires the Government to prove that those who distribute or receive sexually explicit films or photographs of minors are aware that the performers are not adults.
A Federal appeals court ruled in 1992 that because the law does not require proof of such knowledge, the statute violates the First Amendment's guarantee of free speech.


Cuomo Hires Garth for Post In Campaign
Recognizing that he could be vulnerable to a credible Republican challenge, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has hired the political impresario David Garth to be media consultant for his 1994 re-election campaign, senior advisers to the Cuomo campaign said today.
In hiring Mr.
Garth, the Democratic Governor has forged an intriguing alliance with the man who last year helped Rudolph W. Giuliani, a Republican, defeat David N. Dinkins, New York City's first black Mayor.
He also has joined forces with the strategist who ran two campaigns for Edward I. Koch against Mr.
Cuomo, a successful race for mayor in 1977 and an unsuccessful one for governor in 1982.


CHRONICLE
ANDRE PREVIN, the composer and conductor, had a reunion over the weekend with his former orchestra the Pittsburgh Symphony, but it was abruptly interrupted.
Mr.
Previn led the orchestra during concerts on Friday and Saturday but fainted at a party on Saturday evening and had to cancel a Sunday performance, said his agent, Jonathan Brill.


Richter Notches No. 100
One of the reasons the Ranger season is so interesting is that most other teams peak for them, measuring themselves against the best.
This makes many Ranger games intense and memorable, no matter who wins.
But that wasn't the case last night at Madison Square Garden, when the Philadelphia Flyers submitted by 4-1.
Eric Lindros, Philadelphia's large and powerful young star, wasn't much of a factor, managing just three shots on goal.
The Flyers seemed overly respectful of the Rangers, going down in just in 2 hours 21 minutes.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The long commercial slalom is over: Here are the medals for free-style product pitching.
IF Muzak is a "relentlessly running music faucet," as the composer Paul Hindemith once sneered, then CBS's coverage of the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, was a relentlessly running commercial faucet.
Mercifully, the thousands of spots that flooded millions of homes have been turned off -- at least for the next 875 days, when the 1996 Summer Olympics will begin in Atlanta.
The overwhelmingly banal and boring barrage of advertising had so deleterious an impact on this sore-eyed viewer that by Sunday night it had induced hallucinations that the name of a Norwegian soft drink, Solo, was visible in twinkling lights during the closing ceremonies.


Accuser Drops Abuse Charge Against Cardinal in Chicago
A Federal judge in Cincinnati dismissed all sexual-abuse charges against Joseph Cardinal Bernardin of Chicago yesterday after the Roman Catholic Archbishop's accuser acknowledged that his recollections of events he said occurred more than 17 years ago were not trustworthy.
At a news conference in Cincinnati, the accuser, Steven J. Cook, said, "I now realize that the memories which arose during and after hypnosis are unreliable," adding, "I can no longer proceed in good conscience."


Toronto-Dominion Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Special Teams Live Up to Their Name as Devils Romp
The special teams that had been awful in the previous five games delivered tonight for the Devils in a 5-1 triumph over the St.
Louis Blues at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Devils, who had allowed at least one power-play goal in the last five games, killed five penalties against St.
Louis, which was ranked sixth in the National Hockey League with the man advantage and had scored four power play goals in an 11-1 rout of Ottawa on Saturday night.


Classical Music in Review
Musica Sacra  St. Peter's Church
Traditionalists probably saw it as evidence of a world turned upside down, but Musica Sacra and the BMG recording company went ahead last week with a series of concerts re-creating contemporary-music releases on BMG's new Catalyst label.
Friday's concert, with the Musica Sacra chorus under the direction of Richard Westenburg, reproduced the program of one of the stronger disks in the series, "Of Eternal Light." Classics of 20th-century choral music -- Messiaen's "O Sacrum Convivium" and Ligeti's "Lux Aeterna" -- were juxtaposed with pieces commissioned expressly for the recording.


Review/Music; Works by Morton Feldman, Famous Unknown
Morton Feldman wrote nothing that was not beautiful.
"Rothko Chapel," composed in 1971 for the Menil Foundation's devotional room of Rothko paintings in Houston, stands apart even from the rest of his remarkable output.
This half-hour soundscape for viola, wordless chorus, percussion and celeste is among the loftiest and loneliest utterances in 20th-century American music.
Isolated chords and melodic fragments hover like shrouded forms, surrounded by thick silence; a few minutes before the end, the fog abruptly lifts and the viola sings a heartbreaking Hebraic melody in simple harmonic garb.
Even in an imperfect performance like the one on Continuum's all-Feldman program Saturday night at Tully Hall, the effect is nothing less than sublime.
Six years after his death, Feldman remains both famous and unknown.
No longer overshadowed by his onetime mentor John Cage, he has become hugely influential within certain creative circles; younger composers study him intently, and the adjective "Feldmanesque" has entered the lexicon of anyone writing about contemporary music.
He is venerated for his aloofness from 20th-century procedural polemics and his dedication to the sensuous substance of harmony.


Our Tourists Can Save Russia
1To the Editor:
Not that I dispute your facts on crime in Moscow in "Riding Shotgun in Capitalist Russia" (Business Day, Feb. 16), but by overdramatizing events that have become commonplace in our own society, you do damage to one of the few areas of Russia's fledgling free market economy that work: tourism.


Los Angeles Drivers Try New Ways on Old Roads
The Santa Monica Freeway, the world's busiest thoroughfare, links the Pacific Ocean beaches with the downtown high-rises here, divides the rich neighborhoods of Los Angeles from the poor and figures prominently in a Joan Didion novel, a Steve Martin movie and a David Frizzell country song.
Now the famed freeway, cut in two by last month's earthquake, is also at the heart of this city's soul-searching about whether life here ought to be lived differently.


Wendy's International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


On My Mind; The Worth of Israel
For all Israelis but a handful the massacre of the Muslims at prayer was one of the saddest days in the country's history.
That fact does nothing to assuage grief or diminish the crime.
Still, it does tell a great deal about the gap between Arab and Israeli societies -- and the importance of not allowing shock or sorrow to overwhelm the awareness of the difference.


Ivax Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


10 Killed After Muslim Raid On a Police Station in Egypt
Ten people were killed in clashes on Sunday night after Muslim militants attacked a police station in the southern province of Aswan, security officials said today.
It was some of the deadliest fighting between the militants and Government forces in two years.
The violence erupted after eight gunmen, presumed to be members of the Islamic Group, opened fire on a police station in the town of Edfu, killing one police officer.


Jose M. Bosch, 95, Bacardi Rum Chief For Three Decades
Jose M. Bosch, who ran the Bacardi rum empire for 32 years until his retirement in 1976, died on Sunday at his home in Coral Gables, Fla.
He was 95.
Mr.
Bosch, who moved to Florida from Nassau, the Bahamas, two years ago, died after a brief illness, his family said.


Wickes Lumber (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Fishermen Protest New Federal Rules


Coventry Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bond Market Rally Helps Most Stocks Rise
Heartened by some soothing words from a governor of the Federal Reserve Board and some good news on inflation, the bond market rallied yesterday and carried a depressed stock market with it.
The one exception was the Dow Jones industrial average.
It rose for much of the day but was dragged down in the session's last 30 minutes.
Most of the fall was attributed to a single tobacco stock, Philip Morris, which was hurt by negative comments last Friday by a Government regulator.


CHRONICLE
Members of the illustrious Rothschild family gathered in Frankfurt last weekend for a milestone celebration: the 250th birthday of Mayer Amschel Rothschild, who started the family's financial empire and whose grave is in the old Battonn Street Jewish Cemetery.
The commemoration happened to coincide with the city's celebration of its 1,200th anniversary.
"The coincidence of both anniversaries reminds us how much Frankfurt am Main owes to its Jewish citizens," Chancellor HELMUT KOHL said yesterday in an address at the Jewish Museum, which is in a building that belonged to the family in the 19th century.


S.&amp; P. Tobacco
The Standard &amp; Poor's Tobacco Index, consisting of Philip Morris, American Brands and UST Inc., fell sharply yesterday after the head of the Food and Drug Administration, Dr.
David A. Kessler, said on Friday that cigarettes, because they are addictive, could be put under stricter Government regulation as drugs.


For Job-Finding Concern, a Troubled Past
Its promotion sounds irresistible.
The company finds jobs for people on welfare, and, according to its news releases, the government pays nothing for the service until the applicants are hired and working in full-time permanent jobs.
Both Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo have hailed the company, America Works, as a profit-making solution to the welfare burden.
Last month both were on hand as New York City announced that it was joining the state in an arrangement that would double the number of people the company would seek to place in jobs.


Russia Backs NATO
After weeks of sharp opposition to Western military intervention in Bosnia, Russian officials said today that they supported NATO's actions in shooting down four planes on a bombing raid there.
But, clearly juggling competing allegiances, Foreign Ministry officials could not bring themselves to join the alliance in placing direct blame for the incident on the Bosnian Serbs.


False Choice On Voting Rights
To the Editor:
In raising understandable concerns about recent setbacks to enforcement of Voting Rights Act provisions to increase representation of minority voters, "Voting Rights Under Siege" (editorial, Feb. 16) presents a false choice: continued drawing of race-conscious legislative district lines that increase opportunities for minority voters to elect candidates of choice, or a return to the days when the voting power of minorities was diluted in majority white districts.


Kmart Write-Offs Result in Quarterly Loss
The Kmart Corporation decided to clean house in the fourth quarter, writing off losses on two specialty store chains it sold and taking a big charge for renovations and other improvements in an effort to make its core discount-store business competitive.
As a result, it reported a loss yesterday of $1.19 billion, or $2.61 a share.


WEST BANK MASSACRE: The P.L.O.; P.L.O. Insisting That the Settlers All Be Disarmed
Reflecting a wave of revulsion that has spread among Palestinians in much of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, a senior P.L.O. official said today that the removal of weapons from the hands of all Jewish settlers was a condition for theorganization's return to peace talks.
The official, Yasir Abed Rabbo, also said Palestinians were starting a campaign to persuade the United Nations Security Council to back the demand.


WEST BANK MASSACRE: Reaction; Sad, Angry and Fearful: Voices of Arab-Americans and American Jews
With sorrow and trepidation, Jews and Arabs across America are absorbing the shock of the Hebron massacre with vows to repair efforts toward peace, yet prepare for the possibility of further violence.
"Look at this," said a storeowner in the Arab retail section along Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, angrily holding up a newsletter from Kahane Chai, the militant American Jewish group, that boasted of fresh paramilitary training in the Catskills.


Indoor Meet Gets Southern Exposure
In 1888, the national indoor track and field championships began.
The site was the original Madison Square Garden, a former horse barn used by the New York and Harlem Railroad.
Since then, except for occasional visits to Buffalo; Louisville, Ky.; Chicago; Albuquerque, N.M.; Oakland, Calif., and Philadelphia, the championships have been a staple at the Garden.
No more.
Starting this weekend and at least for the next 10 years, the USA/Mobil indoor championships will be staged in the Georgia Dome in Atlanta, the site of Super Bowl XXVIII four weeks ago.


Japanese Linguists
To the Editor:
Your review of Donald Keene's "On Familiar Terms" (Books of The Times, Feb. 21) quotes his observation that after the attack on Pearl Harbor, there were "only 50 Americans who spoke Japanese."


Candidates For Fed Post Being Pared
Senior Administration economics officials began today to pare their list of 15 to 20 possible nominees to replace Wayne D. Angell as a governor of the Federal Reserve Board, Administration officials said this evening.
President Clinton is expected to nominate Alan S. Blinder, a member of the Council of Economic Advisers, to replace David Mullins, who was the Fed's vice chairman until his resignation in early February.
Administration officials are now interested in finding a woman or a member of a minority group to fill the vacancy left by Mr.
Angell's recent retirement.
The White House and Treasury have assembled a list of such nominees, said officials who insisted on anonymity.


AptarGroup Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Books of The Times; Witness Against the Post-Modernist Historians
On Looking Into the Abyss  Untimely Thoughts on Culture and Society  By Gertrude Himmelfarb  192 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
The historian Gertrude Himmelfarb's new collection of essays, "On Looking Into the Abyss," is not only dedicated to the memory of Lionel Trilling, but also takes its title from words written by Mr.
Trilling more than three decades ago.
Indeed Ms.
Himmelfarb invokes his memory throughout the pages of this volume; she says she is "discharging an intellectual and personal debt that is long overdue."


Hair Dye Isn't Linked To Cancer Death Risk
To the Editor:
Re "So You Consider Hair Dye Safe?" (letter, Feb. 16) by Dr.
Samuel S. Epstein: Our study of more than 500,000 American women shows that hair dye is, at most, a minor factor in the risk of cancer death.


Methanex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Witness in Murder Says Memory Was Aided
A witness called to corroborate testimony that a conspirator in a journalist's murder made a trip to pay the accused gunman his fee acknowledged yesterday that his memory had been enhanced by re-enacting the trip with detectives.
The prosecution had earlier suggested that the witness was important because he was not a conspirator in the plot to kill the crusading antidrug journalist, Manuel de Dios Unanue.
Other major prosecution witnesses are conspirators who made deals to testify against the accused gunman, Wilson Alejandro Mejia Velez, in hopes of receiving leniency.


Wainoco Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Khalid Muhammad Returns to New Jersey and Strikes a Conciliatory Tone


Vons Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Morris Is Steadily Rising to the Nets' Occasion
Before the All-Star break, Chris Morris was disappointed that his role with the Nets was diminishing game by game.
With Derrick Coleman leading the team with 20.5 points and 11.6 rebounds a game, and Kenny Anderson emerging as one of the National Basketball Association's premier point guards, Morris found he was getting fewer shots.


Classical Music in Review
Julianne Baird and Eliot Fisk  Soprano and Guitarist Weill Recital Hall
There may be no guarantees in life, but this came close: two sensitive, technically accomplished, intelligent and versatile musicians in a hall ideally suited to the small pleasures in which they excel.


Liberty Media Considers Blockbuster Investment
No sooner had his merger plans with the Bell Atlantic Corporation broken down last week than John C. Malone, the president of Tele-Communications Inc., was talking with another potential partner.
On Friday, two days after the big telephone-cable merger deal went sour, Mr.
Malone, who is also chairman of the Liberty Media Corporation, and Peter Barton, its president, met in Denver, where T.C.I. and Liberty are based, with H. Wayne Huizenga, the chairman of Blockbuster Entertainment, to discuss Liberty's investing in Blockbuster.


Global TV Carried Games Live, Taped or Barely
CBS's taped format, showing events many hours after they happened, was not the standard way of showing the Winter Olympics around the world.
In Paris, there was a lot of live coverage of events in the same time zone as Lillehammer, Norway.
Parisians had a choice of coverage on TF1, a privately owned station; France 2, the government channel; and Eurosport, a cable network.
Britain's BBC had largely live coverage.


Chiquita Brands Int'l reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kloster Cruise reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Toronto Journal; Antiwar Wounds Are Healed and Canada Is Home
After Eric Nagler, who was raised in Brooklyn, entered Canada fleeing the Vietnam War draft, he lived for a time in a tiny log cabin without running water or electricity, but he was "thrilled and happy to be there."
As the years have passed, he left the hippie way of life behind.
He is a popular children's entertainer and television personality with an enormous house on wooded land north of Toronto.
He married a Canadian, and they have four children and about 80 animals, most of them native to Canada, except for the iguana and a mating pair of boa constrictors named Jake and Baby.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Councilman Adam Clayton Powell 4th identified a 1993 primary opponent of Mr.
Powell incompletely in some editions.
He is Francisco Diaz Jr.


NATO CRAFT DOWN 4 SERB WARPLANES ATTACKING BOSNIA
In the first military clash in NATO's 44-year history, American F-16 fighters shot down four Serbian warplanes today after the Serbian planes bombed a munitions plant controlled by the Bosnian Government, American military officials said.
The skirmish, which marked a substantial escalation of the American military role in the region, took place a week after Bosnian Serb forces largely complied with NATO demands that they withdraw their artillery from Sarajevo, thus apparently reducing tensions in the region.


Peace Talks Suspended Pending Efforts by U.S.
The next round of talks in Geneva among the three warring factions in Bosnia has been put off while diplomats from the European Union and the United Nations wait to see whether Washington can broker a separate peace between Bosnian Croats and Muslims.
Officials of Croatia, Bosnia and the Bosnian Croats met today for a third day in Washington with State Department officials to discuss a United States proposal to unite Croats and Muslims in a federation that would cover just over 50 percent of Bosnia.


Pro Bono TV Spot For Abortion Rights
An abortion rights organization and its agency are introducing a pro bono television commercial that is meant to counter a paid anti-abortion campaign introduced almost two years ago.
The abortion rights spot was produced by Mad Dogs and Englishmen, a small New York shop, for the New York State chapter of the National Abortion Rights Action League, or Naral, which will distribute it to the organization's other chapters around the country.
It is intended as an answer to much-publicized anti-abortion commercials sponsored by the Arthur S. De Moss Foundation, which carry the theme "Life. What a beautiful choice."


WEST BANK MASSACRE: Arabs; Among Israeli Arabs, Latent Anger Explodes
On a windswept hill overlooking a patchwork of rolling farmland, 5,000 Arab men knelt as the body of Sami Abu Jama, who died Sunday in clashes with the police, was slowly lowered into the rocky soil.
Black flags of mourning, green Islamic banners and Palestinian flags snapped taut in the wind.
Angry young men, many with their faces masked, chanted slogans vowing to avenge the death of Mr.
Abu Jama, who was shot in a demonstration protesting the massacre of Muslim worshipers in Hebron.
And militant Islamic leaders, their words amplified through a sound system, reminded the mourners that each Arab who fell was now a martyr in a holy struggle.


Sliwa Hiring Serves as Counterweight to WNYC's Liberal Line; Radio Choices
To the Editor:
Frank Rich, in his laudable effort to rally support for municipally owned WNYC radio stations, misidentifies them as New York's only public radio facilities (column, Feb. 17).


Yankees View Boston From a Different Angle
For anyone who has doubted the meaning of insurance policies, baseball style, check out the Yankees.
They are the team that traditionally has an abundance of outfielders.
Yet the Yankees issued Daryl Boston an invitation to camp, challenging the veteran to crack the 40-man roster as a backup to the starting outfielders as well as serve as a part-time designated hitter.


India Moves to Attract Foreign Investment
India's Finance Minister, Manmohan Singh, proposed more measures today aimed at increasing foreign investment in India and speeding up a sluggish industrial growth rate.
The measures include tax cuts for foreign companies active in India, sharp reductions in import duties and a lowering of bank interest rates.
The cut in India's corporate taxes, which are among the highest in the world, would reduce rates to 55 percent from 65 percent on companies incorporated abroad but earning money in India.
In addition, Mr.
Singh said the Government would review the high levels of capital gains tax.


New York's Underground Show Biz
When the glitterati of the music business file into Radio City Music Hall for the Grammy awards tonight, two unheralded combos will be playing in the subway station below.
Like the bash at Grand Central Terminal on Saturday, and last night's stylish affair at the Metropolitan Museum, their concert is part of an entertainment marathon that has enriched New York City for several days.
Fancy parties are very nice, of course.
But the real New York -- the city that overflows with aspiring artists -- is better reflected by the struggling musicians who perform under the auspices of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's "Music Under New York."


Who's on First for the Mets? It Just Might Be Orsulak
The first time Dallas Green said it, people were taken somewhat aback.
When asked in January who might play first base for the Mets and who might bat leadoff, one of the first answers to both questions was Joe Orsulak.
Joe Orsulak?


Ford Motor Creates a Group To Pursue Ventures in China
The Ford Motor Company, seeking to increase its presence in China's nascent automotive market, has formed a new unit to concentrate on that country and has named a senior executive to run it.
The new group, Ford China Operations, will be responsible for negotiating joint ventures, component manufacturing and possibly vehicle assembly.
Ford expects to announce a joint venture soon for the manufacture of automotive glass in China, a company spokesman said today.
The auto maker is also interested in establishing vehicle assembly, possibly as a joint venture with a Chinese company.


Executive Changes
FIGGIE INTERNATIONAL INC., Willoughby, Ohio, appointed Carl J. Shields president of the Rawlings Sporting Goods division in St.
Louis.
GTE CORP., Stamford, Conn., named J. Michael Kelly senior vice president for finance.


Islamic Figure's Speech Takes Soft Tone
Khalid Abdul Muhammad came back to New Jersey today to a nearly statewide turnout of public officials organized to condemn his fiery racial oratory, but this time the Nation of Islam leader's words were subdued.
In his first speech in the state since he ignited a firestorm of recrimination over an attack on Jews as "bloodsuckers," and against Roman Catholics and homosexuals in a November address at Kean College in Union, N.J., Mr.
Muhammad adopted a reflective tone at Trenton State College.
His words tonight stood in sharp, and perhaps intended, contrast to the shield of outrage that state officials erected for his visit.


Patterns
Strength in Numbers
Last season's fashion question -- whither London? -- has turned, with some license, into this season's description: withered London.
But as the interest in London as a fashion capital has ebbed, young designers have rallied, doing whatever they can to stay in business.
Many have emulated the successful British labels Red or Dead and Flyte Ostell and have formed partnerships to buoy their collections.


John Caples Awards For Ogilvy Direct
For the third consecutive year, Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct took top honors, winning the most awards, from judges of the John Caples International Awards for excellence in direct marketing.
At the 16th annual ceremony last week in New York, Ogilvy Direct offices around the world won 12 of the 43 prizes in 16 categories.
Five agencies tied for second place, with two awards each.


Sports of The Times; A Moment That Took The Gold
BEFORE the Olympic women's figure-skating soap opera was over, before Nancy Kerrigan was judged second best, the commercial spot was already in the can, ready to roll.
"I'm going to Disney World," Kerrigan preened to Americans last Friday night.
When the men's speed-skating 1,000 meters was over, when Dan Jansen finally had his gold, his wife, Robin, nearly passed out.
"I needed medical attention," she said later that day.


Playing Down Getting Tough
Despite today's aerial battle and several other signs of stepped-up military activity in the Balkans, American officials say they see little renewed danger of an all-out offensive by the Bosnian Serbs.
So, having helped two weeks ago to bring about at least a temporary end to the artillery bombardment that had threatened to pound Sarajevo into submission, the Clinton Administration is disinclined to see the latest developments as a setback.
Indeed, both military and civilian officials suggested that by responding firmly, NATO may have made further trouble in the area much less likely.


Boy, 15, in Religious Tug-of-War Meets With Parents After 2 Years
Almost two years after he vanished in Brooklyn amid a tug-of-war between his secular family and an ultra-Orthodox Jewish sect, a 15-year-old boy was reunited with his parents today, but told them he wanted to be placed in the custody of an Orthodox Jewish rabbi in Rockland County.
The appearance of the boy, Shai Fhima, in Family Court here was the latest twist in a complex case that has pitted a strictly religious rabbi against non-religious Jews in a clash over the boy's spiritual upbringing.


NEW HEALTH PLAN STRESSES MEDICARE
The chairman of an important Congressional subcommittee is drafting a proposal to expand Medicare to cover millions of people who lack insurance, as an alternative to President Clinton's health care plan.
Under the proposal, devised by Representative Pete Stark, chairman of the Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, the Government would collect premiums from consumers and employers through the Internal Revenue Service.
The proposal would give most Americans the option of enrolling in the new expanded Medicare program or in a private health insurance plan.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Price Powers the Cavs Mark Price scored 19 points and Bobby Phills added 17 last night to carry the Cleveland Cavaliers to their seventh straight victory, 89-81, in Chicago.
The Bulls, who have lost four of their last six at home, shook up their lineup by moving Scottie Pippen from forward to guard and replacing guard Pete Myers with Toni Kukoc at forward.
Kukoc failed to score. (AP) Jazz 89, Rockets 85: At Salt Lake City, Karl Malone scored 18 points to lead the Utah Jazz to their sixth straight victory.
Houston's Hakeem Olajuwon led all scorers with 20 points. (AP) N.H.L.
Penguins Win, 4-1  In Miami, Rick Tocchet's second goal of the game with 4:40 left in the third period on a pass from Mario Lemieux led Pittsburgh by the Florida Panthers last night.
Lemieux, playing in only his ninth game of the season, had a goal and two assists. (AP)


Williams Leaves Hospital To Begin Rehabilitation
Ted Williams was released from a hospital in Gainesville, Fla., yesterday, more than a week after the Hall of Famer suffered a stroke.
Williams, 75, will begin a rehabilitation program at an undisclosed facility, said Daniel Moore, spokesman for Shands Hospital.


NEC and Samsung Form a Chip Venture
Japan's largest semiconductor manufacturer said today that it would form a joint venture with the largest microchip maker in South Korea to develop advanced computer chips.
The NEC Corporation of Tokyo and Samsung Electronics, based in Seoul, will cooperate on key technology for a 256-megabit dynamic random access memory chip, or D-RAM chip, which is the main information storage medium for computers.
The chip is expected to reach the market near the end of the decade, an NEC spokesman said today.
The chip can store more than 256 million bits of information, roughly equivalent to 10,000 typewritten pages and 16 times as much as the 16-million-bit chips currently available.


Plucking a Treasure From Tuscany's Groves; A Historian's Legacy to New York University Is a Life, and Villa, Devoted to Art
It seemed an improbable bequest: Sir Harold Acton, the historian and art collector who epitomized the British upper crust, left his magnificent art-filled estate in Tuscany to a thoroughly urban, thoroughly American school, New York University.
But therein lies a 40-year-old tale.


WEST BANK MASSACRE: The Overview; Rabin Urges the Palestinians To Put Aside Anger and Talk
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin appealed to the Palestinians today to return to the suspended peace talks.
But he warned them not to use the Hebron massacre to set unrealistic conditions, suggesting that he had taken the sternest measures he plans for now against Jewish settlers in the occupied territories.
But in words both lacerating and relentless, Mr.
Rabin declared murderous settlers to be outcasts, alien to Israel and to Judaism.


Orion Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Staten Island Secession, the Debate That Wouldn't Die, Now Reaches Albany
The Staten Island secession movement -- a five-year quest that began as a quixotic dream but somehow survived referendums, court tests, political deals and the scorn of doomsayers -- moved toward a climax in the State Legislature yesterday with the unveiling of a bill to make the borough an independent city.
The bill's prospects were not highly rated, even by its chief sponsor, State Senator John J. Marchi, the father of the movement and chairman of a commission that has laid plans for a City of Staten Island, complete with mayor, council, comptroller, courts, schools and other trappings of a modern municipality.


Big Losses As Emerging Markets Fall
The stock and bond markets of the developing countries have lured both big and small investors in search of higher returns in recent months, despite their reputation for high risk and volatility.
That volatility was in evidence last week as these markets -- mainly in Latin America -- fell sharply, ending a phenomenal yearlong bull market and causing hundreds of millions of dollars in losses among leading banks and brokerage firms that deal in their securities.


Nash Finch Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


A Family 'Barber of Seville'
The Metropolitan Opera Guild is to present four abbreviated performances of Rossini's "Barber of Seville," in English, on Saturday and Sunday and March 12 and 13 at the John Jay Theater, 899 10th Avenue, at 60th Street, Manhattan.
The hour-and-45-minute production, set in modern-day Seville, is part of the guild's Growing Up With Opera series.
Amy Kaiser is to conduct the performances, which begin at 2 P.M.
Tickets are $25.
Information: (212) 769-7008.


Quanex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Clinton Seeks Ban on Export Of Most Hazardous Waste
The Clinton Administration asked Congress today to ban most exports of hazardous waste, bringing the United States into line with a five-year-old international agreement restricting the practice.
The Administration said that with a few exceptions the United States should not export hazardous wastes to countries other than Canada and Mexico.
The three countries routinely ship waste across borders for cheaper and more convenient disposal.


Vikings Lure Hinton From Atlanta Falcons
Atlanta Falcons guard CHRIS HINTON, elected eight times to the Pro Bowl, has agreed to sign a three-year contract with the Minnesota Vikings.
The contract, expected to be signed today, averages a little over $2.5 million a year, The Minneapolis Star Tribune reported.


Fine Line to Distribute 'Hoop Dreams' Film
Fine Line Features announced yesterday that it had won the right to distribute "Hoop Dreams," a three-hour film about the lives of playground basketball players in the projects of Chicago.
The film won the Audience Award for documentary films at the Sundance Film Festival in January.


Petrolite Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Ballard Joins Seahawks
The two-time Pro Bowl tackle HOWARD BALLARD of the Buffalo Bills signed a four-year, $10.5 million contract with the Seattle Seahawks yesterday.
Ballard, 30, was an unrestricted free agent. (AP)


The Pop Life; Stars Count Down To Grammy Night
An estimated 1.4 billion people in 110 countries are expected to watch tonight's CBS telecast of the Grammy Awards from Radio City Music Hall. (At least that's the figure offered by the folks at the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, who bring you the ceremony.) So it's probably a good thing that Natalie Cole and Gloria Estefan, both of whom are Grammy nominees, won't be wearing identical dresses.
"We just discovered this evening that she bought the same dress I bought," Ms.
Cole told the audience at a fund-raising dinner on Sunday night for Musicares, a charity that assists musicians and others in the recording business.
Ms.
Estefan was being honored as "person of the year."


SmithKline Beecham reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mexican Government Is Moving To Open Up Presidential Election
Under pressure from rebels for political changes and the increasingly insistent entreaties of opposition parties for credible elections, the Mexican Government has agreed in principle to an additional round of changes that could make the presidential election in August more competitive.
The changes include accepting for the first time officially recognized international observers, a more independent electoral institute, greater access for opposition candidates to television and a quicker and more intense scrutiny of registration rolls.


Hatred Stalks the Settlements
President Ezer Weizman of Israel was surely right when he called the massacre at the Cave of the Patriarchs "anti-Jewish and anti-Israeli." Doubtless his horror is echoed by most of his compatriots.
But as shocking as the deed itself -- the gunning down by an Israeli settler of more than 40 Muslims as they knelt at prayer -- is the venomous rhetoric that followed from a small group of settlers.
Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, used cauterizing words yesterday to condemn the sympathizers of Baruch Goldstein.
"You are not partners in the Zionist enterprise," he told them.
"Sensible Judaism spits you out. . . . You are a shame on Zionism and an embarrassment to Judaism."


Corrections
An obituary on Sunday about Avery Fisher, philanthropist and founder of the Fisher electronics company, misstated the length of his marriage to the former Janet Cane, who survives him.
They were married 53 years, not 44.
In addition, the obituary omitted five survivors; they are his grandchildren.


U.S. Gain Seen in Mutual Bank Sales
Over the strenuous objections of savings and loan executives, the Congressional Budget Office concluded in an analysis released today that the Federal Government could claim free stock options in the sales of mutual savings institutions to banks or investors.
The finding prompted renewed interest in Congress on new rules for these transactions, which have tended to enrich the managers and directors of mutual savings banks and mutual savings and loan associations.


INSIDE
Clue to Frog Mystery
The thinning of the ozone layer may be responsible for a worldwide decline in amphibians, a new study says.
Science Times, page C4.
Thaw in City Spending Freeze
The Giuliani administration used software to freeze spending for school supplies, but later reversed itself in response to legal concerns.
Page B1.
Joining of 2 Political Masters
Recognizing he could be vulnerable this election year, Governor Cuomo has hired the political strategist David Garth, aides say.
Page B1.
How the Siege Jury Decided
For jurors in the Texas siege trial, one little-noticed fact stood out: top Federal officials had been forced to step down afterward.
Page A21.


Q&amp;A
Heart Muscle Q. What is special about the heart muscle that keeps it from getting tired?


In America Works, Woman Finds Alternative to Welfare
While the cost-effectiveness of America Works has never been independently studied and the company has had a troubled history in other cities, it has had success stories.
Marlo Ingram, a 21-year-old resident of a Harlem housing project, is one.
"I'm a taxpayer," she says, often and with relish.
Ms.
Ingram attained that status in August 1992 when America Works placed her in a $13,000-a-year job taking telephone orders for the Brownstone Studio, a women's clothing catalog company based in Manhattan.


Sliwa Hiring Serves as Counterweight to WNYC's Liberal Line; WNCN Windfall
To the Editor:
I have learned that the late radio station WNCN has donated a substantial portion of its compact-disk collection to WSHU, a small radio station broadcasting out of Fairfield, Conn.
Although not all readers will be able to pick up the signal, I have no trouble here among the high hills of Huntington.
WSHU plays classical music for a good part of the broadcast day.
The signal is 91.1 megahertz, easy to remember.
Just pretend you are using your FM receiver to dial for emergency relief, 911.
ALAN HOENIG  Huntington, L.I., Feb. 22, 1994


Holy Bull Gallops Back To Road to the Derby
Don't throw away those winter-book tickets on Holy Bull, who stopped running in the homestretch of the Fountain of Youth Stakes a week ago.
His owner and trainer, Jimmy Croll, have decided that the colt deserves another chance and will start in the $500,000 Florida Derby on March 12, after all.
Holy Bull became a contender last September when he outran Dehere in the Belmont Futurity.
He also won five races in a row, and only once ran behind another horse during a race.
But in the Fountain of Youth, the unbeaten 3-year-old had trouble breathing in the homestretch and stopped running.
He finished last, and suddenly Croll was expressing doubt that he would even start in the Florida Derby or continue along the road to the Kentucky Derby.


Mexico Seen as Barrier To a Broader Trade Pact
The Clinton Administration is concerned that the Mexican Government may seek to block its plans to bring more Latin American countries into the North American Free Trade Agreement, an internal Administration document shows.
Congress has required President Clinton to list by the end of June those countries with which the White House plans to negotiate free trade deals.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  U.S.
SHOOTS DOWN SERB PLANES  American fighter jets shot down four Serbian warplanes after the Serbs bombed a Bosnian Government arms factory.
It was NATO's first military engagement.
A1


Trial Begins for Man Accused of Killing Abortion Doctor in Florida
The trial of an abortion protester accused of killing a doctor outside his abortion clinic here began today, with prosecutors telling jurors that the defendant originally confessed to shooting the doctor out of "personal conviction."
Lawyers representing the protester, Michael F. Griffin, countered with several defense theories, some seemingly contradictory.
They argued that Dr.
David Gunn may have actually been shot to death by another demonstrator, but they also suggested that if Mr.
Griffin did pull the trigger it was because comrades in the anti-abortion movement had brainwashed him.


COMPANY BRIEFS
D.
GEORGE HARRIS &amp; ASSOCIATES, New York, an industrial management and advisory company, completed the purchases of Thoro System Products from Zeneca P.L.C., London, and of PCR Group Inc., which was privately held, and consolidated the two companies under a new holding company called Harris Specialty Chemicals Inc., with operating headquarters in Jacksonville, Fla.


No Headline
"You are not part of the national democratic camp which we all belong to in this house, and many of the people despise you. You are not partners in the Zionist enterprise. You are a foreign implant. You are an errant weed. Sensible Judaism spits you out." -- YITZHAK RABIN, Prime Minister of Israel, referring to Israeli settlers who favor violence against the Palestinians.  [ A1:2. ]


Merisel Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hardest Task of the 1990's: Raising Prices
If revived inflation is just around the corner, as many seem to believe, you probably won't be finding any at your local KFC chicken restaurant.
"We haven't had a price increase at the retail level since 1989," said Gary Gerdemann, a spokesman for the 5,000-restaurant chain, once known as Kentucky Fried Chicken.
"When we see an increase coming, we go and engineer it out."


Lorena Bobbitt Goes Free


Aqueduct Measures Snow by Days Lost
What is so rare as a day in June?
How about one in January or February with actual racing at Aqueduct?
Those days were especially rare in this year of snow followed by sleet followed by snow.
And from the highest track official to the lowliest railbird, cancellation of 14 of the first 51 racing days of the winter season, most recently last Wednesday , is anything but a joke.


Block (H &amp; R) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Rare Voter, a Clinton In-Law Now Runs
Hugh Rodham's supporters in Miami had been promising that he would be a fresh face in Florida politics.
But even they might not have realized just how fresh.
The voting records of the Dade County Supervisor of Elections Office show that Mr.
Rodham, Hillary Rodham Clinton's brother, who began his bid this week for the Democratic nomination to the United States Senate, registered to vote in the state only in December 1991 -- in time to cast a ballot for his brother-in-law, Bill Clinton, in the 1992 Presidential race.


Vencor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mercer Drops Request
RAY MERCER's lawyer will withdraw his request for a hearing on a tape of the heavyweight boxer's alleged bribe to an opponent during a bout last year.
The lawyer, ANTHONY AMOROSA, said yesterday that he decided to forego the hearing after listening to the tape in the Manhattan district attorney's office.
Mercer is charged with one count of bribery for allegedly offering JESSE FERGUSON $100,000 to lose during a fight at Madison Square Garden on Feb. 6, 1993.
Ferguson won a unanimous decision. (AP)


The Grammys, Notable and Not
In 1958, the first year of the Grammy Awards, there were 140 nominees in 28 categories.
This year, there are 410 nominees, from Rosemary Clooney to Snoop Doggy Dogg, in 81 categories, including Music Video and Polka Album.
The nominees are chosen by the 7,000 voting members of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences.


Review/Theater; Family in a Family in a Play in a Play
Paul, a 30-year-old plumber and aspiring playwright, is rapidly losing body parts.
First, he notices he has misplaced the tip of a finger he was sure he still had at breakfast; then he's missing an ear, his shoulder blades, his left nipple and part of his nose.
It doesn't take him long to figure out where they're going: his ailing, 80-year-old great-aunt has been biting them off.
Taking care of this tyrannical, affection-starved relative is, quite simply, eating him alive.
The literal-mindedness of this metaphor is typical of "The Family Business," a sweet-natured, slightly clunky comedy about the blood ties that bind and strangle, written and directed by the father-and-son team of David and Ain Gordon at the Dance Theater Workshop.


Sliwa Hiring Serves as Counterweight to WNYC's Liberal Line
To the Editor:
Frank Rich misses an important point in "The Radio Funnies" (column, Feb. 17), his criticism of the hiring of Curtis Sliwa by WNYC.
Perhaps conservative views not only "have a right to be represented on WNYC," but are also necessary for the New York City station's survival.


Methode Electronics Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Juror Says Doubts Determined Verdict in Sect Trial
At the outset of jury deliberations in the murder trial of 11 Branch Davidians here, one juror recalled today, everybody agreed that murder had taken place at the compound near Waco one year ago.
But there was a big problem.
"Some thought it was outright murder on the part of the Branch Davidians," the juror said.
"And some thought it was outrageous murder on the part of the Federal Government."


Warnaco Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 8


Overseas Shipholding Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hextall Is Honored
Goaltender RON HEXTALL of the Islanders, who posted two shutouts and a 1.74 goals-against average, was chosen yesterday as player of the week in the National Hockey League.


Review/City Ballet; Season Ends With a First Look at a Martins Work
As usual, the New York City Ballet closed its winter season with an annual benefit for the company's Dancers' Emergency Fund.
But unlike most such programs in the past, this 10th edition at the New York State Theater on Sunday night did not pretend to have a theme that could link disparate excerpts and short ballets.
Instead, Sean Lavery, the benefit's organizer, opted for a rummage-sale approach to the 11 entries on the program.
Bits and pieces sprang back from bygone festivals; current staples highlighted new casts from this season, and Peter Martins, the company's artistic director, presented "Papillons," a premiere announced only two weeks ago.


Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Serbs Apparently Use Sarajevo Arms on Two Cities
Nationalist Serbian forces stepped up activity on several fronts today, apparently using heavy weapons moved from Sarajevo to mount a fierce attack on the besieged city of Maglaj and to resume shelling Tuzla and its airport.
Although the United Nations-brokered cease-fire in Sarajevo has been generally holding, there were indications that it was beginning to fray.
The United Nations spokesman here, Lieut.
Col.
Bill Aikman, said this morning that there had been reports of machine-gun and small-arms fire in several areas and a number of sniping incidents, in which at least one person had been killed in the city and four had been wounded.


Rohr Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Party Favoring Ties With Russia Builds Lead in Moldova Elections
The former Communist establishment took a huge lead over both nationalists and market reformers in war-torn Moldova's first parliamentary elections Sunday, preliminary results indicated today.
The Agrarian-Democratic Party had 45 percent of the vote and the pro-Russian Socialist bloc 25 percent with a third of the votes counted by late today.
Vote counting is painfully slow in Moldova, an agricultural country of isolated villages and poor communications.


Whale Evolution
A new genetic analysis challenges recent findings that suggested whales might have evolved differently than is widely believed.
Whales with teeth are usually thought to have split off in evolution about 40 million years ago from toothless whales that use a fibrous material called baleen to strain food from water.


Review/Theater; Percussionists Turn Junk Into Rhythm
Stomp, an irresistibly frisky percussion troupe from England, may have found a solution to the garbage crisis.
Instead of throwing junk away, why not recycle it as rhythm?
In the group's self-titled, nearly wordless show at the Orpheum Theater, brooms become drum brushes and oil drums boots.
Gladiators wielding metal garbage can lids joust in clanging stylized combat.
In the most acrobatic number, two of the performers, attached to cords, hurl their swinging bodies against a metal grid, becoming human bell clappers.


Market Place; After Starter's stumble, some see a buy, but others are cautious.
THE Starter Corporation lost 21 percent of its market value on a single day in January and has not recovered much since.
The company, which went public at 21 1/2 last April, closed yesterday at 13 3/8, off 1/8, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Starter is well placed in the licensed sports apparel business and is expanding overseas, and some analysts see the low stock price as an opportunity to buy.
But other analysts say waiting may be a better strategy.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  OFF OF WELFARE, BUT AT WHAT COST?
Both Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo have hailed America Works, a job placement company, as a solution to the welfare burden.
But in other states, it has left a trail of unhappy officials who say the company performed poorly and cost too much.
A1.
America Works has had success stories. Marlo Ingram of Harlem is one. B4.


METROPOLITAN COLLEGE REPORT
Big East
With 10 games on the schedule, this is not a slow week in the Big East.
For teams in danger of not making the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, like Boston College, Villanova and Providence, this week provides a crucial tuneup for the conference tournament, which starts a week from Thursday at Madison Square Garden.


They're Back! Komodos Avoid Extinction
THE Komodo dragon, the world's largest, ugliest and most dangerous lizard -- is on the endangered species list, and some would say that this unprepossessing creature would not be missed if it were to become extinct.
But although the death in 1987 of a lone Komodo dragon at the San Diego Zoo temporarily wiped out America's entire surviving population of these fearsome reptiles, a new breeding program in Washington is mass-producing dragon chicks and has begun restocking zoos in this country and abroad.
Komodo dragons are now hatching by the dozen at the National Zoo, the first time these animals have been bred in captivity outside Indonesia, the only nation in the world where Komodo dragons live in the wild.


Review/Fashion; The Inventive Meets the Tailored in Italy
With the local economy scraping bottom and recovery spotty in prime markets like the United States and Japan, Italian designers faced a quandary as they prepared their fall collections.
Should they jolt the world with wildly inventive designs or focus on the expert tailoring and luxurious sportswear that made their reputations?
Both approaches were evident as the shows for fall, the most important selling season of the year, began over the weekend.
Perhaps more important than these design decisions was the emphasis most major houses placed on their secondary collections.
These lower-priced and generally younger-looking clothes are projected to raise interest in fashion, which seems to have lost the priority it enjoyed in the world market in pre-recession days.


Oneida Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Bridge
Suppose you are South, playing six diamonds on the diagramed deal.
Clubs are led and continued, forcing dummy to ruff.
Would you expect to make the slam in real life, with the East-West cards hidden?
Those who answered in the affirmative may have peeked.
It is quite true that you can succeed by working on spades, with or without a finesse, but that requires a favorable spade position, roughly a 50 percent chance, plus a 3-2 trump split.


Dismantling of Nuclear Plant at Shoreham Continues


MCI Plans Big Nextel Stake As a Move Into Wireless
MCI Communications said today that it would invest $1.3 billion in a fast-growing competitor to cellular telephone companies called Nextel Communications, a move that seems certain to step up the rivalry in wireless communications.
MCI, which will acquire 17 percent of the company, will market Nextel's full range of digital wireless telephone, data and paging services under the MCI brand name and will package them with its existing long-distance service.
Nextel and one of its other investors, the Comcast Corporation, both retain the right to market Nextel's services under their own company brand names, although Nextel executives said they expected to eventually phase out use of the Nextel name.


Review/Ballet; Love and Other Distractions Occupying Body and Soul
New Choreographers on Point, an organization dedicated to the production of new ballets, offered its fourth "Ballet Builders" program on Sunday afternoon at the Marymount Manhattan Theater.
Four of the six choreographers represented concerned themselves with love, another was meditative and the last was apocalyptic.
The amorous dances included some lyrical pas de deux.
Lisa Lockerd and Richard Bradley moved with an attractive legato through the "Fall Pas de Deux" from "The Seasons," a longer work by Raymond Van Mason to recorded music by Kurt Bestor.
Yvette Lin and Lawrence De Maeyer brought a quiet joy to Jenny Siu-kan Chiang's "Pastoral," to music by Sha Han Kun.


'Homecoming' For John Major
The reason for choosing this city for the meeting today between President Clinton and Prime Minister John Major lies in Mr.
Major's unusual family history.
Mr.
Major's grandfather, Abraham Ball, immigrated to Pennsylvania from England in the late 1860's and worked in the Carnegie steel mills and at several construction sites here.


Spy Suspects Were Paid $2.5 Million, U.S. Says
Federal prosecutors charged today that a Central Intelligence Agency official accused of spying and his wife were paid at least $2.5 million for their work for Russia and the Soviet Union.
When the official, Aldrich H. Ames, and his wife, Rosario, were arrested last week, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said they had been paid $1.5 million.


Opportunistic Species Gain In Battle for the Backyard
JUST outside the kitchen windows of suburbia, nature's wild, desperate dance of life and death takes place almost unnoticed, veiled by the tame surroundings.
But as the suburbs continue their relentless expansion into formerly wild habitats, a complex new order of ecological conflict is playing itself out.
At the struggle's center is a hardy, opportunistic group of native North American species with both the intelligence to adapt quickly to suburban surroundings and the eclectic appetite to take advantage of the wide variety of foods that suburbanites wittingly and unwittingly serve up.
Crow and blue jay, mallard duck and Canada goose; squirrel, cottontail, skunk and white-tailed deer: together they and other seemingly innocuous species are emerging as collective winners in give-no-quarter combat with a much larger number of more sensitive and less adaptable species that include many songbirds and uncommon plants.


National Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Good Guys in Split With Hal Riney
Hal Riney &amp; Partners and Good Guys Inc., a retail electronics chain in Brisbane, Calif., said yesterday that after 15 months they had agreed to part ways on the company's estimated $10 million account, citing "creative differences."
"We just haven't been able to agree on the creative direction," said David Verklin, Riney's managing director in San Francisco, confirming a report of the split in Advertising Age this week.
He said the account was initially more image-oriented, but had become more retail-oriented, focusing on prices and items.


Chess
When you are playing in a qualification series for the world championship, serendipity is out; prudent preparation is in.
There is no point in taking chances when so much is at stake: getting into one title match is worth years of prizes in lesser events.
So if an opponent plays something that you have not refreshed yourself on lately, you do not take up the challenge but follow a conservative course until you have an intermission in which to polish your homework.


Wine Talk
DO you like a touch of wood in your wine?
Do you look for that enticing taste and heady vanilla aroma of oak when you pull a cork?
Do they call up an image of dark cellars and rows of barrels aging wine to the peak of perfection?
If you are in the habit of paying $20 or more a bottle, there's a reasonable chance that your wine had a barrel in its past.
If you are an oak fan who finds it painful to go over $10 a bottle, welcome to the world of "alternative wood products."


CHRONICLE
FLOYD ABRAMS, the constitutional lawyer, has been named to an academic chair with a judicially impressive name: he will be the first WILLIAM J. BRENNAN JR.
Visiting Professor on First Amendment Issues at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism.
In fact, it was Mr.
Abrams's idea to name the chair for the retired associate justice of the Supreme Court, whom he met in 1989 when they traveled to Israel together to speak about the First Amendment.


An Executive Move At Foote, Cone
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Chicago said yesterday that it would name Geoff Thompson, the senior vice president and deputy executive creative director at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding San Francisco, as executive vice president and executive creative director.
Mr.
Thompson, 51, will replace Eric Weber, 51, effective on April 1, as the agency's creative leader.
Mr.
Weber joined Foote, Cone in September 1991 from Young &amp; Rubicam New York after the agency's intensive efforts to woo him received widespread coverage in trade publications.
Mitch Engel, managing director at Foote, Cone Chicago, said that Mr.
Weber wanted to return East, adding that "we'll be pursuing other opportunities with him within Foote, Cone" that could complement his desire to do so.


Jean Gottman, 78, a Geographer Who Saw a Northeast Megalopolis
Dr.
Jean Gottmann, the French geographer who scrutinized the Northeastern Corridor of the United States and defined it as a new social, economic and political entity he called Megalopolis, died on Monday at his home in Oxford, England.
He was 78.
The cause was cancer said his wife, Bernice.


Leadership It's Not
At a time when anti-lesbian and anti-gay violence is on the rise, says New York City's Comptroller, Alan Hevesi, it is "particularly important" that those who perpetrate bigotry "be criticized in the strongest possible terms."
Mr.
Hevesi has now joined the city's Public Advocate, Mark Green; the Manhattan Borough President, Ruth Messinger; the City Council member Thomas Duane, and a growing number of other officials who have unequivocally denounced the homophobic rhetoric spewed by the Rev.
Ruben Diaz -- and called for his resignation from the city's Police Civilian Complaint Review Board.
Sadly, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Council Speaker Peter Vallone have yet to demonstrate the same leadership.


Bob Evans Farms Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Hebron Mourners Predict Bloodshed
Sitting in long, silent rows, the grieving men listened somberly as the words of Sheik Taysir Bayud al-Tamimi, the chief Muslim judge of Hebron, echoed through the bare meeting hall today.
"This is a crime of historic proportions," he told about 100 relatives and friends of the Muslim worshipers gunned down by a Jewish settler on Friday at a mosque in the Cave of the Patriarchs shrine here, known to Muslims as al-Haram al-Ibrahimi.


Fabri-Centers of America reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Casey's General Stores Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Metropolitan Diary
SEEN and overheard by Robert D. Brady of Scarsdale, N.Y., on line at a Rockefeller Center post office, where big, burly, booted construction worker addresses equally big and burly postal employee.
Hardhat: Do you have any of the self-sticking stamps?


Music Notes
The Muti Mystery
Is Riccardo Muti feuding with the Philadelphia Orchestra?
Will he remain its conductor laureate?
These questions and others -- all subsidiary to a more general one, "What is Mr. Muti up to?" -- have been tossed around in Philadelphia and among orchestra managers in recent weeks, ever since Mr.
Muti's last-minute withdrawal, for the second consecutive season, from commitments to conduct the orchestra.
Orchestra officials have expressed only puzzlement at their recent transactions with Mr.
Muti, who was music director in Philadelphia from 1980 to 1992.
Mr.
Muti is in New York to conduct the Vienna Philharmonic at Carnegie Hall tonight, tomorrow and Friday, dates he had originally promised to Philadelphia.
And although he acknowledges there are ruffled feathers, he also says that everything is just fine.


Inquiry Examines Prudential Settlements
State securities regulators are examining whether brokers for Prudential Securities misled their clients into joining a recently approved class action settlement involving the biggest series of limited partnerships sold by the firm during the 1980's, regulators said yesterday.
The examination expands both the number of Government inquiries and the number of class action settlements that are being studied to determine whether Prudential intentionally misled clients about their legal rights to recover the money they lost in the soured limited partnerships.


Eljer Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Review/Music; With Theatrics Stripped Away, A Diva Stakes All on Her Voice
The stakes seemed higher than usual on Monday evening at Carnegie Hall.
Kathleen Battle was making her first New York appearance since her abrupt dismissal from the Metropolitan Opera three weeks ago, singing Mozart and Strauss with Wolfgang Sawallisch and the Philadelphia Orchestra, and much of the discussion in the hall was about the turn her career has taken.
So with listeners concentrating more closely than usual on the nuances of her performance, Miss Battle had to prove that her artistry outweighed the famous tales of backstage imperiousness.
As it turned out, artistry carried the day.
That was not a foregone conclusion.
In recent seasons, Miss Battle's performances have become alarmingly treacly, to the point where in certain arias one almost expected her to interpolate a chorus of "The Good Ship Lollipop." At the same time, her voice was showing signs of wear.
Although her distinctive sound remained intact, artifice and effort were increasingly apparent.


Review/Fashion; Dresses? Armani? Yes
Who thinks of Giorgio Armani as a dress designer?
Jackets, of course.
Pants, yes.
Even an occasional skirt.
But dresses?
Until yesterday, they were hardly the first thing that came to mind when the work of the master tailor was discussed.
But as the fall and winter fashion openings gathered momentum, Armani dresses were right up there with the rain and the food as topics for serious conversation.


PUSH TO WITHHOLD A SUICIDE REPORT
The independent counsel investigating the involvement of Bill and Hillary Clinton in an Arkansas real estate venture has asked a Federal judge to prevent the release of a police report on the apparent suicide of Vincent W. Foster Jr., a longtime friend of the Clintons and the deputy White House counsel at his death.
The independent counsel, Robert B. Fiske Jr., said in a letter introduced on Monday in Federal court in Manhattan that his investigation would include a detailed look at Mr.
Foster's death last July.
Mr.
Fiske said that making the Park Police report public now would hinder his investigation because witnesses' testimony could be tainted by knowledge of the report.


Ban Lobbyist Gifts
To the Editor:
A ban on gifts, meals and travel by lobbyists for members of Congress certainly belongs in the law, as you state in "Calling Mr. Lautenberg" (editorial, Feb. 9).


Student, 15, Had Ties To Family Of Rabbi
Aaron Halberstam, the 15-year-old student who was the most seriously injured victim of yesterday's shooting on the Brooklyn Bridge, was known throughout the Lubavitch Hasidic community for his exceptionally close relationship to the family of Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson, the group's grand rabbi.
Friends of the Halberstam family and Lubavitch officials said yesterday that the shooting, which left Mr.
Halberstam in grave condition with an inoperable brain injury at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center, was an especially heavy blow for Rabbi Schneerson because he had personally tutored the boy in the Hebrew alphabet eight or nine years ago.


Russians Finish an Inspection Of Plum Island Disease Lab
A group of Russian officials today completed a visit to Plum Island, an animal disease and biological research center off the northeastern tip of Long Island that was once involved in studying defenses against biological warfare.
The island was one of three sites the Russians visited over the last several days, their first tour under a 1992 agreement between the United States, Russia and Britain permitting inspection of sites formerly involved with biological weapons.


The Yankees' Williams Doesn't Need Surgery
The sigh of relief was so evident, it must have been heard as far north as New York.
Bernie Williams, the Yankees were pleased -- and relieved -- to announce, will apparently have to stop throwing for one or possibly two weeks because of an inflamed rotator cuff in his right shoulder.
But after being tested by Dr.
Frank W. Jobe, the orthopedic surgeon and team physician for the Los Angeles Dodgers, surgery will not be needed to fix the center fielder's problem.


Riley Puts 3 Starters On Bench, And Wins
A lineup change brought a change in the Knicks' fortunes.
Ending a season-worst four-game losing streak, the Knicks captured a much-needed 100-88 victory over the Sacramento Kings tonight at the Arco Arena.
After watching New York lose 8 of its previous 12 games, Coach Pat Riley finally made a bold change -- starting Derek Harper, Hubert Davis and Anthony Bonner while benching Greg Anthony, John Starks and Charles Smith.


The Road That Led to Hebron
To the Editor:
Following the mass murder of more than 50 Arabs at prayer, your front page highlights the emotional pain of Israeli Jews, rather than the reactions of Arab victims ("Massacre Leaves Israelis Shamed, Sad and Scared of What's Ahead," Feb. 27).


Clinton to Reinstate Power to Move Fast On Japan Sanctions
President Clinton has decided to sign an executive order reinstating his broad legal authority to impose trade sanctions on Tokyo quickly, an action that the Japanese have warned would mark an escalation in the brewing trade conflict between the two countries.
Senior Administration officials said the President had accepted the recommendation from his economic advisers and had asked his National Economic Council to meet tonight to decide when the order should be signed and what elements it should contain.
An official announcement is expected soon.


Determined Attacker Stalks His Prey Before Disappearing in Traffic
So determined was the gunman stalking the young men in the van on the Brooklyn Bridge that he took aim and fired at his victims at three different points in their terror-ridden siege on the bridge.
The gunman, driving alone in a blue car, opened fire from close range as the van took the final tight turn up onto the bridge from the feeder roads of Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive, said van passengers and the police.


The Job of Juries Isn't to Send Message
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 21 news article about the videotaped shooting of Lorenzo Colston by East Texas police officers, and Mr.
Colston's subsequent assault trial, quotes the prosecutor as telling the jury that then proceeded to convict him: "The question is whether you 12 jurors will band together and send a message to our community that we support our law enforcement officers. Or will we send a message that it is O.K. to violently attack those officers?"


Coca-Cola's 'Alternative' Beverages
The Coca-Cola Company doesn't often give products names like Grape Beyond, Total Fruit Integration, Strawberry Passion Awareness or Citrus Consciousness.
And it certainly isn't known for bottling products in slightly ragged labels festooned with flowers or selling them from vending machines decorated in psychedelic colors.
All that may be uncharacteristic for staid, tradition-minded Coca-Cola, but the marketing strategy is a familiar one: a giant hopes to mimic the success of innovative entrepreneurs like, in this case, Snapple Beverage.


Sales of Stock Funds Remain Strong
Despite the sharp drop in stock prices here and abroad last month, Americans still cannot get enough of equity funds, according to industry executives.
But the specter of rising interest rates last month scared them into bailing out of some bond funds, even the ever-popular tax-exempt funds.
A sign of just how fond of stock funds Americans are is this: At Fidelity Investments, the country's largest fund complex and a popular one with trigger-happy investors, customers who took money out of long-term bond funds did not move it to the safety of money market funds.
Instead, they put it into short-term bond funds and, most surprisingly, into stock funds, sales of which matched January's record, said Neal Litvack, executive vice president of marketing for Fidelity.


Russia Battle: Stage Is Reset
The failure of President Boris N. Yeltsin's efforts last week to block Parliament's amnesty of his opponents has done more than underscore his political weakness.
It also marks the beginning of the 1996 presidential campaign, in which at least some of those released will probably try to return to power.
While no one expects a renewal of armed rebellion by Mr.
Yeltsin's foes, there is a chance for civil strife, especially if the economy worsens.
But it is more likely that Mr.
Yeltsin's enemies will seek their revenge at the ballot box.


Nikon Dismisses Ammirati &amp; Puris
Nikon Inc. and Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York, its agency since 1990, parted company yesterday in an unusually bitter fashion.


Charles Ballon, 83, A Lawyer Involved In Philanthropies
Charles Ballon, a Manhattan lawyer who was active in Jewish philanthropies, died yesterday at his Fifth Avenue apartment.
He was 83.
He died of natural causes, said Orin Kramer, his son-in-law.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  TWO ACCORDS FOR BOSNIA  The United States brokered the framework of an agreement to unite Bosnia's warring Muslims and Croats.
And in Moscow, Russia extracted a pledge from Bosnia's Serbs to let an airport reopen in the besieged Muslim town of Tuzla.
A1  Bosnian Serbs agreed to let an airfield reopen in a Muslim town.
A10


Science and Marketing Mix in Gasoline
As Mary Grant was filling up her red Volvo station wagon this morning at the self-service pump of J. T. Muska Texaco here, her three young children fidgeted in the back seat.
And they, like her, seemed oblivious to the banners and signs proclaiming New Clean System 3, the gasoline additive Texaco introduced today at its 14,000 stations nationwide.
"I have more important things to worry about," Mrs.
Grant said, when a reporter asked if she realized she was pumping a tankful of new, improved fuel that Texaco says will clean her engine and cut pollution.
"I know very little about cars."


Fewer Black Men Attend College . . . And Graduation Rates Stay Low


Engine With a Peephole Aids Cleanliness Quest
In tackling deposits inside the combustion chambers of an auto engine, gasoline scientists face a bigger challenge than they did in creating earlier gasoline additives.
Cleaning fuel injectors and intake valves is easier because the gasoline is still in liquid form when it passes those points.
But in the combustion chamber, the gasoline becomes vaporized at temperatures of up to 1,600 degrees Fahrenheit.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Union
A college with only 2,000 students, Union joined the ECAC three years ago with trepidation.
Could the Dutchmen build a competitive program with limited resources and without athletic scholarships?
Coach Bruce Delventhal said yes, but it might take a while.
It didn't take too long.


No Headline
"The only thing that will stop this spending is courage, and courage cannot be legislated into the Constitution." SENATOR BOB KERREY, opposing the balanced-budget amendment.  [ B7:6. ]


Tom Ruud, 50, Dancer And Choreographer
Tom Ruud, a dancer and choreographer with the San Francisco Ballet, died on Monday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 50.
The cause was AIDS, said Pam Lord, a public-relations associate for the ballet company.


SPI Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Errant Luggage Delays Opening of Denver Airport
It might have been a scene fit for a Marx Brothers' comedy: luggage flying off the conveyor and popping open, undergarments bursting out for all the world to see.
But travelers would probably not have been amused.


Teva Pharmaceutical Indus(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amid Blood, Victim Thought of Terrorism
When Yaakov Schapiro realized bullets were flying through the window of his van and his hands were soaked in blood, his first thought was to wonder whether he was alive or dead.
Once he determined he was still alive, he became certain he was under attack by Arab terrorists.
"Right away, I thought the Arabs were shooting at us," said the 17-year-old yeshiva student, a victim of yesterday's shooting attack on the Brooklyn Bridge.
"I knew there had been problems with the Arabs because of the shooting in Hebron, and I figured they were taking it out on us because we had beards and hats."


Thomas Takes Control For the Surging Islanders
Steve Thomas has not been shy in saying his team needs to get its act together, and tonight he said it again, with two power-play goals that not only helped the Islanders beat the St.
Louis Blues, 4-2, but also kept New York's "other" hockey team in the playoff hunt.
"These were huge points for us," said Thomas, the Islander right wing, who leads the team with 31 goals.
"The last five or six games we have not allowed more than three goals -- that's a credit to our defense, that's what is winning these games."


Aide to Giuliani Warns Of Hospitals Budget Gap
Only a month after pushing through spending cuts and layoffs at the agency that operates New York City's public hospitals, the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani opened another assault on the agency's management yesterday, saying it may face a new budget gap of $80 million to $120 million.
Appearing before a City Council committee, the Mayor's budget director, Abraham M. Lackman, said the projected shortfall at the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation could force another round of budget cuts to balance the agency's $3.2 billion budget for the fiscal year that ends in June.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's promise of $1.5 billion in tax cuts misstated the outlook for a vote in the State Senate.
The legislation on which the Senate will vote tomorrow is a three-bill package similar to one approved by the Assembly on Monday that will reduce the state income tax by 5 percent at an estimated cost of $243 million; it is not the $1.5 billion program.


Polenta Tempo Allegro
POLENTA, the long-cooking cornmeal staple of northern Italian meals, may never be as popular as pasta, but it has achieved cachet on the menus of many restaurants today.
So one of the most exciting discoveries for a quick-cooking column is that some polenta cooks quickly.
Polenta made from fine-ground cornmeal fits perfectly into family dinners that have to be ready in 20 or 30 minutes.
It makes no difference whether a packaged polenta product calls itself "instant." If it uses fine-ground cornmeal, it can be ready in five minutes.
In today's menu polenta forms the base for a traditional tomato sauce with wonderful low-fat sausages.
A light salad with a sharp vinaigrette provides the right counterpoint.
Polenta With Sausage and Tomato Sauce
8 ounces whole onion or 7 ounces ready-cut (1 2/3 cups)  1 teaspoon olive oil  1 large clove garlic  6 ounces low-fat chicken or turkey sausage  8 ounces zucchini  14 ounces no-salt-added tomato puree  3 ounces no-salt-added tomato paste 3/4 cup dry white wine  1 teaspoon dried oregano  1 teaspoon dried thyme  1 teaspoon sugar  Freshly ground whole black pepper to taste  2 1/4 cups no-salt-added chicken stock  1 ounce Parmigiano Reggiano  8 tablespoons fine-ground cornmeal.
1. Chop whole onion and saute in hot oil in large nonstick pan.
2. Mince garlic and add, cooking until onion begins to soften.
3. Remove sausage from casing and crumble into pan; brown on all sides.
4.
Wash, trim and cube zucchini; add to pan and continue to cook until zucchini begins to take on color, about 2 minutes.
5.
Add tomato puree, tomato paste, wine, oregano, thyme, sugar and pepper; stir well, and cook over medium-low heat while preparing the polenta.
6. Bring chicken stock to boil for polenta in covered pot.
7. Grate cheese coarsely.
8.
Slowly stir cornmeal into boiling stock, and cook until mixture thickens to a soft mush.
Remove from heat.
9. Serve polenta topped with sausage-tomato sauce, sprinkled with cheese.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 670 calories, 20 grams fat, 85 milligrams cholesterol, 705 milligrams sodium, 35 grams protein, 75 grams carbohydrate.
Green Beans Vinaigrette
8 ounces green beans  1/4cup minced red onion  1 teaspoon olive oil  1 teaspoon balsamic vinegar  1 teaspoon Dijon mustard.
1.
Wash and trim green beans, and place in steamer basket over hot water.
Cook about 7 minutes, until the beans are firm but tender.
2. Combine the onion with oil, vinegar and mustard in a serving dish; mix well.
3. When green beans are cooked, drain well and stir into dressing.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 75 calories, 3 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 70 milligrams sodium, 3 grams protein, 12 grams carbohydrate.


Goodbye to an Exile's Haven


Corrections
An article on Sunday about Japan's entrenched bureaucracy misstated the circulation ranking of Nihon Keizai Shimbun, a daily newspaper that described the bureaucracy's handling of the opening of Japan's rice market to imports.
It is the fourth-largest Japanese daily; the largest is Yomiuri Shimbun.


P.L.O. to Send Team to U.S. To Spell Out Terms for Talks
Dismissing Israel's offer to allow international civilian observers into Gaza and the Jericho area as insufficient, the Palestine Liberation Organization decided today to send a mission to Washington to spell out its conditions for resuming peace talks with Israel.
P.L.O. officials said the mission, which is expected to leave Friday but has yet to be chosen, would urge the United States to seek further concessions from Israel to allow Palestinian negotiators to return to the bargaining table in good conscience in the wake of the massacre of Palestinians at a Hebron mosque on Friday.


Extra Night in Hospital Saved Newborn
To the Editor:
The insurance company practice of requiring that women and newborns be discharged from hospitals within 24 hours of birth robs women of the necessary support to recover from birth and to learn to care for their infants.
More important, however, this practice endangers the lives of our newborns.


Not Quite Spring, but the Sun Is Welcome


Public &amp; Private; Where There's Smoke
Oh, what a smoothie that David Kessler is.
The Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration recently set a fire beneath one of America's most pernicious public health issues.
But he said Congress must decide how to put the fire out, knowing full well that many elected officials will want only to ignore the smoke and go about their business-as-usual.
The subject was tobacco, and in a letter to an anti-smoking activist Dr.
Kessler raised the possibility that cigarettes may be considered drug-delivery devices, subject to F.D.A. regulation.
The added twist is this: Given what we know about the health hazards, if the F.D.A. regulated cigarettes it would have no choice but to ban them.


A Town Battles Elements, the Hard Way
Spring can't come soon enough for the highway department here.
Since October, the five-man department had kept up with the more than 150 inches of snow that had fallen.
Then on Feb. 23 the town barn was destroyed in an electrical fire; all that remains is the building's metal shell, with charred equipment still inside.


Urged by Russia, Bosnia Serbs Yield on Airlift
Under strong pressure from Russia, the leader of Bosnia's Serbian nationalists agreed today to allow an airfield near the northern city of Tuzla to reopen for flights carrying food and medicine.
The United States and its NATO partners resolved in January that if necessary they would use force to open Tuzla, which is controlled by the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government.
More than 250,000 refugees have fled there, increasing the local population to about 800,000.


Gitano Files for Bankruptcy After Accord on Sale
The Gitano Group Inc., the troubled jeans manufacturer, said yesterday that it had filed for bankruptcy protection after agreeing to sell itself to Fruit of the Loom Inc. for $100 million, about $30 million less than Gitano owes its creditors.
Fruit of the Loom was the high bidder in an auction for Gitano that began in late January after Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the jeanswear maker's largest customer, pulled its orders because Gitano had violated United States customs laws.
Wal-Mart has a policy that prohibits it from dealings with suppliers that have pleaded guilty to Federal offenses.


Food Notes
End of a Hamptons Winery
Bridgehampton Winery, the first winery in the Hamptons, is for sale.
Lyle Greenfield, who owns Bang Music, which makes music for commercials, planted the first tiny vines on 10 acres in spring 1979, and sank more than $500,000 into the business.
He has finally decided that the land is unsuitable for growing grapes because it is in a frost pocket.
Even though the winery bought grapes from the North Fork and won awards for its wines, Mr.
Greenfield said he could no longer afford to keep it going himself.
The 1993 vintage was his last.


Top Grammy to Houston; 5 for 'Aladdin'
Swooping, trembling and ululating, Whitney Houston opened the 36th annual Grammy Awards ceremonies last night with the song that garnered the top awards: "I Will Always Love You." The awards, given in 79 musical categories, were announced in a ceremony at Radio City Music Hall broadcast on CBS.
"I Will Always Love You" was part of the soundtrack of "The Bodyguard," which sold more than 10 million copies in the United States, making it the most popular album of 1993.
It won the Grammy for album of the year.
The song was named record of the year, given to a single.
It also won the award for pop vocal, female, a choice that was such a foregone conclusion that the award was announced by the song's writer, Dolly Parton, and its producer, David Foster.
Mr.
Foster was also named producer of the year (nonclassical).
Because "I Will Always Love You" was first recorded by Ms.
Parton in 1974, it was ineligible to be song of the year.  'You Never Get Tired'
For sheer numbers, the year's other awards were dominated by "Aladdin." Its theme song, "A Whole New World," sung by Peabo Bryson and Regina Belle, won as song of the year and as pop performance by a duo or group; material from this Disney movie soundtrack also won three other awards.
Its composer, Alan Menken, won three awards for "Beauty and the Beast" last year and two for "The Little Mermaid" in 1991.
"You never get tired of these," Mr.
Menken said from the stage.


Marketing Aide Is Named National League President
National League club owners liberated Bill White today, unanimously electing Leonard Coleman to succeed him as league president.
Coleman, major league baseball's executive director of market development, is expected to be as visible and accessible as White was not during his five-year term.
Coleman, 45 years old, replaces White as the highest-ranking black official in professional sports.
He was recruited to baseball from investment banking in December 1991 by Fay Vincent, who was then the commissioner.


Eating Well
SINCE 1990, the fast-food industry has been cooking french fries in hydrogenated vegetable oil instead of beef tallow and tropical oils.
The industry made the change, to public acclaim, because the prevailing scientific opinion was that vegetable oils were healthier than the other oils.
Vegetable oil contains less of the fats that increase the bad cholesterol in the blood, the low-density lipoproteins, or LDL's.
But in the last few years, evidence has been growing that the hydrogenation process, which among other things prevents spoilage, not only increases the amount of saturated fat in the oil but also produces trans fats, which, like saturated fat, increase the bad cholesterol.
In other words, hydrogenated vegetable oil turns out to be no better than beef tallow.


Scientists Share in Pain Of Experiment Debates
The Clinton Administration's investigation of experiments in which Americans may have been unwittingly exposed to radiation has turned into a searing experience not only for the families involved but also for the scientists who conducted the research and the universities where the studies took place.
Some of the nation's most prominent universities have been besieged with questions and criticism since December, when Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary announced that her department would investigate the Government's cold war radiation experiments on people.
In response, some universities have expressed regret even as they say the Government and the news media are failing to make distinctions about who sponsored the research and the levels of radiation involved.


Review/Television; Families on the Move To and From Their Roots
It's family time on commercial television these nights, and for various reasons of sociology and audience demographics, parents and children are on the move.
In "Tom," making its debut tonight at 8:30 o'clock on CBS, Tom Arnold transports his television family of wife and five children to a construction trailer on his parents' farm in Kansas while he struggles to build their new house next door.
And in "The Byrds of Paradise," beginning tomorrow at 8 P.M. on ABC, Timothy Busfield ("Thirtysomething") plays a Yale philosophy professor who, after his wife is killed in a cash-machine holdup, takes off with his three children for Hawaii and a job as headmaster at a private school.
It's America as a tribe of wanderers.


Market Place; Some investors may be overly pessimistic on ARCO's outlook.
FOR years Atlantic Richfield lived off the rich reserves of its domestic oil and gas fields and its major 1960's strike in Prudhoe Bay, Alaska.
But the bonanza is running on low and a number of attempts to find big new fields in Alaska have come up dry or have not paid off yet.


Conseco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Paroled Rapist Held in Assaults Of Four Girls in Housing Projects
A paroled rapist was arrested yesterday, charged as a serial rapist who sexually assaulted four young girls and teen-agers in public housing projects in East Harlem and the Lower East Side since December.
Investigators expressed relief at the arrest of the man, saying that the the frequency of the last three rapes, on Feb. 6, 19 and 24, led them to believe that he was in a highly agitated condition and would probably strike again soon.


Grubb &amp; Ellis reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Champion Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Puppa Paces Lightning  Daren Puppa stopped 37 shots as the Tampa Bay Lightning ended Washington's three-game winning streak with a 4-3 victory last night, their first-ever triumph over the Capitals.
Gerard Gallant, Chris Gratton and Danton Cole each had a goal and an assist for the Lightning.
Tampa Bay, which entered the National Hockey League last season, is now 1-3-2 against Washington. (AP) Red Wings 5, Flames 2: Sergei Fedorov scored his first career hat trick to lead Detroit over Calgary in a battle of Western Conference division leaders.
The victory was Detroit's sixth in seven games, and moved the Red Wings 2 points ahead of Toronto in the Central Division.
Detroit, with the league's highest-scoring offense, has used defense during its latest streak.
The Wings held the Flames to just two first-period shots. (AP) TENNIS  Courier Upset in Opener  No. 2-seeded Jim Courier was upset by Patrick Rafter of Australia in a second-round match of the $1.72 million Champions Cup Men's Tournament in Indian Wells, Calif., yesterday.
Rafter, who had to play three sets to win a first-round match Monday while Courier had a bye, won a first-set tie breaker and then put Courier away easily in the second set on scores of 7-6 (7-2), 6-2. (AP) Jarryd Ousts Svensson: Anders Jarryd upset his Swedish countryman, Jonas Svensson, 6-3, 6-1, yesterday, eliminating the second-seeded player in the opening round of the $188,750 Copenhagen Open.
No. 7-seeded Brett Steven of New Zealand was beaten, 6-3, 6-3, by Alex Antonitsch of Austria.
No. 3-seeded Magnus Larsson of Sweden defeated Britain's Jeremy Bates, 6-3, 6-0, in 55 minutes.
No. 4 seeded Yevgeny Kafelnikov of Russia posted a 6-7 (5-7), 6-4, 6-0 victory over France's Stephane Simian. (AP) Graf and Sabatini Win: Gabriela Sabatini and Steffi Graf won in straight sets on a windy day to advance yesterday to the third round of the Virginia Slims in Delray, Fla.
Sabatini, the third seed, defeated the Italian qualifier Elena Savoldi, 6-4, 6-2.
Graf, the world's No. 1 player, had a 6-0, 7-5 decision over Marianne Werdel. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Pole-Vault Record Falls
China's Sun Cayan and Germany's Nicole Rieger set a women's world indoor record in the pole vault yesterday, clearing 13 feet 4 3/4 inches at the Karlsruhe international track meet in Germany.
A few minutes before the two women broke Cayan's previous mark by four-tenths of an inch, England's Linford Christie won the 60-meter dash in 6.48 seconds, a European record.
His mark beat the 6.51 seconds he shared with several others. (AP)


High Court Eases Rule on Paying Lawyers' Fees in Copyright Suits
The Supreme Court today made it easier for successful defendants in copyright infringement suits to have their lawyers' fees reimbursed by the side that brought the suit.
The 9-to-0 decision resolved a long-festering issue in copyright law by creating a level playing field for plaintiffs and defendants on the subject of lawyers' fees.
Before today, several Federal appeals courts had applied a dual standard under which winning plaintiffs were almost routinely reimbursed for their fees but successful defendants had to show that the lawsuit was frivolous or brought in bad faith before their lawyers' fees were repaid.


Who's in Charge Here?
Very soon now the fiction writers will be going out of business.
The strangeness of reality is so much more potent than the strangeness of the imagination, at least in New York politics.
The latest piece of evidence is the alliance announced recently between Gov.
Mario Cuomo and David Garth, who in past campaigns has worked against Mr.
Cuomo.
What do they see in each other?
Several thoughts occur.
Governor Cuomo prides himself on wearing no person's -- or party's -- leash.
Not even the Democratic National Convention can get him to run for something he does not desire.


Carbide/Graphic Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Reviews/Rock; A Strong Voice On Nuances Of Love
A decade ago, rock was crowded with blues-based, husky-voiced belters who could work themselves up with vows like, "I'm the only one/ Who'll walk across the fire for you." It was the heyday of rockers like Bruce Springsteen, Bob Seger, John Cougar Mellencamp, Rod Stewart and Don Henley, who sang earnest three-chord songs about scarred but hopeful romances.
Since the late 1980's, the style has been picked up by a woman: Melissa Etheridge, who performed a triumphant show on Monday night at Irving Plaza for an adoring, mostly female audience.
Fans sang along and whooped with pleasure every time Ms.
Etheridge sang lines like, "Come lay your body beside me." When K. D. Lang stepped out to sing harmony on "You Can Drive While I Sleep," the crowd was so overjoyed its shouts brought the song to a standstill, though it happily quieted down to hear a final verse.


Neediest Appeal Ends
The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund ends its 82d appeal having raised $4,590,568.69 from nearly 13,500 contributors over three months.
The total is the second highest in the appeal's history, behind the 1991-92 campaign, which raised $5,083,550.81.
Page B3.


Philips Unit Selects D.M.B.&amp; B.
The Philips Consumer Electronics Company in Knoxville, Tenn., said yesterday that it had selected D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York to handle its estimated $20 million to $30 million account.
It had been at Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. in New York for the last seven years until that agency and the company mutually decided to part company in October.


Sports of The Times; Look Who's On Yanks' Payroll
APPROACHING his third season as the Yankee manager, Buck Showalter seems to be everywhere.
Watching his pitchers pitch and his hitters hit.
Hurrying to the other diamonds to monitor drills.
Checking the batting cages.
Holding a daily news conference.
And if Showalter is still on the job when the Yankees play their 149th game in September, he will have set a record for a manager in the George Steinbrenner regime: 473 consecutive games.
Billy Martin had a streak of 472 from late 1975 to midseason 1978.


Chinese Government Shows Video Of 4 Prisoners Mentioned by U.S.
A top Government spokesman gathered several American journalists today and played them a videotape purporting to show that four leading political prisoners were in good health.
By showing the tape, the Chinese leadership appears to be trying to deflect criticism about how it treats political prisoners.
The screening also coincides with the visit to Beijing of the State Department's chief human rights official, John Shattuck, who is preparing the agenda for Secretary of State Warren Christopher's first visit here.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about Nextel Communications Inc. misidentified the company investing $197 million in Geotek Industries on Nov. 4.
Geotek received the investment from Vanguard Cellular Systems Inc.; it had no connection with Nextel.


New Economic Data Send Stocks Down
Stock and bond traders pounced on new economic data yesterday, furiously examining the numbers for symptoms of inflation.
And when they found them they sold furiously, sending stock prices down and interest rates up sharply.
Both the stock and bond investors assume, with little clear and convincing evidence for now, that a strong economy necessarily carries with it a strong dose of inflation, which would hurt the investment value of bonds, raise the borrowing costs for corporations and thus hurt the price of stocks as well.


Corrections
The Advertising column in Business Day yesterday, and a chart on the section's front page referring to the column, misidentified the agency that created a Rold Gold pretzels commercial that was broadcast during CBS's coverage of the Winter Olympics.
It is DDB Needham Chicago, not BBDO New York.


Tennessee Valley Authority reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japanese Premier May Soon Dismiss Key Adviser
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa was reported today to be ready to expel his chief Cabinet secretary from a crucial policy-making role, a step that is likely to encourage those who want faster changes in the economy and closer ties to the United States.
After seven months of unstable government and several policy zigzags, Mr.
Hosokawa was described as being on the verge of ending a longstanding battle within his Government by casting his lot with the conservative.


The German Premiere Of 'Schindler's List' Brings Tears and Praise
Tonight, 800 people -- Germans and Jews, diplomats and artists, film makers and people who had known Oskar Schindler when he lived here -- came solemnly together in the municipal theater under the patronage of President Richard von Weizsacker to see the German premiere of an American film many Germans thought one of their own should have made long ago: "Schindler's List" by Steven Spielberg.
The reactions at the end were tears, stunned silence and a smattering of applause that was cut short as if somehow out of place.
"It needed you to do it," Mr. von Weizsacker told Mr.
Spielberg when the lights came up.


Service Remembering Alice Tully The Way She Chose: With Music
Alice Tully, the philanthropist who died on Dec. 10 at the age of 91, had told her friends that she wanted to be remembered with a concert -- and a lively one -- instead of a memorial service.
Yesterday afternoon, at the Lincoln Center hall which Miss Tully paid for, and which bears her name, a large, starry cast of musicians honored her request.
Among the performers were players from the New York Philharmonic and the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, two organizations that benefited from Miss Tully's largess over the years.
The conductor and pianist James Levine represented the Metropolitan Opera, and accompanied Hermann Prey and Jessye Norman, two of Miss Tully's favorite soloists.


Stein Mart (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
President Clinton has decided to sign an executive order reinstating his broad legal authority to impose trade sanctions on Tokyo quickly, a move that the Japanese have warned would mark a big escalation in a brewing trade conflict.  [ Page A1. ]
den, Austria and Finland as members.  [ A11. ] The Economy
The economy surged at a 7.5 percent annual pace in the final quarter of 1993, the strongest performance in nearly 10 years.
But economists stuck to the view that growth has already slowed.  [ D1. ]
The Senate narrowly rejected a constitutional amendment that would have required a balanced Federal budget.  [ A1. ]
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen proposed to pay for the consolidation of bank regulatory agencies by charging Federal examination fees to large state-chartered banks.  [ D2. ]
The New York Power Authority needs to improve its two nuclear plants or its chief will recommend shutting them.  [ D5. ] Markets
Stock and bond traders were shaken by new hints of inflationary pressure, inferred from a report of corporate purchasing managers.
Stock prices fell, with the Dow Jones industrials losing 22.79 points.  [ D6. ]  Interest rates climbed to their highest level in almost a year.  [ D14. ]  The rise in rates pushed up the dollar.  [ D16. ]
Investors continue to rush into stock mutual funds, despite the recent sharp drop in stock prices.  [ D17. ]
The longest insider trading case from the 1980's ended as a former Merrill Lynch executive agreed to settle charges.  [ D2. ]
Crude oil prices rebounded after a two-day slide.  [ D16. ] Companies
Stanley R. Jaffe will lose his job as president of Paramount Communications when Viacom completes its acquisition of the company, Viacom executives said.  [ D1. ]
Broadcasters seem close to persuading Congress to allow them to use channels set aside for future high-definition television for money-making purposes like pay-per-view sports events.  [ D1. ]
Time Warner Cable cast new doubts on the quick arrival of commercial interactive television, saying it was delaying a 4,000-home field trial of its interactive television system.  [ D1. ]
State regulators are examining whether Prudential Securities brokers misled clients into joining a class action settlement.  [ D2. ]
Gitano filed for bankruptcy protection after agreeing to sell itself to Fruit of the Loom for $100 million.  [ D4. ]
Union Pacific agreed to buy the oil and gas subsidiary of Cyprus Amax Minerals for $819 million in cash.  [ D4. ]
American Telephone and Telegraph is threatening to change its name -- to just AT&amp;T.  [ D4. ]
G.E. is teaming up with Motorola to produce a new generation of light bulbs that will use substantially less electricity.  [ D4. ]
The I.R.S. has chosen a Loral subsidiary to develop a scanning system for hundreds of millions of documents.  [ D4. ] Business Technology
Oil companies like Texaco face the challenge of convincing motorists that a new gasoline additive is worth the trouble of driving even a block out of the way to buy it.  [ D5. ] Today's Columns
Coca-Cola hopes to mimic the success of Snapple by entering the fast-growing market for noncarbonated "new age" beverages.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D1. ]
Some investors may be overly pessimistic about the outlook for ARCO.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]


Donald Hopson; Fashion Designer, 57
Donald Hopson, a New York fashion designer best known for his work on the Adele Simpson collections of women's clothes, died on Friday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 57.
The cause was cancer, said Rodger Robinson, the executor of his estate.


CHRONICLE
JILL KREMENTZ is hoping that some of the 120 children she has photographed and written about in more than two dozen books will turn up for a talk titled "Listening to Children: The Real Experts," which she is giving this evening at the Hunter College School of Social Work.
"But I don't know how many will be there," she said.
"Everything I do with children is contingent on their homework, their orthodontist appointments, their custody arrangement. It's amazing I ever get to interview any of them."


Spy's Paper Trail
Evidence at a bail hearing sketched an almost comic portrait of Aldrich Ames, who prosecutors said slipped off unnoticed to Vienna, Bogota and Caracas to meet contacts, yet left compromising papers and files where easily found, in a box in a closet and on a computer diskette.
Article, page B7.


Bridge
One might think that the diagramed deal would have no history.
North-South overbid slightly to six diamonds, using some modern responses to Key-Card Blackwood.
West leads his singleton heart, and East takes two heart tricks for down one.
But the deal, played in a regional championship in Hawaii in January, was the talking point of the tournament.
It was reported by Ron Garber of Los Angeles, who was sitting East and having a bad day.


U.S. AND RUSSIANS BROKER NEW PACTS FOR A BOSNIA PEACE
Working on parallel diplomatic fronts, the United States and Russia brokered separate agreements today that were meant to move Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to peace.
In Moscow, Russia succeeded in persuading the leader of the Bosnian Serbs to permit the reopening of the airfield near the Bosnian Muslim town of Tuzla for relief flights of food and medicine.
In Washington, negotiators for the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government and the Bosnian Croats signed a framework agreement to unite the parts of the country that are under their control.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Bally's Park Place Funding, Chicago, a subsidiary of Bally Manufacturing Corp., is selling $425 million of 9 1/4 percent first-mortgage notes due in 2004 priced at 97.618 to yield 9.625 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The issue is callable in five years and is rated B-1 by Moody's Investors Service and BB by Standard &amp; Poor's and Duff &amp; Phelps. *
CIT Group Holdings Inc., New York, is selling $100 million of subordinated medium-term notes due in 2004 priced at 100 to yield 6.98 percent through Chase Securities.
The issue, callable in three years, is rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Accounting for a 'Dear Friend'
Following is the text of an exhibit that the Government says is an accounting made by a Russian official to Aldrich H. Ames, the Central Intelligence Agency official accused of spying.
The punctuation and spelling are from the text as are the numerical notations on the right margins that appear to be cents.
Dear Friend,
this is Your balance sheet as on the day of May 1, 1989,
- All in all You have been appropriated ---- 2,705,000 $
- From the time of oppening of Your
account in our Bank (December 26,
1986) Your profit is --------------------- 385,077$ 28c
(including 14,468$ 94c as profit on bonds, which we
bought for You on the sum of 250,000 ]
- Since December 1986 Your salary is ------- 300,000$
- All in all we have delivered to You ------ 1,881,811$ 51c
- On the above date You have in Your
account (including 250,000$ in bonds) ---- 1,535,077$ 28c
P.S.
We believe that these pictures would give You some idea about the beautiful piece of land on the river bank, which from now belongs to You forever.
We decided not to take pictures of housing in the area with the understanding that You have much better idea of how Your country house (dacha) should look like.
Good luck


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 25
Feb. 18
Feb. 26
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
2.9
Gasoline stocks
228.5
228.1
239.3
Distillate stocks
106.2
110.2
113.9
Crude imports, daily
6.0
6.3
6.9
Product imports, daily
2.0
2.2
1.8
Crude stocks
325.7
333.5
333.1
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
87.5
90.0
84.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Weicker Testifies for Youth Programs
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. today staked his final year in office on legislation aimed at improving the lives of poor children.
Testifying before the legislature's Select Committee on Children, Mr.
Weicker said he had been shocked to learn that the legislation, his Youth Initiative to improve neighborhoods, job opportunities and health care for children in the state's cities, was in danger because of what he called "scurrilous" objections to its $40 million cost.


INSIDE
Economy Grows by 7.5% In Fastest Pace Since 1984
The economy surged at a 7.5 percent annual pace in the final quarter of 1993, the strongest performance since 1984.
But most economists stuck to the view that growth has already slowed and that the risk of revived inflation remains low.
Page D1.
Opening Doctors' Eyes
Tagging along with nurses, interns at Long Island Jewish Medical Center are forced to notice the work, time, discomfort and expense caused by tests they order routinely.
Page B8.
Grammy Awards
And the winners are . . .
Whitney Houston, Sting and 'Aladdin' in the 36th annual award ceremony at Radio City Music Hall.
Page C15.


MACY IS EXPECTED TO SEEK AN EXTENSION ON PLAN
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company is expected to ask for an extension of its deadline to file a term sheet outlining its plan of reorganization, lawyers representing its creditors said yesterday.
They said the retail company had worked out an agreement with Cyrus R. Vance, who was appointed last week as mediator in Macy's bankruptcy case, to extend until March 23 its deadline for filing a term sheet.
The current deadline, established by Judge Burton R. Lifland of United States Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan, is next Tuesday.


South African Foes Leave Door Open for an Accord
In a concession that at least postponed the threat of a violent election boycott, Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi of the Inkatha Freedom Party agreed today that his mainly Zulu party would "provisionally" register for the country's first free elections.
In exchange, Nelson Mandela of the African National Congress endorsed an Inkatha proposal to submit the parties' deep differences about a new Constitution to international mediation.


Review/Theater; A Revolutionary Terror That Comes Full Circle
Returning from intermission at the Irondale Ensemble's riveting production of "Danton's Death," Georg Buchner's masterpiece about the French Revolution's turning on itself, one is startled to find a huge guillotine has been erected on a platform in the middle of the theater.
It was a relief to see that no one had started knitting in the front row.
Jim Niesen, the Irondale's director, has mounted a production that is a powerful testament not only to the 19th-century playwright's genius but also to the terrible consequence of employing fear and loathing in the pursuit of power.
In this bicentennial of Danton's death (and Robespierre's, too, only a few months later), the play still speaks to those today who would unleash tyranny in the name of liberty.


House Pauses in Deference to a Record
The House of Representatives ground to a halt today to spare an ailing Congressman who has not missed a vote in 40 years from ruining his perfect record.
The Congressman, William H. Natcher, an 84-year-old Kentucky Democrat first elected to the House in 1953, sent word to House leaders shortly before today's scheduled session that he was hospitalized for intestinal treatments at the nearby Bethesda Naval Hospital.


Purvis to Succeed Bonnett in Winston Cup
JEFF PURVIS got the bittersweet opportunity yesterday to take over the Winston Cup ride of his late friend, Neil Bonnett, who died in a crash last month at Daytona International Speedway.
"Neil always had a lot of faith in me," said Purvis, who will enter eight races in 1994 in Bonnett's Chevrolet Lumina.
"I believe he would be glad for me."


COMPANY NEWS: It Just Wants to Be AT&amp;T; Going a Long Distance Before Shortening a Name
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that despite feelings of nostalgia among its directors, it had decided to seek approval from shareholders to change its name to, of all things, its initials, the AT&amp;T Corporation.
It certainly seems a logical move, considering that its 109-year-old name sounds outdated, and the A.T.&amp; T. brand and logo, adopted in 1984, are so familiar.


Odd Couples Can Make Magic
INNOVATION, said Louis Pasteur, is essentially "chance favoring the prepared mind." That applies not only to scientists searching for a vaccine, but also to chefs fusing special ingredients into something new and exciting.
Creative minds continually push the frontiers, risking chaos and ignominy.
My experiences with calamity include being served a perfectly grilled striped bass that was garnished with what could best be described as Dairy Queen strawberry sauce.
I told the waiter that all it lacked was whipped cream and a cherry.
On another occasion, venison with peanut butter sauce sent me scrambling for the check.


Istanbul Journal; Career Women Finding Elbowroom in Turkey
Much has changed here in recent years -- the ribbons of freeway, the sprawl of tenements, the sense that this city straddling Europe and Asia has become what some residents call "the wild West," where prospectors ride into town to stake out a share of the gold rush.
But one of the most far-reaching of Istanbul's myriad revolutions lies in the new sense of liberalism and even liberation for the capital's women.


Schottenstein (M/I) Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. URGES ISRAELIS TO CURB MILITANTS
Seeking to bring the Palestinians back to the bargaining table, the Administration urged Israel today to do more to rein in militant Israeli settlers and offered unusually lavish praise for Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Robert H. Pelletreau Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Near East Affairs, told a Congressional committee that Israel needed to go beyond "tokenism" in restricting settlers in the occupied territories.
A settler from Brooklyn massacred Palestinians in a mosque in Hebron on Friday.


People
*
Mary Ann Quick was named to the new position of executive vice president and chief creative officer at Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago.
The agency's creative responsibilities were previously handled by Tony Vanderwarker, who was vice chairman and chief creative officer until he left almost two years ago.
Ms.
Quick was previously an executive vice president and group creative director at the Leo Burnett Co., Chicago. *
Curtis King was named a partner and corporate media director at Eric Mower &amp; Associates, Rochester, succeeding Ira Bass, who left.
Mr.
King was previously a senior vice president and media director at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, Chicago.


4 Hasidic Youths Hurt in Brooklyn Bridge Shooting
A gunman in a car opened fire on a van carrying more than a dozen Hasidic students as it began to cross the Brooklyn Bridge from Manhattan yesterday morning, critically wounding two young men and injuring two others, the police said.
The lone gunman, driving a blue Chevrolet Caprice and apparently using two guns, pursued the van full of terrified students across the bridge.
He fired in three separate bursts, the police said, spraying both sides of the van with rounds from 9-millimeter weapons.
Then he disappeared into traffic as the van came to a stop at the Brooklyn end of the bridge, the police said.
A Grim Prognosis
The injured yeshiva students were returning from a Manhattan hospital where the spiritual leader of the Lubavitch sect, Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson, had undergone minor surgery.
Rabbi Schneerson, who had made his unannounced trip to the hospital early in the morning with a police escort, had already returned to Brooklyn via a different route by the time the shooting broke out.


Witness Says Defendant Shot Doctor at Clinic
A witness to the slaying of a doctor last March near the back door of an abortion clinic here identified Michael F. Griffin in a courtroom today as the man who fired the fatal shots.
"There were three pops," the witness, Della Lindsey, told the jury.
"The first pop got my attention, and I looked and saw a man firing the others. I couldn't see who he shot at, but I saw feet."


Books of The Times; A Writing Form Meant For the Frank and Brave
The Art of the Personal Essay
An Anthology From the Classical Era to the Present
Selected and With an Introduction by Phillip Lopate
777 pages. Anchor Books. $30.
"I have ordered myself to dare to say all that I dare to do, and I dislike even thoughts that are unpublishable," wrote Michel de Montaigne four centuries ago.
To what lengths essayists have since gone to make good on that dare!
Frankness is the least of it; any oaf can be perfectly or brutally frank.
The point is to be seductively or courageously frank.
To question and explore aloud, exposed to the scrutiny and judgment of strangers: that's the challenge and there's the rub.
The material of a personal essay can be literally anything: city noise, country solitude; smoking hashish, fasting; love letters, dinner parties; a drunken father, a lover taking his leave; watching a moth die, watching a criminal go to the guillotine, watching your own face in a mirror; observing what grace you can or cannot muster under the pressure of sickness, failure, longing, bad nerves or moral sloth.


Rabin Is Tough, Maybe
His disgust over the massacre of worshiping Palestinians by a Jewish settler in Hebron could not be plainer or more deeply felt.
He has made outcasts of Israelis who would kill Arabs because they are Arabs, saying in the most graphic language that Judaism spits them out.
And his Government has committed itself to arrest the most extreme settlers, take their guns away and keep them out of the occupied territories.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.49
3.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.49
3.40
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.70
3.61
3.04
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.28
6.13
5.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.77
6.65
6.83
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.60
7.49
7.79
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.83
5.77
5.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Redskins Fire Charley Taylor
CHARLEY TAYLOR's three-decade relationship with the Washington Redskins is over.
The Redskins announced on Monday that Taylor, first an All-Pro wide receiver and later an assistant since 1978, would not be kept on the staff of the new coach, NORV TURNER.
The team completed the staff by naming former Cincinnati Bengals and Dallas Cowboys safety RAY HORTON as a defensive assistant.


Samuel Blutter; Apparel Executive, 83
Samuel Blutter, who retired in 1984 as president of Dolly Martin Inc., a maker of women's sportswear, died on Feb. 9, at a Manhattan nursing home.
He was 83 and lived in Manhattan.
He had had a long illness, his family said.


Jansen at Starting Line In Corporate Arena
After turning a heart-wrenching 0-7 Olympic speed-skating career into a heartwarming 1-7 triumph, Dan Jansen took the first tentative steps today into cashing in on his lone gold medal.
Jansen, who set a world record in winning the 1,000 meters in Lillehammer, Norway, 11 days ago, appeared at a news conference arranged by Integrated Sports International, the New Jersey-based sports-marketing company he has retained as his trolling line to corporate America.


When New Yorkers' Hearts Stop, Only a Few Live
People who suffer cardiac arrest in New York City have only a 1 in 100 chance of survival, a much lower rate than in several smaller cities and rural areas that have been studied, new research shows.
The researchers, who studied 2,329 consecutive cardiac arrests in New York City during a six-month period in 1991, attributed the poor survival rates to factors that are common to large cities and that delay the care of such patients, whose hearts have stopped pumping.


New York Power Chief Warns of Plant Closings
On his first day on the job, the head of the New York Power Authority warned today that the authority would have to improve operations at its two nuclear plants or he would recommend shutting them.
S.
David Freeman, the chief executive officer of the power authority, said that he and his staff would produce a preliminary study in about 90 days, but that the most likely course would be "giving these plants two or three years to show their stuff, or forever hold their peace."


Rev. Paul L. Lehmann, 87, Dies; Theologian and Civil Libertarian
The Rev.
Paul L. Lehmann, a theologian, scholar of Christian ethics and outspoken civil libertarian, died on Sunday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.


On Campus; Casino Profits Help Indians Get Degree in Gaming
Using profits from their reservation casino, the Menominee Indians of northeastern Wisconsin have bankrolled a community college that offers an associate of arts degree in casino gambling.
Now in its third semester, the College of the Menominee Nation, in Keshena, Wis., about 60 miles northwest of Green Bay, intends to train Indians who want to run casinos on their reservations.
The Menominees have had a dramatic infusion of income -- estimated at $8 million last year -- since expanding a bingo hall into a casino in 1989.


Holdout Carr Steals Back Into Camp
CHUCK CARR ended a three-day holdout yesterday and reported to the Florida Marlins' spring training camp.
Carr, who left after Friday's workout because of a contract dispute, gained nothing financially from his move.
He agreed to the same one-year, $230,000 contract the Marlins had been offering before he left.


Banks May Pay Fees to Be Regulated
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen proposed today to pay for the consolidation of bank regulatory agencies by charging Federal examination fees to large state-chartered institutions like Chemical Bank and the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company.
The Administration plan, put forward by the Treasury Department today to the Senate Banking Committee, would collect $50 million a year from these banks, said Frank N. Newman, the Under Secretary of the Treasury for Domestic Finance.


The Road That Led to Hebron; Dismantle Settlements
To the Editor:
The reporting on the Palestinians killed in the Hebron mosque has attempted to provide balance by speaking of extremists on both sides.


A Bear Market: Jets Cautious on Free Agents
Last year, the Jets looked at their 4-12 record, waded into the free-agent pool and signed safety Ronnie Lott and defensive tackle Leonard Marshall to lucrative contracts.
This year, with the $33.8 million salary cap putting a stranglehold on their wallet, the Jets haven't even tested the free-agent waters.


Review/Fashion; Basking in Minimalism As an Antidote to Stress
In this Minimalist era, designers and the fashion editors who follow them often look like the bland leading the bland.
Vibrant color is part of that over-the-rainbow world, as at the designer Tomasz Starzewski's show in London last week, where each pair of shoes was dyed to match a dress in a shade of mango, pistachio or curry.
Before women traveled so frequently (and without steamer trunks); before the forces of the economy increased the hours in their workweeks; before every minute spent getting dressed cut such a chunk of their discretionary time, there was an era when having saffron-colored shoes, handbag and hat just didn't seem to be such a big deal.
Today, it is.
Dressing for working women has become, by necessity, mindless.


Rates Climb on Report Of Inflation Pressures
Interest rates climbed to their highest level in almost a year yesterday as investors sold on economic data that bore evidence of inflationary pressures building in the economy.
The selloff came after the National Association of Purchasing Management reported that its price index climbed in February to its highest point since 1990.
The report rekindled speculation that the Federal Reserve would move again on short-term interest rates as it did on Feb. 4.


The Road That Led to Hebron; Talks Must Go Forward
To the Editor:
If there is a ray of hope to be glimpsed in the aftermath of the Hebron massacre, it is that the shock of this horrible event may accelerate the achievement of peace by making clear to all that Israeli-Palestinian negotiations about peace (i.e., "final status" and settlers and Jerusalem) cannot be put off for another two years.
JOHN V. WHITBECK  Paris, Feb. 28, 1994


Expansion Panel Is Named
Further evidence that Phoenix and St.
Petersburg-Tampa, Fla., will receive franchises when major league baseball next expands came today with the appointment of six owners to an expansion committee.
John Harrington of the Boston Red Sox confirmed that he had been named chairman of the committee and said he would be joined by George Steinbrenner, Yankees; Jerry Reinsdorf, Chicago White Sox; Richard Jacobs, Cleveland; Stan Kasten, Atlanta; Bill Giles, Philadelphia, and Stanton Cook, Chicago Cubs.


In Milan, they talk of food, wine, the weather and dresses by Armani. Armani?


Atom Inspectors in North Korea, Easing Rift
Inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency entered North Korea today for the first time in seven months, ending a tense standoff over the Communist Government's refusal to provide even minimal access to the sites where the United States believes nuclear weapons are under development.
The team of six inspectors and a technician arrived in North Korea's capital, Pyongyang, wheeling giant boxes of inspection equipment with them.
They were immediately whisked off to Yongbyon, the nuclear complex 60 miles from Pyongyang.


Japanese Vessel Fails to Set Ocean Depth Mark
An unmanned Japanese vessel descended today to the deepest spot in the world's oceans, sending back the first television pictures of the Marianas Trench nearly seven miles below the surface of the Pacific.
But just as it was on the verge of landing on the ocean floor, the remote-controlled craft was forced to abort its mission by an equipment failure.
The craft apparently fell a few feet short of setting a record for the greatest depth reached by a manmade vehicle.


'91 Ports May Warm Shipper And Buyer
NOTHING warms fanciers of vintage port more than icy weather.
And nothing warms port shippers more than declaring a vintage.
New York's wretched winter was made in heaven for both.
And for consumers, too.
The 1991 vintage ports, costing $20 to $30, are arriving in a buyer's market.
Added to a glut of 1985 vintage ports in the same price range, the 91's offer immediate savings and future hedonistic value to canny shoppers.


Memorable Atlanta Debut for Manning
Hawks 102, Timberwolves 99
Danny Manning, in his home debut for the Atlanta Hawks, hit a 12-foot jumper with 8 seconds left last night, salvaging a 102-99 victory over the Minnesota Timberwolves, who had mounted an impressive rally.


White House Offers Version Of Three-Strikes Crime Bill
The Clinton Administration today issued its version of a "three strikes and you're out" crime measure, which officials estimated would incarcerate only 200 to 300 prisoners a year for violent Federal offenses.
Despite that estimate by Administration officials, Vice President Al Gore said at a White House news conference that the proposal would make a "huge dent" in crime.


Healthsouth Rehabilitation Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Another Blow to the N.R.A.
The Street Sweeper can discharge 12 shotgun shells in less than three seconds.
It is not a sporting gun; it was invented in Zimbabwe for military purposes and used by the South African police.
According to police, it is also much admired and frequently used by American drug dealers.
The Treasury Department has now appropriately reclassified the Street Sweeper, along with two other types of semiautomatic shotguns, as a "destructive weapon." Owners of such shotguns will be required to register them, and to be photographed and fingerprinted.
New fees and taxes will be imposed on manufacturers and dealers.


Review/Pop; The International Sound of Celine Dion
Celine Dion, whose hit single "The Power of Love" has been No. 1 on the American pop charts for the last month, has a voice so devoid of strong stylistic inflections that her singing suggests a computer-determined vocal composite of international pop divas.
Listening to her enunciating in a phonetically perfect English, you can as easily imagine her being Japanese or Greek or Spanish as North American.
In fact, Ms.
Dion who is 25, is French Canadian and has spoken English for only six years.
Ms.
Dion, who appeared at Town Hall on Monday evening, is a belter with a high, thin, slightly nasal, nearly vibratoless soprano and a good-sized arsenal of technical skills.
She can deliver tricky melismas, produce expressive vocal catches and sustain long notes without the tiniest wavering of pitch.
And as her two hit duets, "Beauty and the Beast" (with Peabo Bryson) and "When I Fall in Love" (with Clive Griffin) have shown, she is a reliable harmony voice.


Syracuse Survives Scare From Lowly Hurricanes
With the Big East Conference race settled, perhaps it was predictable that 18th-ranked Syracuse would be asleep at the switch tonight against the hapless University of Miami.
The Orangemen, after getting special permission from the conference, flew into town Sunday night straight from their 82-81 victory over St.
John's.
They had plenty of time to be tourists and savor the climate.


Trial of Interactive TV Is Delayed
Time Warner Cable cast new doubts yesterday on the quick arrival of commercial interactive television, with its promise of hundreds of channels of entertainment and home shopping.
The company said it was delaying a 4,000-home field trial of its interactive television system in Orlando, Fla., until the fourth quarter.
The trial was supposed to begin on April 1.


Columbia/HCA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Whitman Freezes Accident Claims and Chooses an Insurance Chief
As Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman introduced her choice for New Jersey Insurance Commissioner today, she gave thousands of state motorists some bad news: their auto insurance claims will not be paid any time soon.
Governor Whitman declared a freeze on paying accident claims to drivers insured by the state-run Market Transition Facility until state officials can find the money.
There are about 100,000 motorists and $900 million in claims affected by Governor Whitman's emergency order.


American Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Colby Agency Plans to Close
Rick Colby, head of the Colby Agency in Los Angeles, said yesterday that he would close his shop and join Lois/ U.S.A., opening an office of that agency in Santa Monica, Calif., called Lois, Colby Los Angeles.
Mr.
Colby, 42, who served as president, creative director and chief operating officer at Colby, was named chairman and creative director of the new shop, which will operate as a division of Lois/USA West.
"I think I can help them build something up here," Mr.
Colby said, adding that he hoped his six remaining accounts with combined billings estimated at $10 million would follow him.
Only a handful of his shop's 12 employees will join him, he said.


Students Design Machines to Share the Load


HDTV Use For Profit Is Pushed
Television broadcasters seem close to persuading members of Congress to allow them to use new channels reserved for high-definition television for money-making purposes like pay-per-view sports events and data services.
Backing for the broadcasters came today in an amendment to sweeping telecommunications legislation under consideration in the House.
A version of the amendment is expected to be part of a bill that the House Energy and Commerce Committee may vote upon as early as next week.


Royal Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


In America; Deadly Data on Handguns
In 1992, handguns were used in the murders of 33 people in Britain, 36 in Sweden, 97 in Switzerland, 128 in Canada, 13 in Australia, 60 in Japan and 13,220 in the United States.
Those are the latest annual statistics available.
They were released yesterday by Handgun Control Inc. and the Center to Prevent Handgun Violence.


Flake and His Church Agree to Repay Federal Money
In a settlement to a civil suit brought by the Justice Department, Representative Floyd H. Flake and the church he heads in Jamaica, Queens, have agreed to repay $530,000 in Federal money that the government had claimed was improperly used to help build a church school.
With interest dating to 1982, when construction on the school started, the repayment will add up to $925,000.


Bank of Nova Scotia reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Union Pacific Resources To Buy Oil and Gas Unit
The Union Pacific Corporation said yesterday that its Union Pacific Resources unit had agreed to buy the oil and gas subsidiary of the Cyprus Amax Minerals Company for $819 million in cash.
Union Pacific Resources, based in Fort Worth, said the transaction would significantly expand its natural gas business, raising its natural gas reserves by about 20 percent.


Personal Health; Jury fails to convict hair dye as a cancer risk.
AGING baby boomers and millions of other Americans both older and younger received reassuring news last month: the coloring that many use to hide that telltale gray or to give themselves a fresh new look may be a lot safer than previous reports had suggested.
The newest finding, as reported recently in The Journal of the National Cancer Institute, was said in an editorial to show "conclusively that use of permanent hair dyes does not increase risk of cancer mortality."


Ex-Bengal Is Sentenced to Year in Jail
REGGIE REMBERT, a former Cincinnati Bengals wide receiver, has been sentenced to a year in jail for drunken-driving offenses that prompted his release from the team last season.


Venture Aims At Advance In Lighting
The electronic revolution, which swept the vacuum radio tube away 40 years ago, may be about to do the same to the lowly light bulb.
The General Electric Company, which traces its roots to Thomas Edison's original incandescent bulb, is teaming up with Motorola Lighting to produce a new generation of light bulbs.
The new lamps will use substantially less electricity and will have much longer life than current bulbs, company officials say.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN BIOMED INC., Woodlands, Tex., appointed Herbert Kalman vice president and chief financial officer.
ESCALADE INC., Evansville, Ind., a maker of sports and recreation equipment, named Bill Reed president and chief operating officer and John Wilson vice president and chief financial officer.


Three Goalies and One Net
Corey Hirsch was nowhere to be seen today at the Rangers' practice, but Glenn Healy still felt his presence.
Hirsch, the highly regarded prospect who was a member of Canada's silver-medal team at the Lillehammer Olympics Games, was called up on Monday and could join the team Wednesday.
That will give the Rangers three goalies: Mike Richter, Healy and Hirsch.
And Healy has no idea where he stands.


Langston Hughes On the IRT; A Poem Arouses Many Feelings
The Transit Authority's program is called Poetry in Motion, and on this particular morning eight lines of Langston Hughes rumble along the length of the IRT No. 3 line.
Sometimes a crumb falls
From the tables of joy
Sometimes a bone
Is flung
To some people
Love is given
To others
Only heaven.


Senate Turns Down Amendment On Balancing the Federal Budget
The Senate tonight rejected a constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget, killing the proposal for at least this year.
The vote was 63 to 37, leaving the measure four votes short of the two-thirds majority required for a constitutional amendment.


Tuberculosis Vaccine Found Surprisingly Effective in Study
A vaccine to prevent tuberculosis that is used only infrequently in this country, largely because Federal health officials consider it unreliable, is surprisingly effective, a new statistical study has discovered.
It was found to reduce the risk of full-fledged tuberculosis of the lung by 50 percent and death by 71 percent.
The vaccine known as BCG, for bacillus Calmette-Guerin, after the French scientists who began developing it in 1906, is reported to be the most widely used vaccine in the world.
It has been injected into an estimated three billion people, and the World Health Organization recommends BCG as a standard childhood immunization.


Court of Memory: Hurley Shoots Baskets
A little less than three months after nearly dying in a car accident, the Sacramento Kings rookie BOBBY HURLEY returned to the court in Jersey City yesterday to shoot baskets.
"He shot about 25 free throws, the number the therapist said he could shoot," his father, BOB HURLEY SR., said by telephone from his home.
Bobby Hurley shot as his father's St.
Anthony's High School basketball team practiced at Public School 28 in Jersey City.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COMMERCE BANCSHARES INC., Kansas City, Mo., a bank holding company, said it had completed the acquisition of closely held Walnut Valley Corp. for an undisclosed amount of stock.
CHARLES SCHWAB CORP., San Francisco, the discount securities brokerage firm, plans to open about 23 branches this year, increasing the total by about 10 percent.


West Frazer reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Paramount Expected to Oust Jaffe From President's Post
Stanley R. Jaffe, president of Paramount Communications Inc., will be out of a job when Viacom Inc. completes its acquisition of Paramount in the coming weeks, Viacom executives said today, confirming recent speculation of a shake-up at the Hollywood film studio.
The Viacom executives, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said today that Martin S. Davis, Paramount's chairman, told Mr.
Jaffe the bad news on Monday, after attending a meeting with Viacom executives in Vail, Colo., where it was decided that Mr.
Jaffe would no longer have a role in the company.


WPIX to Keep Yank Tradition
After months of protracted, prickly negotiations, MSG Network and WPIX-TV/Channel 11 will announce a three-year deal today to put 50 Yankee games on WPIX.
The agreement extends WPIX's 43-year tradition of broadcasting Yankees games on free television and will most likely bring back Phil Rizzuto, Tom Seaver and Bobby Murcer as the announcers.


Book Notes
Good and Bad
At a whither-publishing panel sponsored by the PEN American Center on Monday night, the first speakers were having an elaborate discussion about Martin Midlist, a hypothetical author, and his discouraging prospects when Harold M. Evans all but floored the audience with some solid facts.
Making the point that commerce does not always correspond to culture, Mr.
Evans, the publisher of the Random House adult trade division, said the 29 books he published that made it onto The New York Times's 1993 list of Notable Books lost $698,000 collectively.
At the same time, he said, the eight books published by his division that recently won awards from the American Library Association lost a total of $370,000.


Trying to Produce Doctors With a Sensitive Touch And a Grasp of Economics
For their clinical education course at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center, the five young doctors had just completed an eight-hour shift working as nurses and they still sounded a little shellshocked, sitting around a conference room table, discussing what they had learned.
"You see the effects of all these blood tests we doctors order," said Dr.
Pierre Herard, who spent the day hunting clean bed pans, untangling patients snagged in intravenous tubes and waiting for countless blood test results from the hospital laboratory.
"And I realize, sometimes we doctors order all these blood tests and we don't even check them."


Snapple Beverage (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In 'Tragic Error,' Soldiers Kill a Settler
In circumstances as confused as they were certain to inspire new soul-searching, Israeli soldiers shot dead a Jewish settler in the occupied West Bank tonight, apparently believing him to be a Palestinian gunman, the army said.
The episode -- described by an army spokesman as a "tragic error" -- provided graphic illustration that Israelis fear Palestinian vengeance for the massacre of worshipers on Friday in a Hebron mosque.


Corrections
An article yesterday about anger among Israeli Arabs referred incorrectly to the population of Israel.
According to the Israeli mission to the United Nations, it is 5.1 million, not 4 million.


'It's Always Good to Take an X-Ray.' But Necessary?
"Take out a piece of paper and a pen," said Dr.
Linda Kanarvogel, co-director of the advanced clinical skills course at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center.
"Today we're talking about cost-analysis of lower back pain."
Most of the interns were fresh from medical school, but one, Dr.
Pierre Herard, had practiced in Jamaica as an orthopedic specialist before coming here for more training, and instructors noticed that he kept ordering X-rays.


Corrections
A listing in Weekend on Feb. 18 about events in connection with the Frank Lloyd Wright exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art misstated the area code in the information number for the symposium "Frank Lloyd Wright: Beyond Conventional Boundaries," to be held at the museum on April 27.
A co-sponsor of the event is the Society of Architectural Historians in Philadelphia, and the society accepts symposium registrations at (215) 735-0224.


Reynolds Defends Outside Activity to Faculty
The City University of New York chancellor, W. Ann Reynolds, yesterday defended her service on five corporate boards before the university's faculty senate, where some members expressed skepticism that her corporate work actually benefits the university.
"I have meticulously followed the guidelines," Dr.
Reynolds said about complaints that she might be violating the university's two-day-a-month limit on "outside consultation and professional activities."


C.I.A. Had Hints of a Spy Years Before Hunt Began
The C.I.A. first became aware that Aldrich H. Ames might be a Soviet mole nearly seven years ago, but failed to focus on evidence pointing at the intelligence officer until last year, when agents finally searched his office, intelligence officials and members of Congress said today.
Recounting the investigation that led to Mr.
Ames's being charged with spying for Moscow, they said the C.I.A.'s investigation of a suspected traitor in its ranks rose and fell in intensity over the years.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  FOUR HASIDIC YOUTHS INJURED ON BRIDGE
A gunman in a car opened fire on a van carrying more than a dozen Hasidic students as it began to cross the Brooklyn Bridge from Manhattan, critically wounding two young men and injuring two others, the police said.
A1.
So determined was the gunman that he took aim and fired at three different points. B4.
One victim was exceptionally close to the Lubavitch grand rabbi. B4.
Yaakov Schapiro, a student in the van, was certain he was under attack by Arab terrorists.
B4.


As U.S. Exits, Somali Clan Chief Stands Strong
Four weeks before the last American soldiers are scheduled to pull out of Somalia, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid is widely seen as a powerful figure who must decide whether to negotiate or fight with other powerful clans if he wants to extend his power throughout the country.
General Aidid, who became an implacable enemy of international peacekeeping forces during their 15-month operation here, has in some ways emerged even more powerful than he was before the operation began, diplomats and relief officials say.


Sanfilippo (John B.) &amp; Sons Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Modest Show of Force in Bosnia
Even a month ago, it might not have happened.
But when NATO spotters caught six Serbian warplanes blatantly violating the United Nations ban on military flights over Bosnian airspace Monday, they acted.
American F-16 fighters pursued them, warned them, and when the warnings were ignored, shot four of the Serbian planes down.
Technically, it was the first combat operation ever staged by the 44-year-old NATO alliance.
It will, if nothing else, add credibility to future NATO warnings.


Wall Street Helps Neediest Cases Rest on a High Note
With a push in the final days from several Wall Street firms, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund ended its annual appeal on Monday with the second-best campaign in its 82-year history.
The fund raised $4,590,568.69 from nearly 13,500 contributors during the three-month drive.
The donations will help seven social-service agencies feed, house and provide medical care to tens of thousands of poor New Yorkers.


Bindley Western Indus(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
Krugerrand Organization, Hingham, Mass., to Ally &amp; Gargano, New York, to handle advertising and marketing for the reintroduction of the Krugerrand gold coin.
Billings were estimated to exceed $3 million. *
Beiersdorf Inc., Norwalk, Conn., to Hall Decker McKibbin Inc., Fair Lawn, N.J., to handle advertising for its Basis skin care products line, previously handled by Brancaccio/ Christofer/Shields, North Hills, L.I.
Hall Decker already handles skin and wound care products from Beiersdorf's medical division.
Billings were not disclosed.


G.D.P. Up at 7.5% Pace In Last Quarter of '93
The Government reported today that the economy lunged ahead at a 7.5 percent annual pace in the final quarter of 1993, the strongest performance in nearly 10 years, but most economists stuck to the view that growth has already slowed in the new year and that the risk of revived inflation remains low.
In sharply raising its late January estimate of a 5.9 percent rate of expansion in gross domestic product -- the nation's total output of goods and services -- the Commerce Department said much of the revision resulted from a jump in exports.
The Government, however, did not expect exports to continue at their fourth-quarter pace, given the weak economies of American trading partners.


Broadcasting Museum Planned for Los Angeles
The Museum of Television and Radio, founded in 1975 in New York, announced on Monday that it was establishing a similar showcase in Los Angeles.
The museum said Richard Meier had been selected as the architect to renovate a building in Beverly Hills as the West Coast counterpart for the collection.
The site is on the southwest corner of North Beverly Drive and Little Santa Monica.
It is expected to open next year.


Administration Outlines Hopes for Health Savings
With its health care plan battered by critics on the left and the right, the Administration tried today to revive interest in the proposal by asserting that every state would save money if Congress approved the plan in precisely the form recommended by President Clinton.
The Administration's estimates are rosier than those by various governors, Republicans and independent researchers.
In addition, lawmakers from both parties say Congress will make major changes in the President's plan.


Coastal Healthcare Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dad's the One in the Blue Uniform


Nassau Seeks Private Bids For Hospital
The Nassau County Executive, proposing a sweeping retrenchment in county services, said today that he would seek to sell or lease the county's hospital, nursing home and nine health clinics.
Both Democratic and Republican officials have been seriously studying the privatization of the Nassau County Medical Center and the A. Holly Patterson Geriatric Center for more than two years.
Still, County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta, a Republican, surprised many here today by moving from discussion to action with his call for proposals from private hospitals and other enterprises to operate or buy those two institutions, as well as the nine clinics, which are run by the health department.


Pall Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Recycling Creates More Problems Than It Was Meant to Solve
To the Editor:
The New York State Court of Appeals decision ordering New York City to meet mandated recycling goals (news article, Feb. 23) may create as many problems as it solves.
The court ordered the city to find a way to recycle 25 percent of collected trash, as called for in the City Council's 1986 enactment, instead of the 15 percent it is now recycling.


Redmen Never Had Shot In the Eagles' Territory
St. John's had little chance tonight against Boston College.
It was the last scheduled home game at Conte Forum for Bill Curley, the Eagles' star, and the three other senior starters who have meant so much in bringing Boston College's basketball program to a higher level.


Former Mergers Expert Settles Insider Charges
During the last decade, Government investigations of wrongdoing on Wall Street successfully transformed once-respected names like Boesky, Milken and Drexel into synonyms for white-collar crime.
But even with those victories, nothing quite rankled Government investigators as the name of one who got away: Nahum Vaskevitch.
No more.
After seven years on the run, Mr.
Vaskevitch, the former head of international mergers and acquisitions at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, surrendered and agreed to settle fraud charges, bringing an end to the longest, most tortured insider trading case from the 1980's, regulators announced yesterday.


Beman Retiring as PGA Tour Commissioner After 1995 Season
Deane R. Beman, the hard-bitten and driven man who presided over the PGA Tour's growth from modest beginnings to a multimillion-dollar enterprise, announced today that he would step down as commissioner after a 20-year run.
Beman, 55 years old, informed the PGA Tour Tournament Policy Board that he does not wish to extend his contract, which runs through December 1995.
The search for a new commissioner will begin almost immediately.


Off the Menu
Arrivederci, Bellini
Last week, Arrigo Cipriani closed Bellini by Cipriani, the restaurant he opened at Seventh Avenue and 51st Street in 1987.
Mr.
Cipriani, the son of Giuseppe Cipriani, the legendary Venetian restaurateur and hotelier who started Harry's Bar, also owns Harry Cipriani in the Sherry-Netherland Hotel, Fifth Avenue and 59th Street.


For Kent, Offense Is the Best Defense
Jeff Kent will never be a Gold Glove second baseman.
This he admits in a heartbeat.
He would like to improve his defense -- he did commit more errors last season than any other second baseman -- but that is not the point.
The point is, he needs to provide the Mets with some of the offense they so desperately need.


AT LUNCH WITH: Jeff Berg; In Hollywood, Artist of Deals
Jeff Berg walks into Drai's, a trendy, of-the-moment restaurant where the position of the table, the quality of the service and maybe even the quality of the food are inextricably linked to a customer's celebrity.
Mr.
Berg is escorted to one of the best tables.
Outside Hollywood, Mr.
Berg, the chairman of International Creative Management, is relatively unknown.
Here, though, Mr.
Berg is viewed as Very Important, a bit mysterious and the second most powerful agent, after his rival, Michael Ovitz, the chairman of Creative Artists Agency.
In a place where hierarchy and status seem almost tribal, Mr.
Berg's position seems less than enviable.


U.S. Shows List of Secrets Moscow Wanted to Obtain
The Government today revealed a wealth of new details about its espionage case against Aldrich H. Ames and his wife, including a financial statement from Moscow listing $2.7 million in payments and a nine-page letter that prosecutors said was a shopping list of American secrets the Kremlin wanted Mr.
Ames to steal.
The documents were disclosed in a three-hour hearing before United States Magistrate Barry R. Poretz, who ordered Mr.
Ames and his wife, Rosario, held without bail.
The judge concluded that the Government had provided probable cause to hold Mr.
Ames and his wife on charges they conspired to commit espionage, a crime punishable by life in prison.


Mafia Defector Says He Lost His Faith
Facing the twin perils of an underworld death threat and a 30-year prison sentence, Anthony Accetturo defected as the top Lucchese crime family leader in New Jersey to become a Government witness because, he says, the Mafia's current bosses have discarded the secret society's traditional principles.
"The new generation that is running things threw all the old rules out the window," said Mr.
Accetturo in an interview Monday in a northern New Jersey prison where he is being held in a witness protection wing.
"The key word is greed. All they care about is money, not honor."


A Few Cents More Can Help Mexicans
To the Editor:
"My head hurts, my back hurts." Thus complained a young man in a remote village in Chiapas, Mexico.
Unlike the aches of dozens of other people I examined during a recent medical mission in the region, his pains came not from endless hours of hard labor carrying heavy sacks of firewood, corn and coffee.


Giuliani Picks Head Of Agency on Aging
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday named Herbert W. Stupp, a former Federal education official, to head New York City's Department of Aging.
Mr.
Stupp, 43, served in the administrations of Presidents Reagan and Bush as regional director of the Federal Action agency, the national agency for volunteer services.


The Road That Led to Hebron; Apologies Never Made
To the Editor:
No reasonable person can fail to be revolted by the slaying of Arabs by Baruch Goldstein at Hebron.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel immediately phoned Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, and apologized for the tragic incident, which was committed by one person.


Simms's Surgery Goes Well
Giants quarterback Phil Simms underwent surgery to repair a torn labrum in his throwing shoulder at the Hospital for Special Surgery-Cornell Medical Center in New York yesterday, the team announced.
The surgery was performed by Russell F. Warren, the team's doctor.
Warren said there was no other signs of injury to the muscles or the rotator cuff in Simms's right shoulder and added that Simms's prognosis for recovery was excellent.
The 38-year-old quarterback will have his arm in a sling for four weeks and then will begin a rehabilitation program.
He is expected to recover in time for training camp.


Good News Comes in Threes for Morris
All season, Chris Morris has been asking for the ball. Tonight he got it.
Morris, the Nets' 6-foot-8-inch small forward, set a team record by hitting 6 of 8 3-point shots to lead New Jersey to a 108-98 victory over the Detroit Pistons at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


The Kings of New York? The Nets, of Course
So who owns New York?
Despite the fact that the Nets have already clinched their five-game season series with the Knicks, having beaten them three straight times, the Knicks continue to capture the hearts and sympathies of metropolitan area fans.


Gettysburg Address Should Stay in Capital
To the Editor:
"The Right Address Is Gettysburg PA" (editorial, Feb. 21) urges that one original draft of Lincoln's Gettysburg Address be permanently placed at the national battlefield park.
Since the Library of Congress has two drafts, you would have us yield to local interests, divide this national treasure and leave one draft on permanent display at Gettysburg.
This sounds Solomonic and simple.
But it is not.
The library was explicitly given custody of both drafts in 1916 by the descendants of John Hay, Lincoln's secretary; they are among the designated national treasures that we carefully preserve for future generations of Americans.
We have lent one draft to the National Park Service at Gettysburg seasonally since 1979.
Congress's Joint Committee on the Library, concerned about the fragile condition of the documents, has directed us to end this arrangement after this year.


Fiery Leader and Loyal Follower in the Nation of Islam; Khallid Muhammad
As soon as he walked into the arena where the Nation of Islam held its convention on Sunday, people began whispering and pointing at Khallid Abdul Muhammad, the deposed top aide but still unbending follower of Louis Farrakhan.
"This is the most difficult and trying time of my life," Mr.
Muhammad told the Nation's newspaper, The Final Call.
"But I'm a soldier. I follow a divine chain of command."


Clinton's Welfare Advisers Urge Plan Stressing a Need to Work for Wages
The task force drafting President Clinton's welfare plan is urging him to abandon traditional work programs for a more stringent approach that denies any cash to welfare recipients who fail to work, officials said.
The endorsement of the plan, called work for wages, was reached at an unusual daylong meeting on Saturday, which for the first time spelled out many of the crucial details behind Mr.
Clinton's campaign promise to "end welfare as we know it."


Reviews/Music; 2 Dark Quartet Monuments
In a 25th-anniversary concert on Tuesday at Carnegie Hall, the Cleveland Quartet brought together two dark monuments of the string quartet repertory, Schubert's "Death and the Maiden" and Beethoven's Opus 131.
The pairing makes eminent good sense; these quartets were composed two years apart and share a similar threnodic minor-key palette.
It's tempting to hear "Death and the Maiden" as a homage to late Beethoven, to find Schubert's whole conception growing out of Opus 131's elegiac sixth movement and savage finale.
Except that Schubert came first; he divined late Beethoven almost before it had come into being.


Apply What U.S. Learned in Bosnia to Haiti
To the Editor:
It is ironic that on the very day that United States support for NATO military intervention makes peace possible in Bosnia, "Frustration Over Haiti" (editorial, Feb. 21) precludes the possibility of forceful intervention to restore democracy and end the gangster violence of the military junta in that unfortunate Caribbean country.
The problem of Haiti does not exist in a vacuum.
The elections that gave Jean-Bertrand Aristide an overwhelming majority were monitored by international observers, including former President Jimmy Carter.
The coup that sent President Aristide into exile violated hemispheric treaties that commit the American republics to the defense of democracy.


Alexei Haieff, 80, A Ballet Composer And Teacher, Dies
Alexei Haieff, a composer whose long life in music reached from Siberia to the United States and finally to Italy, died on Tuesday in San Camillo Hospital in Rome.
He was 80.
The cause was lung congestion and heart failure, hospital officials said.


Spare No More: Los Angeles Goes Baroque
INTERIOR decoration, which has been in the doldrums for the last few years, is beginning to revive, finding inspiration in broader sources, particularly fashion.
Fresh, often exotic materials, vibrant ethnic colors and a spirited sense of whimsy characterize this fashion-furnishings crossover.
In Los Angeles, the city that started the trend for sloppy-slipcovered gentility, as embodied by a store called Shabby Chic, something new is taking form.
"It may be a shift in esthetic to richer, darker, heavier," said Dara Buck, Shabby Chic's co-founder, who has added velvets to her signature line of "soft and floppy" cotton damasks.


Aikens Arrested
WILLIE AIKENS , one of four Kansas City Royals players who pleaded guilty to cocaine charges in 1983, was charged yesterday with distributing crack cocaine.
Federal prosecutors said Aikens was charged with one count of distributing about 31 grams of crack cocaine to an undercover Kansas City police officer.
He was arrested Tuesday at his home in Kansas City, Mo., and ordered held without bond. (AP)


A Film On a Case That Shut Alcatraz
The time is 1939.
Prisoners, shackled to one another, climb off a barge onto a dock.
Guards armed with shotguns hover nearby.
"Welcome to Alcatraz," says one guard in an unwelcome voice.
Marc Rocco, the director, is shooting a scene for the film "Murder in the First," on the site of what was once this country's most infamous prison.
Speaking in a whisper, Kirk Petruccelli, the movie's production designer, said: "At night it's very scary, very mysterious here. When the fog rolls in, it's unbelievably eerie. You almost hear voices."


INSIDE
A Testing Ground in Bosnia
A federation with Croatia?
Along a river in central Bosnia, Muslims and Croats want peace but are not sure the accord can work.
Page A10.
Welfare Fraud Uncovered
A New York City investigation has found 425 cases of Newark residents listed on welfare rolls in both New Jersey and New York.
Page B1.
La Guardia Takeoff Aborted
A Continental Airlines plane skidded to a stop past the runway at La Guardia Airport, injuring 29 people, 7 of whom were hospitalized.
Page B1.


Test of Tolerance Where 3 Faiths Pray
The Bosnian-Croatian federation hammered out in Washington on Tuesday will be tested along the Zujevina River here, in villages and towns that seem much the same -- except for the minaret rising over one, the spire of a Roman Catholic church over another, the onion-shaped domes of a Serbian Orthodox church over a third.
"I'd like to live together, but I'm not sure," said Adnan Manovic, a 24-year-old Bosnian Army soldier standing near the main mosque.
He said four comrades had been killed by Croats in a massacre.
"I don't trust them. With normal people, we could live. But not with war criminals."


BROOKLYN BRIDGE SHOOTING: The Mayor; Giuliani Leaves No Doubt Over City Hall's Concern
With the swagger of the lawman he once was, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani stared into a bank of television cameras yesterday afternoon to announce that a suspect had been charged with sending a fusillade of bullets Tuesday into a van filled with Hasidic students.
"We're saying as a community that if you violate us -- this shooting violated every one of us -- the largest and most effective police department in the United States will use every lawful technique to track you down," the Mayor proclaimed in City Hall's Blue Room, surrounded by the police hierarchy, Jewish leaders and elected officials.
"When this police department is motivated to act, there's nothing quite like it in law enforcement."


Forcing Truants Back to Class Will Only Undermine Schools; A Refuge in the Snow
To the Editor:
There are far too many good reasons to criticize the New York City school system, but in answer to State Senator Martin M. Solomon's Feb. 21 letter, the decision to stay open during the February snow emergency is not one of them.
Schools provide warmth, shelter, supervision, hot meals and medical and mental health services to schoolchildren, all in addition to education.
At times when parents are struggling with inclement conditions on their way to work or in their apartments, children especially need open schools.


Chancellor Presents Plan To Rebuild School System
Warning of the stresses of growing enrollment and educational failure, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines sketched out a broad plan yesterday to rebuild the school system, from cutting administrators in high schools to reorganizing the city's huge and costly special education program to experimenting with year-round schooling.
Mr.
Cortines told the City Council that school enrollment has topped one million this year for the first time in 15 years, and that with even more students expected, the Giuliani administration has not made plans to provide seats for them.
He predicted that 117,000 more seats would be needed over the next decade -- twice the total school enrollment in Boston.


Mr. Giuliani's Calming Message
"This act of evil is not the act of a people, but it's the act of a person or persons. Let's show America and the world that we can make that distinction, that we have not only the best of cities, but the wisest of cities."
With those sound words, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani sought to calm a tense New York City in the aftermath of Tuesday's brutal shooting of four Hasidic students.
The attack on the Brooklyn Bridge left one student brain dead and another critically wounded.
It also did further injury to a city shaken too often by violence and tension.


U.S. Says Wider Peace in Bosnia Would Cut Its Troop Commitment
The agreement between Bosnian Croats and the Bosnian Government could lead to a broader accord that would require fewer peacekeeping troops than projected, Defense Secretary William J. Perry said today.
A previous peace plan to divide Bosnia into 10 ethnically based provinces would have needed perhaps 50,000 troops to enforce, NATO planners estimated, and Washington had pledged to provide half of them.
In recent weeks Administration officials have reaffirmed their commitment to send troops to support any agreement reached by the three factions, but they have sought to scale back the number, indicating that American forces should account for perhaps only a third of the force.


Board Disavows Diaz on the Gay Games
Responding to a growing dispute, the Civilian Complaint Review Board voted yesterday to disavow recent comments critical of homosexuals made by the Rev.
Ruben Diaz, saying that they "were not made on behalf of the board."
The unanimous vote, amounting to a rebuke of Mr.
Diaz, came at the end of a regular meeting of the panel, at which several representatives of gay groups appeared and criticized Mr.
Diaz.


CHRONICLE
ISABEL ALLENDE would never consider writing her memoirs because, as she said recently, she is not really sure what is true.
"They would be a pack of lies," the Chilean author said Tuesday in an address during International Women's Week at the University of Colorado.
"I can't separate reality and fantasy anymore."


Out of the Wheelchair and Onto the Slopes
He likes to think of himself as Air Mike.
And, indeed, Mike Utley has gotten some air lately, schussing down the slopes of Vail, Colo.
That's the problem.
"I've got to learn to control my speed," said Utley, the former offensive lineman for the Detroit Lions who was paralyzed during a football game three years ago.
"I crashed twice today. It's one of those things. I enjoy getting the adrenaline working again. But I go on the edge of out of control."


Farrakhan: Fiery Separatist in a Sober Suit
The ornate mansion where Louis Farrakhan lives and directs his separatist Nation of Islam is in an integrated neighborhood of doctors and lawyers and corporate captains, a sheltered place where people are judged less by the color of their skin than by the contents of their wallets.
Two blocks away in the Kenwood neighborhood lie the segregated precincts of 47th Street, in bygone days a bustling thoroughfare through the heart of black Chicago but now a street of sorrow.
Today, liquor stores thrive and the corners are crowded with men without means to earn a legal living.


Inflation and Rate Worries Sink Stocks Across Europe
Investors drove down the price of stocks and bonds across Europe today on fears that inflation may be on the rise in the United States and that interest rate cuts in Germany may come more slowly than expected.
With markets in London, Frankfurt, Paris and other financial centers gripped by a doggedly negative psychology, prices fell precipitously early in the day, with the London stock market at one stage down by 75 points, or 2.3 percent.


It's Stocks and Bouquets as Baiul Returns to Ukraine
After an exhausting 14-hour day, Oksana Baiul stood at the door of her tiny room at the Hotel Sport here.
"They've organized such wonderful meetings for us," she said as she flopped on her bed, her signature ponytail bobbing.


BROOKLYN BRIDGE SHOOTING: Lubavitchers; Clinging to Daily Faith, Despite Rage and Pain
In the world of the Lubavitch Hasidim, there is a feeling that everything fits into a divine design, however unfathomable, and so while there was rage and pain yesterday in reaction to the shooting of four yeshiva students riding over the Brooklyn Bridge there was also an effort not to let the grim event overwhelm the daily rhythms of their religion.
In the agora-like hubbub of the main synagogue at 770 Eastern Parkway in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, men were twisting the leather straps of their phylacteries around their left arms in preparation for the morning prayer.
Others, already deep in prayer, were swaying ardently or pacing frenetically.


2 Held on Mob Lending Charges
Two men described as mobsters were arraigned here today on Federal charges of loan-sharking and extortion.
Federal prosecutors said that one man charged a Federal informer 156 percent interest on a $60,000 loan taken out in January 1993.
The weekly payments were $1,700.


Aldyn McKean; Gay Rights Advocate, 45
Aldyn McKean, a singer and actor who was an advocate for gay rights and the rights of people with AIDS, was found dead on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He apparently died during the weekend.
He was 45.
The cause was AIDS-related complications, said Denny Lee, a spokesman for the AIDS protest group Act Up.


Custom publishing is taking a broader view of advertising, but when does overkill kick in?
AN agency known for offering clients services in addition to advertising is adding another to its portfolio.
Frankfurt Balkind Partners, a shop with offices in Los Angeles, New York and San Francisco, is forming a division that specializes in custom publishing: the creation and production of magazines, books and other publications designed specifically for marketers.
The new unit will do everything from writing the editorial content to selling the advertising space.


Selling Cigarettes: Who Needs Ads?
Tobacco companies may yearn for the old days, when they could call on Rob and Laura Petrie of the "Dick Van Dyke Show," or even Fred Flintstone, to yabba-dabba-doo about their cigarettes on their programs.
Last week the tobacco industry faced the prospect of the sharpest restrictions on advertising yet, as the Surgeon General said she would rather see no advertising for "something we know to be a poison and a killer."
But as hostility toward smoking and its advertising has grown, companies have increasingly pursued other strategies to attract new customers.
Over the last four years, the tobacco industry has cut its advertising in half, shifting to sales approaches that are proving more efficient than traditional broadcast and print.
A Pioneer in Marketing
Why pay to reach people who will never smoke if you can offer discount coupons, merchandise and other blandishments to those who do?
Restricted from television and radio advertising more than 20 years ago, the tobacco industry is among the pioneers in selling its products without the very sort of media bombardment that has made American consumer brands so familiar in the first place.
"The tobacco industry has been in the vanguard," said Bonnie Carlson, chairman of the Promotion Marketing Association of America.


SPS Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jets Seem Prepared To Drop Nagle
The Jets could be prepared to severe ties with quarterback Browning Nagle, a 25-year-old restricted free agent.
Yesterday, they brought in Steve DeBerg, 40, the oldest player in the National Football League and expected a visit tomorrow from Dave Krieg, 35, the Kansas City Chiefs backup.
"We're keeping all our options open," said Jets General Manager Dick Steinberg.
"We don't have Browning Nagle signed. We want him as part of the team and we think he has a future here. But if the money gets to a point where we can't fit him in we want to have talked to other people."


Democrats and Republicans Vying for High Ground on Crime
The tide of anti-crime proposals floating around Albany rose yet higher today as Democrats and Republicans unveiled separate measures they hope will keep them at the forefront of this year's get-tough politics.
In his first major initiative as Assembly Speaker, Sheldon Silver, Democrat of Manhattan, announced a comprehensive crime package calling for an end to building prisons and focusing on funneling nonviolent offenders into drug treatment and other alternatives to incarceration.


Groping, Not Fondling
To the Editor:
One can only be grateful for "The Tailhook Fiasco" (editorial, Feb. 17).
Let me, just the same, call attention to your misuse of the word "fondle," an error unfortunately widespread.
The offending sentence reads: "More than two years ago the now-infamous Tailhook convention was the scene of physical assaults in which unwilling women were grabbed, fondled and partially disrobed."
Now, the 83 women who were the victims at the Tailhook convention were humiliated, insulted and abused.
Not one was fondled.
"Fondled," in the usage I grew up with and that is still the definition in Webster's Third New International Dictionary, means "to handle tenderly, lovingly, lingeringly; treat caressingly."


Doskocil Cos.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Michaels Stores Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Treasury Securities Up After Rate Rise Earlier
Treasury securities rebounded to finish slightly higher in volatile trading yesterday, battling back from another sharp rise in interest rates, this one ignited by an overnight slump in world bond markets.
But according to market participants, the market's surprising turnaround yesterday does not mean that the recent selloff is over.
Many analysts say nothing has changed since the bond market decline began in February because investors are still afraid of inflation and waiting for another rate increase by the Federal Reserve.
The first rise in short-term rates, on Feb. 4, set off the selloff.


Theater in Review
Innocent Erendira and Her Heartless Grandmother  Gramercy Arts 138 East 27th Street Gramercy Park Through March 20  By Jorge Ali Triana and Carlos Jose Reyes, based on a story by Gabriel Garcia Marquez; English translation by Felipe Gorostiza and Rene Buch; directed by Mr.
Triana; original music by German Arrieta; English lyrics by Mr.
Gorostiza; sets by Liliana Villegas; costumes by Rosario Lozano; lighting by Robert Weber Federico; musical director, Nicolas Uribe; stage manager, Ana Margarita Martinez-Casado.
Presented by Repertorio Espanol, Gilberto Zaldivar, producer; Mr.
Buch, artistic director; Mr.
Weber, associate.
WITH: Miriam Colon, David Johann, Sofia Oviedo, Jeffrey Rodriguez, Rene Sanchez and Tatiana Vecino.


The Age Of Gunman Disputed At a Trial
The owner of a Queens restaurant where a crusading anti-drug journalist was shot to death testified yesterday that he did not recall initially telling the police that the gunman was 30 to 35 years old.
At the trial of a teen-ager charged with being the gunman when he was barely 17, the owner said the gunman "must have been in his 20's."


CLINTON AIDE MET TREASURY OFFICIALS TO DISCUSS INQUIRY
The White House counsel, Bernard W. Nussbaum, met twice in October with senior Treasury Department officials to discuss a decision by the Resolution Trust Corporation to look into President Clinton's role in the Whitewater land deal, Administration officials said tonight.
Anticipating the disclosure of the meetings, the White House reversed its policy today and directed senior officials to stop discussing the President's involvement in the Whitewater Development Company with Federal regulatory officials.


Mr. Clinton Trips
With Representative Dan Rostenkowski facing a difficult primary election on March 15, President Clinton traveled to Chicago this week to put a Presidential arm around the embattled House Ways and Means chairman and lavish praise on his legislative leadership.
The ostensible purpose of the visit was to talk about health care and crime, but Mr.
Clinton's insistence that it was not a campaign endorsement is laughable.
If the President is feeling queasy about his foray into Chicago politics, he has good reason.
His overt support of Mr.
Rostenkowski undermines the credibility of his Justice Department's inquiry into the Chicago Congressman's affairs.


Players' Labor Motto: Expect the Worst
The New York Yankees interrupted their spring training regimen today to listen to their union hierarchy explain just what, if any, circumstances might lead to an interruption of the 1994 major league season.
And if the reaction of one veteran was any indication, the players are, in the least, bracing for what seems to be the inevitable confrontation between labor and management.
"There's always reason for concern because the owners kind of seem to be in disarray," Don Mattingly, the Yankees' captain and first baseman, said.
"So we're always cautious and conservative and hope for the best, but expect the worst. It's unfortunate, but that's the way it is."


Economic Scene; Economists are keen to give the inflation-proof bond a try.
HAVE interest rates on United States Treasury bonds soared because the demand for capital is blooming along with the American economy?
Or are frightened lenders simply reacting to the first whispers of inflation in the air?
The question kept popping up at last Saturday's meeting in Germany of finance ministers and central bankers of the major industrial nations, in spite of the more pressing issue on the agenda of aid to Russia.
And it obviously bothers the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, who, while too much the old-school gentleman to say so, is vexed by talk that he might let inflation get out of hand.


A New Life For Cross Colours
What a difference a year makes.
About this time last year, Cross Colours was considered one of the hottest labels in the fashion industry.
Retailers consistently sold out of the line of hip-hop clothing -- baggy jeans, brightly colored T-shirts, jackets and caps: apparel with a black urban attitude.


Prudential Chief Takes The Blame for Scandals
After months of mostly keeping a measured distance from allegations of wrongdoing at a brokerage subsidiary, the chairman of the Prudential Insurance Company of America publicly accepted responsibility yesterday for improprieties that took place in recent years at the unit, Prudential Securities, and within the insurance giant itself.
The statement by Robert C. Winters, the chairman, came at Prudential's annual press luncheon to discuss details of the company's financial performance.
While Mr.
Winters has made similar comments in meetings with employees, yesterday's statement was his first in a public forum.


Abbot J. Copeland; Textile Executive, 88
Abbot J. Copeland, a retired textile executive who worked in Manhattan for 44 years, died on Feb. 18 at his home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 88.
The cause was the effects of old age, said his son Denis K. Copeland.


Caught in a Buyer's Panic? Help Is at Hand
SCRATCH the surface of a personal shopper and you may find the makings of a psychotherapist.
"A personal shopper works the psyche of her clients," said Judy Krull, who was the director of Bloomingdale's At Your Service department for a decade, and more recently a buyer for Henri Bendel.
"A client may say, 'My mother told me never to wear brown.' We help her understand she's no longer a pale 6-year-old. She's a magnificent honey blonde, with full makeup, and she can build an entire wardrobe around brown if she wants to."


Essay; Whitewater Cover-Up
In the history of modern political scandal, the cover-up is always worse than the crime.
That's the way it was in the Nixon White House about a stupid break-in at Watergate.
That's how it is with Bush Justice's non-prosecution of Iraqgate, which Reno Justice should be ready to turn over for prosecution as soon as House and Senate conferees adjust the recently passed Independent Counsel Act.
And that's how it will be when the Whitewatergate Federal-level cover-up of state-level wrongdoing is exposed in the years to come.


Read Bobby Bo's Lips: Smile, Smile, Smile
Don't mention the contract.
Don't malign Eddie Murray.
And don't even think about asking Bobby Bonilla to discuss his relationship with reporters.
These are topics that prompt Bonilla to summon the famous "Bobby Bo" smile and shake his head slowly, because he can't understand why people don't see these issues the same way that he does.
He still raises his eyebrows at some questions, gets somewhat defensive about others.
That's Bonilla, and that's not going to change.


Survey Finds Minorities Resent One Another Almost as Much as They Do Whites
Presenting a portrait of a highly Balkanized country, a national survey indicates that black, Hispanic and Asian Americans say they have fewer opportunities than whites.
But the survey also indicates that the antipathy these three minorities feel toward one another nearly equals the resentment they collectively feel toward whites.
The survey, conducted by L. H. Research for the National Conference of Christians and Jews, found that majorities of black, Hispanic and Asian Americans agree that whites are "bigoted, bossy and unwilling to share power." Majorities of the nonwhite groups also say they have less chance to gain a good education, a skilled job or decent housing than do whites.


CHRONICLE
Whither Wuthering Heights?
Some celebrities are enraged by proposals to build wind farms in and around the English village of Haworth, where the Bronte sisters lived, and on the surrounding moors that inspired Emily Bronte when she wrote her romantic novel.
A letter of protest in a recent issue of The Times Literary Supplement was signed by EDNA O'BRIEN, RUTH PRAWER JHABVALA, ALAN AYCKBOURN, TED HUGHES, MURIEL SPARK, IRIS MURDOCH, TOM STOPPARD, EMMA THOMPSON, PETER BROOK and about 50 others.


Cancer Patients Suffer Needlessly, New Federal Pain Guidelines Say
Millions of adults and children with cancer suffer unnecessarily because doctors fail to treat the pain associated with their disease aggressively, experts said today in releasing new Federal guidelines for relieving cancer pain.
Fears about the use of narcotics and other strong pain relievers were among the chief reasons for undertreatment of pain, said an independent panel that developed the pain management guidelines for the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, a branch of the Department of Health and Human Services.
The panel added that these fears were unfounded.


Christopher Defends U.S. Policy Toward Moscow
In the Clinton Administration's most vigorous defense of its Russia policy since last week's arrest of a C.I.A. agent on charges of spying for Moscow, Secretary of State Warren Christopher told a Congressional committee today that it was vital for Washington to support economic reform in Russia.
Mr.
Christopher also rejected charges that the Administration had backed the Russian Government too uncritically.
He said the White House would not shrink from differing with Moscow when appropriate and warned Russia not to intervene in neighboringcountries except as part of an international effort.


Suspect Arrested in Shooting of Hasidim
A 28-year-old man described as a Lebanese native was arrested yesterday and charged with attempted murder in the Brooklyn Bridge gunfire attack on a van full of Hasidic students.
The police said their investigation was helped by citizens who alerted them to the suspect's attempt to hide.
The arrest of the suspect, identified as Rashad Baz, an alien, and the confiscation of an assortment of loaded semiautomatic weapons was announced by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani in exultant tones at a City Hall news conference.


President Seeks To Lure P.L.O. To Table Again
President Clinton warned today that the refusal of Palestinians to return to Middle East peace talks would be the "surest way to hand a victory to the madman who killed all the Palestinians in the mosque" in Hebron last week.
The President expressed confidence that Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, still wanted to return to the bargaining table.
But he said he was concerned about the pressure being put on Mr.
Arafat by Palestinians opposed to a resumption of talks.


Brazilians Get Serious On Inflation and Deficit
Brazil is mounting yet another effort to reduce its 2,500 percent annual inflation rate and achieve economic stability, a step that is necessary to make Latin America's largest nation more attractive to foreign investors.
Television talk shows today featured Government officials introducing Brazil's seventh anti-inflation package in eight years and fifth new currency in a decade.


CHRONICLE
JEHUDA REINHARZ, 49, a professor of modern Jewish history at Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass., has been named the school's seventh president, it was announced yesterday.
He will succeed SAMUEL O. THIER, who will leave the job in May to become the president of Massachusetts General Hospital.
Dr.
Reinharz has been working on a biography of Chaim Weizmann, the Zionist leader and first president of Israel.
At a reception in the faculty club at the university yesterday, he said that he had been looking forward to completing the third volume of the work when he was chosen for the presidency.


Consumer Spending Rises 0.5%
Despite bad weather and low levels of savings, consumers stepped up their spending by five-tenths of 1 percent in January, matching December's satisfying gain, the Commerce Department reported today.
It was the 10th consecutive increase in this indicator, which covers two-thirds of business activity.
"That's some kind of evidence that the household sector is maintaining its spending momentum," Paul W. Boltz, economist at T. Rowe Price in Baltimore, said.
"That's an impressive number."


No Headline
This act of evil is not the act of a people, but it's the act of a person or persons.
Let's show America and the world that we can make that distinction, that we have not only the best of cities, but the wisest of cities. - MAYOR GIULIANI.  [ B5:6. ]


BROOKLYN BRIDGE SHOOTING: Photographer; Chance, Tragedy and a Renewed Career
Louis Liotta, a New York Post photographer for 48 years until his union went on strike last fall, happened to be driving across the Brooklyn Bridge on Tuesday morning, his cameras with him.
He was on his way to visit a friend at his old newspaper.
That was how The Post happened to get the best photographs in the city of the aftermath of the Brooklyn Bridge shooting, which filled The Post's front three pages yesterday.
It was also how Mr.
Liotta, at 72 years of age, got his job back.


PACKWOOD LOSES APPEAL ON DIARIES
Senator Bob Packwood lost his last hope of shielding his private diaries from the Senate's ethics committee today when Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist emphatically rejected the Senator's plea to keep the diaries secret until a court battle over them is resolved.
The Chief Justice's order means that large parts of Mr.
Packwood's diaries, now in the hands of a court-appointed special master, will be turned over to investigators for the ethics panel as soon as preparations to review them are complete.
Senate officials declined to say today when that might be.


Review/Television; A New Host for Late Night Viewers
Let's say this for Greg Kinnear: He has courage.
Replacing Bob Costas as host of NBC's really late-night "Later" (1:35 to 2:05 A.M. weeknights), he enters what is commercial television's looniest bin at the moment.
Just this week, CBS's David Letterman had as a guest Garry Shandling, who does a wicked sendup of talk-show hosts on HBO's "Larry Sanders Show." Mr.
Letterman then rushed over to his old NBC studio to be a gracious guest on "Late Night With Conan O'Brien." One topic of their conversation was Johnny Carson.
NBC's Jay Leno had earlier told his audience, "It's a day-to-day job, ladies and gentlemen." And then on Mr.
Kinnear's debut the same night, the very first commercial began with Chevy Chase eating potato chips.
Certain animals devour their young; television doesn't care how old you are.


Stars and Stripes Keeps Soldiering On
To the Editor:
Your article about the military newspaper Stars and Stripes (The Media Business, Feb. 21) is misleading and inaccurate.
The paper does not have "a maximum of 30 pages." It regularly runs to 32 pages, often 40, sometimes 64.
The statement that Stars and Stripes "does not accept nonmilitary advertising" is wrong.


Review/Dance; Baryshnikov Drives His Superstar Vehicle
It was a quiet evening at the ballet.
Well, not exactly.
The pyrotechnics in the dancing were definitely played down, but anytime Mikhail Baryshnikov steps on stage, interest will pick up and theaters will sell out.
Last seen locally as a guest artist with the Paul Taylor Dance Company in October, he returned on Tuesday night for the Manhattan debut of the White Oak Dance Project, the small touring company he formed in 1990.


Will They or Won't They? They Will, It Seems
After five years of announcing and then denying that a recording collaboration would take place, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr, the surviving former Beatles, have spent much of the last month recording new music in England.
They have turned down journalists' requests to attend the sessions, saying that the presence of outsiders would put them under too much pressure.
They have also sworn those around them to secrecy.
But people close to the project say the sessions began at the Mill, Mr.
McCartney's home studio in East Sussex, and have moved to Friar Park, Mr.
Harrison's home in Henley-on-Thames.
And a report to be published today in Beatlefan, one of the more reliable journals devoted to the former Fab Four, says that Mr.
Starr has told friends in the music business that the sessions have gone "much better than expected."


South Korea Offers Terms for Ending War Games
South Korea announced today that it would suspend its war games with the United States this month, provided that North Korea allows the international inspection of seven nuclear plants, now under way, to be completed.
The South also insisted that the North proceed with talks that would culminate in an exchange of envoys.
The proposed suspension is part of a package of offers intended to end the standoff over North Korea's nuclear program.
The move was announced in Seoul early Thursday by South Korea's Defense Ministry as the North and South opened talks in Panmunjom.


A Little Night Music
"WELCOME to my little house," Van Cliburn says.
"In Texas we always use that adjective because surely someone else will have a bigger house."
As he often does, he is playing host to a late-night gathering of friends and musicians.


Heart-Stopping News
Add another hazard to life in the Big Apple.
A chilling new study finds that if you suffer cardiac arrest in New York City you have very little chance of surviving.
Only 1 in every 100 New Yorkers who go into cardiac arrest outside a hospital emerges alive.
That is comparable to the odds in Chicago, but far worse than the rate in several smaller cities and rural areas.
The lucky residents of suburban Seattle, for example, have a 1 in 5 chance of surviving cardiac arrest, a testament perhaps to their superb emergency services.


Jewelry That Holds Mystical Stories
KARA VARIAN BAKER's chunky, tactile pendants, cuffs and rings of cast silver have won her praise as one of the country's best young jewelry designers.
Created with movable parts, and embossed with words like "courage" or "faith," they invite the wearer to fiddle and reflect.
This into-the-mystic collection is inspired by Ms.
Baker's late-night forays to abandoned churches and cemeteries near an Oakland, Calif., Cannery Row-like waterfront.
Reliquaries have influenced her themes: many of her pendants, rings and turned wood vessels have lids.
"We all find our own treasures; broken, useless mementoes to which we are emotionally attached," said the designer, 30.
Architectural fragments in churches provide mystical stories that she retells in her jewelry.


DeShields Injured
Los Angeles Dodgers second baseman DELINO DeSHIELDS fractured a cheekbone in an accident yesterday, but he is not expected to miss much playing time.
DeShields suffered a small fracture of a bone below his left eye when a bat accidentally slipped from a teammate's hands and struck DeShields, who was standing too close to the protective netting of a batting cage. (AP)


Searches in Spying Case Yield Gems and Secrets
Federal agents who searched the house and office of Aldrich H. Ames, the Central Intelligence Agency officer accused of spying for Moscow, found bracelets, chokers, pendants and earrings of gold, silver, rubies and diamonds; a stack of 78 $100 bills, and a credit card receipt from La Cote Basque, one of New York's most expensive restaurants.
Agents who searched Mr.
Ames's maroon 1992 Jaguar after his arrest on Feb. 21, also unearthed classified documents and a nearly full box of chalk, a possible link to what prosecutors say was a communication system used by Mr.
Ames to signal his handlers with chalk markings on predetermined mail boxes.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about Congressional proposals on high-definition television channels misidentified the home state of Representative W. J. Tauzin in some editions.
He is a Democrat from Louisiana, not Oklahoma.


The Prodigal Outfielder: Polonia Returns
Where there used to be nothing but intrigue, there is now nothing but serenity.
That's how much things have changed since Luis Polonia left and then returned to the Yankees.
Polonia, 29 years old and closing in on his seventh full season in the majors, is back in pinstripes, far removed from the youthful inexperience and controversy that combined to chase him out of New York in 1990.


Market Place; Some analysts see a spurt for Texas Instruments, finally.
AFTER a day spent hearing his Texas Instruments executives forecast the longest economic recovery in history, strong worldwide demand for chips and the screaming success of new products, even Jerry R. Junkins, the company's chief executive, saw the need for some balance.
"We've about worn you out with all these positive attitudes," he told a roomful of analysts and money managers at the company's headquarters here yesterday, with a broad grin.
"I'd like to try to correct that."


Analyzing Gunfire in Abortion Doctor's Slaying


Corrections
An article on Feb. 26 about plans for a special session on hate speech that the New Jersey Assembly held Monday rendered a statement by Bob DeSando, a spokesman for the Speaker, incorrectly.
Mr.
DeSando said, "Anyone who wants to attend and sit in the gallery will be encouraged to do so"; he did not say visitors would be encouraged to speak.


Critic's Notebook; Welcome Invasion: A Russian Season In Paris Theaters
If German music, especially by Richard Strauss, has dominated concert life here this fall and winter, it is now the turn of Russian theater.
Five theaters -- the Rond Point Theatre Renaud-Barrault, MC 93 Bobigny, the Odeon-Theatre de l'Europe, Nanterre-Amandiers and the Conservatoire National Superieur d'Art Dramatique -- have turned themselves over to Russians: to Russian companies or French troupes directed by Russians or French troupes with their regular directors doing Russian works.
The links between France and Russia go back a long way.
French was the language of the Russian aristocracy in the 18th and 19th centuries.
There was a wave of upper-crust Russian immigration to Paris after the Russian Revolution.
More recently, French intellectuals felt a profound sympathy with Soviet Russia and kept up ties even in the depths of Stalinism.
It is no accident that the high-tech MC 93 theater in the working-class suburb of Bobigny -- the MC stands for Maison de la Culture, one of a slew of government cultural outposts dotted all over France -- is on the Avenue Lenine.


L.I.R.R. Attack Prompts Call for Ban on Assault Weapons


Journal; Bad For the Jews
My grandmother, who was no fool, took a strict line on people and events.
They fell into two categories: they were either good for the Jews or bad for the Jews.
In the simpler times of the 1950's, the bad-for-the-Jews list began with Hitler, always the gold standard, and descended all the way down to the jerk who elbowed his way to the front of the line at the Woodmont Country Club buffet.
In between came Roy Cohn, Meyer Lansky and the Imperial Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan.


Calendar: In Bloom
Tropics in Philadelphia  Philadelphia Civic Center, 34th Street and Civic Center Boulevard; (215) 625-8253.


Bridge
One of the reigning World Olympiad Team champions is Herve Mouiel of Paris, who was a member of the French team that won in Salsomaggiore, Italy, in 1992.
He was less successful in December 1993, when he visited New York City as a member of the Burgay team, which challenged a star American foursome and lost.
A happier memory for Mouiel in 1993 is the diagramed deal played in the Coupe de France.
As South, he landed in six spades as shown after West had shown great heart length.
A club lead would have been decisive, but West could not have known that and produced the heart ace.


Hooper Holmes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BROOKLYN BRIDGE SHOOTING: The Suspect; Man Charged With Shootings Silently Watched TV Replay
The evening a van carrying Hasidic students was sprayed with gunfire, Rashad Baz came home to his Brooklyn apartment and silently watched as television news reports replayed the blood-stained scene of the incident, according to his aunt, who also lives in the apartment.
Gloria Akel, who is married to Mr.
Baz's uncle, said yesterday that her nephew never mentioned the shooting and gave no indication that he had been involved in an incident.


Plane Skids Off a Runway at Snowy La Guardia
Aborting a takeoff in a snowstorm at La Guardia Airport last night, a Continental Airlines jet skidded to a stop far beyond the runway, its nose stuck in rocks at the edge of Flushing Bay and its landing gear teetering on a narrow sea wall.
The police said that all 115 passengers and crew members on board were evacuated, some suffering minor injuries.
The accident occurred on a night when a storm snarled roads throughout the metropolitan region, reviving a sense of winter that only a few days ago had receded into memory.
Winter's grip will not loosen today, the National Weather Service predicted, but will instead bring more snow and freezing rain, for storm totals of 4 to 8 inches along the coast and 10 to 15 inches inland.


Bankers Trust Denies Rumors of Europe Loss
Amid rumors that Bankers Trust had sustained huge losses in European markets, the company's stock did not open for an hour and a half yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, until Bankers Trust denied that it had lost money.
Shortly before 11 A.M. yesterday, the bank issued a short statement that said that "its operations thus far for 1994 have been profitable." At 11:02, Bankers Trust's stock finally opened for trading at $79, down $1.75.
Nearly one million Bankers Trust shares traded yesterday, triple the usual volume, mostly at prices below $78, although the stock closed at $78.50, off $2.25 for the day.


METRO DIGEST
BROOKLYN BRIDGE SHOOTING: SWIFT INVESTIGATION YIELDS ARREST A 28-year-old man described as a Lebanese national was arrested for the Brooklyn Bridge gunfire attack on four Hasidic students and charged with attempted murder after a swift investigation aided by citizens who alerted police to the suspect's attempt to flee and hide.
A1.
BROKEN WINDOW LEADS TO BREAK IN CASE It was a shattered car window and some observant New Yorkers that helped lead the police to arrest Rashad Baz in the shooting of four Hasidic students, a senior police official said.
A1.


Winning by a Whisker; At a Manhattan Cat Show, Some Breeds Aren't to All Tastes
Consider Sphynxes, one of the world's rarest breed of cat.They are literally naked.
Totally hairless.
Their heavily wrinkled brows don't add allure.
Their ears are so large they look like the opening of the Chunnel.
"I tell people don't think of them as a cat, think of them as E.T. or Yoda," says Sandy Adler, who uses the pulsating cats, blood warm because they have no fur, as foot warmers while in bed in her home in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
"Then right away they're cute."


B.C. Hires Henning
DAN HENNING, a former National Football League coach, was named head coach at Boston College yesterday.
Henning replaces TOM COUGHLIN, who is leaving after three years to become coach of the expansion Jacksonville Jaguars in the N.F.L.
Henning, 51, who was discharged in December after two seasons as offensive coordinator with the Detroit Lions, previously served as head coach of the San Diego Chargers from 1989 to 1991 and the Atlanta Falcons from 1983 to 1986. (AP)


Duty Free Int'l reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


CBS Sees New Gold From Olympics
CBS executives, still aglow over the spectacular success of their Winter Olympics coverage, said yesterday that they expected better ratings for their regular shows in the coming weeks and bigger fees from Olympics advertisers four years from now.
CBS's results for the Olympics are heavy on the superlatives.
No Olympics ever performed better.
CBS dominated the February "sweep month," a special television ratings period, because of the Olympics.
The network estimated that 204 million people watched some part of its Olympics coverage.
And the two nights that featured women's figure skating wound up as the highest-rated Wednesday and Friday nights for a network in television history.


Setback for Japan's Leader on Trade Issue
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's efforts to resolve a bitter trade dispute with the United States and to revive the faltering economy suffered a major setback today when he announced that he had been forced to abandon a campaign to remove a dissident from his fractious inner circle of advisers.
It was a startling display of political weakness, in which Mr.
Hosokawa apparently succumbed to threats that several parties, including the Socialists, might quit the coalition Government if he forced out the official and pursued a more conservative course.


Staples Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


PARENT &amp; CHILD
DR.
RUTH A. LAWRENCE recalls how she used to try to please both her parents and her in-laws when she shuttled between their homes during weekend visits with her eldest son, who was then an infant.
"My mother worried that children wore too many clothes and got overheated, my mother-in-law thought the opposite," said Dr.
Lawrence, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Rochester who has nine children and eight grandchildren.
"I used to change my son's clothes -- putting more on or taking some off in the car -- when I would bring him to each of their houses," she continued.


Shhh! There's This New Hotel . . .
IN the shoulder-to-shoulder resort community of South Beach, in Miami Beach, a new hotel can become maximally hip just a few weeks after opening, when a predictable three-step process befalls it: design and fashion types descend, staff turns cocky, room rates skyrocket.
Just as young parents are careful not to broadcast to friends the name of their great baby sitter, the New York design community is keeping under wraps the Hotel-of-the-Moment: the Impala, renovated by the Miami architect Peter Hawrylewicz, who also concurrently renovated the nearby villa of the designer Gianni Versace.
An investor, Ken Lieber, a former Elite model, said, "Mr. Versace had a much bigger budget than we did," but the pitted and patinated saturnia-stone floors in the hotel and the Versace house are from the same source.


Crop Insurance Plan To Improve Protection and Cut Costs
The Department of Agriculture proposed changes in the Federal crop insurance program yesterday that would offer farmers more protection against disasters, but would prevent Congress from appropriating additional money for crop disaster relief.
The changes are aimed at ending the practice of many farmers who decline to buy insurance but collect the disaster payments routinely provided by Congress.
A similar problem exists for the Federal flood insurance program, which is also considering big changes because too few homeowners buy the insurance.


AST Stock Drops 18% On Report
Shares of AST Research Inc. plunged more than 18 percent today after the company's chief financial officer told analysts that its third-quarter earnings would fall below their estimates.
The stock fell $5.25, to $23.50, in Nasdaq trading.
AST's comments suggested a broad weakening of demand in personal computers, and other computer stocks also fell.
Shares of the the Compaq Computer Corporation dropped $2.25, to $94.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Shares of the Dell Computer Corporation were unchanged at $24.875.


Waban Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


EX-BLACK PANTHER HAS BRAIN SURGERY
Eldridge Cleaver, the former Black Panther leader and author of "Soul on Ice," was in serious condition today at Alta Bates Medical Center here after a drug arrest, a mysterious head injury and nearly five hours of brain surgery.
A spokeswoman for the hospital said Mr.
Cleaver, 59, was making progress after an operation on Tuesday afternoon to relieve pressure on his brain caused by the head injury.


Dr. Jay Brown, 50, A Medical Professor And a Cardiologist
Dr.
Jay Brown, the chief of cardiology at Harlem Hospital Center and an associate professor of medicine at the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, died on Monday in Los Angeles.
He was 50 and lived in Manhattan until recently.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Jeffrey Tennyson, at whose home he died.


Met's Next Season Includes a Shostakovich Premiere
Shostakovich's "Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk," an opera for which the composer was censured during the Stalin regime, is to have its first Metropolitan Opera production next season.
There will also be new productions of Debussy's "Pelleas et Melisande," Verdi's "Simon Boccanegra" and Puccini's "Madama Butterfly."
The season, which is to run 30 weeks, opens on Sept. 26 with an unusual double bill: Puccini's "Tabarro," with Teresa Stratas, Placido Domingo and Juan Pons, and Leoncavallo's "Pagliacci," with Luciano Pavarotti, Miss Stratas and Mr.
Pons.
James Levine is to conduct.


Corrections
An article and a headline in Business Day yesterday, about an Internal Revenue Service scanning system that is to be developed by the Federal Systems Company, misidentified the company's corporate parent in some editions.
The Loral Corporation completed its acquisition of Federal Systems on Tuesday; the subsidiary is no longer owned by the International Business Machines Corporation.


Critic's Notebook; A Guardian Angel on the Airwaves
So, does Curtis Sliwa belong on New York City's public radio station?
By at least one standard advanced during the past week of station fund-raising, he does, since he was a flop on commercial talk radio, and in the precincts of public radio that is a sign of grace. (Mr. Sliwa's accomplishment was not all that remarkable, considering that he was competing with the popular and much funnier Don Imus.)
By other standards, however, the ascendancy of the primo Guardian Angel from the yak ghetto to the aerie of high-minded broadcasting -- a three-hour weekday afternoon talk show on WNYC-AM -- raises questions.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Jets Put the 'Win' Back in Winnipeg  The Winnipeg Jets stopped their league-high 19-game streak without a victory last night, getting goals from four different players to beat the Dallas Stars, 4-2.
Russ Romaniuk, Randy Gilhen and Stephane Quintal staked Winnipeg to a 3-0 second-period lead.
Tie Domi had the other goal for Winnipeg, which had gone 0-16-3 since beating Buffalo on Jan. 12. (AP) Sabres 7, Senators 2: The rookie defenseman Philippe Boucher scored two goals as visiting Buffalo beat Ottawa.
The Sabres scored twice on power plays and once short-handed as they ended a two-game losing streak and lifted their record to 32-26-7. (AP)


Moscow Journal; Census-Takers Come Calling and Get a Scolding
Bleary-eyed and numb after a long day of cleaning toilets in a state tool factory, Svetlana A. Berikova had just come home when she heard the knock on the door.
"Who?" she barked as she peered through the tiny keyhole of her two-room apartment in the Sokolniki housing complex on the northeast edge of Moscow.
"What do you want from me?"


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.31
3.29
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.46
3.49
2.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.66
3.70
3.01
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.25
6.28
5.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.76
6.77
6.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.58
7.60
7.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.94
5.83
5.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Accounts
*
Groark for Governor, Farmington, Conn., to Rotando Partners, Stamford, Conn., to handle advertising for Eunice S. Groark, the independent candidate for governor of Connecticut who is now the state's lieutenant governor.
Billings were estimated at $1.5. million. *
Mass Transit Administration of the Maryland Department of Transportation, Baltimore, to Gray Kirk/Van Sant Advertising, Baltimore, to handle its contract over a three-year period, previously handled by Eisner &amp; Associates, Baltimore.
Billings were estimated at $2.2 million.


Hint of U.S. Trade Escalation Draws Warning From Japan
The Japanese Government reacted warily and with a touch of anger today to the prospect that President Clinton might be preparing to reinstate a tough trade law that would allow him to impose sanctions on Japan if it refused to open its markets.
Some senior Administration officials said in Washington on Tuesday that Mr.
Clinton had decided to sign an executive order reviving the measure, known in official shorthand as Super 301, which would significantly add to his arsenal of weapons in persuading Japan to remove barriers to the import of foreign goods and services.


BROOKLYN BRIDGE SHOOTING: Vigil; In Hospital Hallways, Family And Friends Pray for Victims
They came by vanloads to keep vigil, like pilgrims trudging through the snow into the waiting room at St.
Vincent's Hospital to offer prayers and good wishes for the two young Hasidic men critically wounded in Tuesday's gunshot attack on the Brooklyn Bridge.
Huddling in corners and hallways, the young men stood in odd relief to the hospital's stained-glass windows of St.
Patrick and St.
Vincent, a crucifix and a portrait of the Virgin Mary.
In black hats and coats, they quietly read psalms, or tehillim, from pocket-sized, dogeared prayer books, waiting to visit the two rabbinical students, Aaron Halberstam, 16, and Nachum Sossonkin, 18, who remained unconscious from head injuries.


FIFA Job Up for Grabs?
European soccer's governing body criticized the power struggle under way in FIFA, which runs international soccer, and indicated that it might withdraw its support for FIFA's long-reigning president.
The Union of European Football Associations said yesterday in a statement that it was extremely concerned about reports of a conflict between FIFA's general secretary, JOSEPH BLATTER, and its president, JOAO HAVELANGE.
The statement said the European union would hold talks with the four other continental soccer federations before deciding whether to back Havelange in his June bid for a sixth term. (AP)


Tour Set To Make First Pitch (And Putt)
If any doubts remained about when the real golf season begins, they were dispelled during a stroll through the lobby of the Doral Resort and Country Club today.
With rain pouring down on the golf course outside, the reigning royalty of the game milled about within.
Greg Norman, the No. 1-ranked player in the world, ambled through the doorway leading to Champions Restaurant.
Nick Faldo, ranked No. 2, stood under an awning looking out at the practice putting green.
Nick Price, the fourth-ranked player, bounded up a staircase and into an interview room.


Autozone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 12


Physicians Health Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amid Speculation, Jury Deliberates Trade Center Case
While lawyers drift in and out of the courtroom, and reporters stand in clusters in the hallway of the Federal District Court, the World Trade Center case has become a matter of waiting -- waiting and speculation set off whenever the jury asks to review evidence.
In all, four men are on trial in the case -- Mohammad A. Salameh, Nidal A. Ayyad, Mahmud Abouhalima, and Ahmad M. Ajaj -- all of whom face life sentences if convicted.
Yesterday, the jury in the case finished its fourth full day of deliberations without issuing a verdict.


Surgery for Smith
Dallas Cowboys running back ENMMITT SMITH underwent surgery yesterday to repair a shoulder separation that occurred in the final game of the regular season.
He is expected to be ready for training camp. (AP)


Review/Fashion; With Color and Lots of Shine, Versace Designs a la Courreges
Fashion rides along for a while on a fairly even keel and everyone feels she knows where she stands -- on the question of shoulder pads, for instance, or the length of skirts.
Designers speak of change in terms of evolution, not revolution.
It is pretty well understood where to draw the line between good taste and vulgarity.
Then a designer comes along and shatters the peace.
That is what happened Monday evening in the middle of the fall and winter shows here.
In just 25 minutes, Gianni Versace presented a well-thought-out collection of clothes that challenged the conventional view.


Rykoff-Sexton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Eliot H. Sharp; Publisher, 90
Eliot H. Sharp, the founder and for 35 years publisher of the Investment Dealers' Digest, a financial trade magazine published in Manhattan, died on Friday at his home in Morrisville, Pa.
He was 90.
The cause was the effects of old age, said his son, Timothy.


Venture Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Harvey Leibenstein, Harvard Professor, 71
Harvey Leibenstein, an author and professor of economics at Harvard University for 20 years, died on Monday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 71.
He died of cancer, his wife, Margaret, said.


Tejas Power Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Giants Put Jon Hand on Their Wish List
The Giants may have salary cap problems, but that's not keeping them from checking out the free agent market.
As free agents make the National Football League rounds, peddling their services like salesmen, the Giants are definitely in the mix.
One of their priorities is to fortify the defensive line, which explains why they have a big interest in Indianapolis defensive lineman Jon Hand.
Hand, 30, a monstrous 6-foot-7-inch, 300-pounder who can play any position on the line, is supposed to visit the Giants next week.
Many personnel people around the league think that Hand, an unrestricted free agent, is one of the diamonds in the rough of a free agent field that is slim in pickings.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  MEXICO AND REBELS REACH ACCORD  The Mexican Government and the peasants who rose up against it said they had tentatively agreed on reforms that could transform the political and economic landscape of Chiapas, Mexico's poorest state.
A1  PALESTINIANS RIOT OVER KILLINGS  Rioting broke out almost as soon as the Israeli Army lifted curfews in the occupied territories, suggesting that Palestinian fury over the massacre of Muslims in Hebron is not about to subside.
A1  RAGE AND ROADBLOCKS  Paradoxically, everyday conditions have become even more harsh for Palestinians in the territories since a Jewish settler gunned down Muslim worshipers there last week.
A8  Israel's right wing is torn over whom, or what, to blame.
A8  President Clinton said ending talks would mean the gunman won.
A8  WHERE SPIRE AND MINARET COEXIST  The accord hammered out by Bosnia's Muslims and Croats would face its real test in towns along the Zujevina River, which seem much the same except for the minaret rising over one, the spire of a Catholic church over another.
A10  Envoys said the Serbs must be persuaded to accept the accord.
A10  Fewer troops than anticipated may be needed to enforce a pact.
A10  MEASURING RUSSIA'S MISERY  Moscow Journal: As Russia conducts the first census of the post-Communist era, respondents do not take kindly to questions like, "How much money do you make?" A4  TALK OF EASING A CHINESE LAW  A United States official said the Chinese leadership was debating whether to drop "counterrevolution" as a crime.
Such a charge is used to put most political prisoners in jail.
A3 National A14-19, B8-9 CLINTON AIDE BRIEFED ON INQUIRY  The White House counsel, Bernard W. Nussbaum, met twice in October with Treasury officials to discuss the Resolution Trust Corporation's decision to look into President Clinton's land deal, Administration officials said.
A1  NATION OF ISLAM'S ENIGMA  Louis Farrakhan, a preacher who says there is no shame in hatred, is a man of contrasts.
While his bodyguards project militancy, his dark suits and bow tie are out of a chamber of commerce meeting.
A1  REDUCING CANCER PAIN  Millions of adults and children with cancer suffer unnecessarily because doctors fail to treat the pain aggressively, experts said in releasing new Federal guidelines.
A1  SOLZHENITSYN'S PROTECTORS  Even after Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn announced that he was returning to Russia, from which he was exiled in 1974 for his descriptions of Stalinist terrors, the town of Cavendish, Vt., still guards the Nobel laureate's privacy.
A14  COURT HEARS A SENATOR ARGUE  For the first time in more than 20 years, a member of Congress argued a case before the Supreme Court as Senator Arlen Specter tried to persuade the Justices to let him sue the Navy for closing the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard.
A16  CAPITOL HILL TITAN  Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia spurred the White House, unions and other groups to action, to defeat a constitutional amendment to require the Federal budget to be balanced.
A16  PACKWOOD FAILS TO KEEP DIARIES  Senator Bob Packwood lost hope of shielding his private diaries from the Senate's Ethics Committee when Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist rejected his plea to keep them secret until a court battle is resolved.
A16  DECLINE IN ANIMAL STUDIES  The number of animals used in research in the United States has fallen more than 50 percent since 1968, a Tufts University report said.
A18  DECLASSIFYING GOVERNMENT  The chairmen of the Senate and House Intelligence Committees introduced legislation to reduce greatly the number of classified documents and the time they remain secret.
A19  A SPY'S CACHE OF JEWELS  Federal agents who searched the home and office of Aldrich H. Ames, the C.I.A. officer accused of spying for Moscow, found bracelets, pendants and earrings made of gold, silver, rubies and diamonds.
B8  Eldridge Cleaver, former Black Panther, was hospitalized.
A18 Metro Digest B1 ARREST IN BRIDGE SHOOTING  A 28-year-old man described as a Lebanese national was arrested for the Brooklyn Bridge attack on four Hasidic students.
A1  WATCHING THE NEWS  The evening a van carrying Hasidic students was sprayed with gunfire, Rashad Baz went home to his Brooklyn apartment and silently watched television news reports.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-13  Hope for ancient plants.
C1  A frame is worth 1,000 words.
C1  At home with Van Cliburn.
C1  House Proud C4  Parent &amp; Child C12  Fashion: Versace designs.
C13  Arts/Entertainment C14-22  Russian season in Paris theaters.
C15  Reunion of the Beatles.C14  Film on Alcatraz.
C15  Grammy Award winners.
C20  Music: Met announces its next season.
C14  Dance: Baryshnikov and company.
C15  Books: The conquest of old Mexico.
C22  Television: The new host on "Later." C22  Radio: Curtis Sliwa on WNYC.
C22  Sports B11-17  Basketball: Knicks make adjustments.
B11  Hockey: Rangers topple Nordiques.
B11  Olympics: Baiul returns to Ukraine.
B11  Obituaries D22  Alexei Haieff, composer.
Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials  Mr.
Giuliani's calming message.
A less bad three-strike bill.
Mr.
Clinton trips.
Heart-stopping news.
Letters  William Safire: Whitewater cover-up.
Frank Rich: Bad for the Jews.
Albert Wohlstetter: Genocide by mediation.
Bridge C14 Chronicle B7 Crossword C22


State Power Authority Chief Opposes Contract With Quebec
The new president of the New York Power Authority told a legislative hearing today that New York State should reject a 20-year, $5 billion contract to buy electricity from Quebec because of possible environmental damage in Canada and because of a sharp decline in the demand and price for electricity in the state.
"From a straight business point of view, why would we want to buy more of this stuff when we've got enough?" said S. David Freeman, who took over as president and chief executive of the authority on Tuesday.


HEWLETT-PACKARD TO OFFER WIRELESS MESSAGING SERVICE
The Hewlett-Packard Company is expected to announce a new wireless messaging service today, to be called HP Starlink.
It would permit users to transmit electronic mail messages in addition to news, sports and financial information directly to the company's 100LX palmtop PC's.
The service was expected to be available in early April 1994 at monthly rates that are competitive with those of other wireless services, which are generally in the $50-to-$100-a-month range.


Shoemaker Hurt by Diazo's Injury
Bill Shoemaker doesn't need any reminders of the highs and lows of life in racing.
But he got one this week, anyway.
His star 4-year-old colt Diazo cracked a bone in his left foreleg during a workout at Santa Anita and will be out of action for six months.
Diazo, who is owned by Allen Paulson, ran fifth in the Kentucky Derby last year and first in the Pegasus at the Meadowlands.
He has won 6 of his 13 starts, and he was the probable favorite in the $1 million Santa Anita Handicap, the winter's richest race, which will be run Saturday.
He was coming back from a workout last Sunday with Laffit Pincay Jr. riding when his career took a turn.


Mexico, Pledging Big Changes, Reaches an Accord With Rebels
The Mexican Government and peasant rebels who rose up against it two months ago announced a tentative agreement today on reforms that could transform the political and economic landscape of Mexico's poorest state.
As part of the draft settlement, which still needs approval by the peasant communities that support the rebels, the Government promised new rights and protection for Indians, changes in the political and judicial systems of Chiapas state, land reforms and a deluge of new social programs.


Concern Is Voiced in Croatia's Capital On Serbs' Reaction to Bosnia Accord
The peace accords signed by Croatian leaders and the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government on Tuesday were hailed today by politicians and foreign diplomats here, but they warned that the accords signed in Washington cannot be fully successful unless Serbs are persuaded to accept them.
The only force able to persuade the Serbs to do so, they said, is Russia, and some diplomats said they were encouraged by Moscow's recent performance.


Wallboard Maker Picks Top Officer
The National Gypsum Company said yesterday that it had named Stephen M. Humphrey president and chief executive of the nation's No. 2 wallboard maker, effective March 21.
Mr.
Humphrey's appointment is the second in as many months at National Gypsum, which has experienced a number of management changes that began during its Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization hearings.


Bills Would Slash the Number of U.S. Secrets
Describing the Government's secrecy system as an absurd relic of the cold war, the chairmen of the Senate and House Intelligence Committees introduced legislation today to reduce greatly the number of classified documents and the time they remain secret.
They said the Government classifies roughly seven million documents a year, or one every second in a working week.
Some records from World War I are still stamped secret on the ground that their release would endanger national security.


A.A.A. Will Begin National TV Effort
The American Automobile Association said yesterday that it would begin advertising nationally for the first time in its 92-year history.
At a news conference in New York, the A.A.A. announced it had signed a multimillion-dollar agreement with the Turner Corporate Sales division of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. to advertise exclusively on Turner's cable channels.
A campaign is scheduled to begin with a series of 30-second television commercials to run from July 23 through Aug. 7, during WTBS's coverage of the Goodwill Games in St.
Petersburg, Russia.


China May Ease Law on Dissent, U.S. Aide Says
United States officials say China's leaders are considering abolishing the law by which they put most political prisoners in jail, one such official here said today.
The official, describing the results of a five-day visit to China by John Shattuck, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, said the Chinese leadership is debating whether to drop "counterrevolution" as a crime, and to establish new laws directed at prohibiting specific acts that endanger national security or public order.


Devils Undaunted By Florida's Fast Start
When the Florida Panthers score first, they have a 25-9-6 record.
They scored first tonight against the Devils.
They even scored the second goal of the game.
The Devils, though, came back for a 3-2 victory in their first game at Miami Arena before 13,071 fans.


Knicks Respond Favorably to Riley's Changes
Changing the starting lineup helped.
The off-day excursion to Reno probably helped.
Playing the Sacramento Kings definitely helped.
For whatever reasons, the Knicks finally ended their season-high four-game losing streak with Tuesday's 100-88 victory over the Kings.


Books of The Times; Vivid Picture of Cortes As Bold, Even Funny
Conquest Montezuma, Cortes and the Fall of Old Mexico By Hugh Thomas Illustrated. 812 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.
A century and a half ago, the English historian Macaulay wrote that "every schoolboy knows who imprisoned Montezuma and who strangled Atahualpa."


Apply What U.S. Learned in Bosnia to Haiti; Tighten the Embargo
To the Editor:
"Frustration Over Haiti" (editorial, Feb. 21) misleadingly suggests that at this point in the game there is no way (barring full-scale invasion) for the United States and the international community to pressure the Haitian military to undertake political changes and restore democracy to Haiti.
The logical outcome of this misguided perspective -- adopted by the Clinton Administration the very next day, Feb. 22 -- is to pressure President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to grant total amnesty to Haiti's coup leaders and to drop the threat of tighter economic sanctions.
You give little credence to the thought of imposing a complete embargo upon Haiti, an action recently recommended not only by President Aristide, whom you mistakenly describe as "messianic and unbending," but also by the French delegate to the United Nations.


Votes Cast From Sickbed
Propped up on a hospital bed and surrounded by aides, a frail Representative William H. Natcher was wheeled onto the floor of the House of Representatives today so he could maintain his perfect voting record.
Mr.
Natcher, the 84-year-old Kentucky Democrat who has not missed a vote in his 40 years in Congress, later had a private meeting with Speaker Thomas S. Foley.


Sprouting Tomatoes So Ugly, Potatoes So Blue
IF you are interested in growing heirloom varieties, here are a few organizations that sell them and some thoughts on what to order.
NATIVE SEEDS/SEARCH is a nonprofit organization that concentrates on the traditional native crops of the Southwest.
It offers tepary beans of many colors and a Havasupai sunflower, along with seven kinds of chiltepines, a wild relative of cultivated hot peppers, and many kinds of Indian corn.


Fiery Leader and Loyal Follower in the Nation of Islam; Louis Farrakhan
Louis Haleem Abdul Farrakhan was born Louis Eugene Walcott in the Bronx during the Great Depression.
His West Indian mother, Mae Clark, reared him and his brother in Boston, where she took in laundry to help make ends meet.
In his 1993 book, "A Torchlight for America," Mr.
Farrakhan said his mother tried to abort him three times.
"Although she eventually decided to have me, the effect of her thinking is on me," he wrote.


Reviews/Music; Bartok in an Eastern Light
The Asian-born performers who have become an integral part of musical life in recent decades have, for the most part, mastered the codes of Western musical tradition without greatly revising them.
One rarely hears performances that show traces of a separate cultural tradition.
Hence the surprise and fascination of Tomohiro Okumura's recital at Alice Tully Hall on Monday night.
This young Japanese violinist, the recipient of the 1993 Naumburg Award, played Bartok's First Sonata with a cool, rapt, meditative detachment that put the music in an intriguing new light.
It should be noted first that Mr.
Okumura is a player of considerable technical fluency and tonal polish.
Bach's Sonata in A, first on the program, promised an evening of refined, restrained musicianship; Saint-Saens's First Sonata, with its dazzling 16th-note cascades, added virtuoso glitter at the end.
But the intense molding and shaping of sustained tones in the Bartok sonata alerted one to an unusual temperament.
It somehow sounded more Japanese than Toru Takemitsu's tone-picture "Hika" (also on the program), without seeming at all unidiomatic.


A Less Bad Three-Strike Bill
After a year of watching Congress from the bleachers, President Clinton has begun to play the crime-law game, offering his own version of a "three-strikes-you're-out" measure.
His bill easily improves on the sloppily drafted sections of the Senate's crime bill.
But it is not nearly as clever as the President led the public to hope when he pledged to be "tough and smart" about crime.
The Senate sought to toughen penal laws that already punish repeat offenders more severely than first-timers.
For Federal defendants convicted of their third felony, after two previous convictions in state or Federal court, the Senate made life imprisonment mandatory, But it defined serious crimes so loosely that it brought many nonviolent crimes under the mandatory scheme.


Mayor Praises Response of Police and Community
Here are excerpts from a transcript of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's opening remarks as he announced the arrest of a Lebanese man in connection with the shooting incident that left two Hasidic youths critically injured.
He spoke yesterday in the Blue Room at City Hall:
The massive and swift response of our city has sent a signal that our streets are not open to bloodshed and our communities will not tolerate hatred.


TJX Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Mariners Might Play A Series In Japan
Negotiations are under way with prospective Japanese sponsors for the Seattle Mariners and another team to play their season-opening series in Japan in 1995, club and union officials said today.
If the series comes about, it would mark the first time major league teams played regular-season games in a country other than the United States and Canada.
Mariners officials said they believed there was a better than 50-50 chance that the Japanese series would take place, but a Players Association lawyer said there was "a host of issues that have to be resolved."


Couture Furniture
IT'S the 90's, but who said the glamour is gone?
Get ready for furniture dressed up in Romeo Gigli clothes.
Well, not exactly clothes.
Sherri Donghia, a vice president of the New York-based home furnishings company that bears her family name, is translating the Milanese fashion designer's fabrics into a new collection of textiles for interior design.
"We're known for a tailored look," she said.
"Gigli adds luxury to our vocabulary. He takes Turkish, Indian and Byzantine sources and makes them modern."


Rio Algom Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


It's Sliding Time Again


United Westburne reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NCH Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Annual Ritual Begins as Cuomo and Legislators Argue Over Forecasts of Tax Revenue
The backroom sparring over the state budget began in earnest this week as Democratic and Republican legislative leaders said Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has underestimated tax revenues for the coming fiscal year, and they called on him to make deeper tax cuts and increase spending on schools, parks and social programs.
The economic forecasts released this week by the Democratic-controlled Assembly and the Republican-controlled State Senate are nominally based on the same general premise as projections released by Mr.
Cuomo in January: that the state's economy is improving, but only sluggishly.


Jaguars Hire Huyghue
MICHAEL HUYGHUE, an executive with the Detroit Lions, was hired yesterday as vice president of football operations for the Jacksonville Jaguars, becoming one of the highest-ranking blacks in the National Football League. (AP)


Rise in German Money Supply Roils Markets in the U.S.
There were few American economic statistics to stampede the high-strung financial markets yesterday, so stock and bond traders looked all the way to Germany for their daily dose of excitement, and the stock market fell sharply, then surprisingly rebounded, in heavy trading.
The Dow, which plunged 50.65 points at one point, closed up 22.51 points, at 3,831.74.
The Dow's gyrations of more than 76 points for the day set off the anti-program trading rules of the New York Stock Exchange for the second time in five sessions.


Injured Fighter Better
A boxer hospitalized with bleeding in his brain after collapsing in the ring was in much improved condition yesterday and may be able to go home later this week, according to Dr.
ROBERT KARNS, who is treating him in Los Angeles.
MIGUEL MERCEDES , 33, was carried from the ring in a stretcher after his superflyweight fight with CECILIO ESPINO was stopped early in the 10th and final round at the Forum in Inglewood, Calif. (AP)


WPIX Gives New Meaning To Term Cash and Carry
In the new deal that will keep some Yankee games on free television for three years, the MSG Network and WPIX-TV/Channel 11 said yesterday that they compromised from positions that had been set in bedrock.
"There were times when we wondered whether there would be a deal," Doug Moss, the MSG Network president, said during a news conference.


CML Group reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


'Creeping Crash' Is New Investment Nightmare
When Americans worry about the stock market, they dread The Big One, a crash like the 1987 stock market meltdown.
But after a three-year rally that carried the Dow Jones industrial average up almost 70 percent to a record high, the stock market seems to be edging down slowly but inexorably.
And some investment veterans increasingly fear something worse than the crash.
Their nightmare is that stocks will suffer gradual but persistent declines, the financial version of Chinese water torture.
Such a "creeping crash" would mark the return of traditional bear markets, the slow and painful sort that prevailed before the 1980's.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Wall Street is beginning to worry about a "creeping crash," the financial version of Chinese water torture, with stock prices gradually but persistently falling.
Such a long-term decline bespeaks a return of bear markets.  [ Page D1. ]
European stock and bond prices fell sharply on fear that inflation might be on the rise in the United States and that interest rate cuts in Germany would come more slowly than expected.  [ D1. ]


Second Half Is a Glide For Drexler And Blazers
Trail Blazers 131, Pistons 107
Clyde Drexler scored 20 of his 28 points in the second half when the Portland Trail Blazers outscored Detroit by 73-43 for a 131-107 victory in Auburn Hills, Mich., last night.
The victory was the seventh in eight games for the Trail Blazers, who handed the Pistons their fifth straight loss and dropped their record to 0-10 against the Pacific Division.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about Sir Harold Acton's bequest of a Tuscan villa to New York University misstated the year he was knighted.
It was 1974, not 1966.


Versace's Way With Shine


Wisconsin Ends Slump By Upsetting Michigan
Wisconsin 71, Michigan 58
Michael Finley scored 20 points and shut down Jalen Rose as Wisconsin snapped a four-game losing streak with a 71-58 upset of third-ranked Michigan at Madison, Wis., last night.
The slumping Badgers (16-8 over all, 7-8 in the Big Ten), losers of 8 of 12 after a promising 11-0 start, snapped the Wolverines' 9-game winning streak and kept their own slim N.C.A.A. tournament hopes alive.


Welfare Rolls In Manhattan List Jerseyans
Taking the 20-minute, $1 train ride from Newark to Manhattan, at least 425 New Jersey residents came to New York City to illegally collect welfare payments totaling more than $1 million since 1991, investigators say.
Some tried to cheat on the train fare as well.
Investigators at New York City's Human Resources Administration said they began to look into two-state welfare fraud last September after a number of people caught trying to beat the fare on PATH trains turned out to be carrying welfare identification cards for both New York and New Jersey.


Eight L.I. Trash Haulers Agree to Monitoring Plan
In an agreement aimed at weakening mob control of the trash-hauling industry on Long Island, Federal prosecutors announced a settlement today that would place a court-appointed monitor over eight of the region's largest hauling companies.
The agreement comes five years after the Government filed the largest racketeering suit in history, naming 110 people, companies and others to try to break organized crime's hold on garbage collection on Long Island.
Prosecutors called the agreement an important first step toward tougher regulation of an industry that has sidestepped law-enforcement efforts since the 1950's.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a woman on welfare who got a job through the company America Works misstated the amount of her government assistance in some copies.
The payments came to $6,756 a year, not $6,756 a month.


Isaac Stern Cancels Month's Performances
Isaac Stern has canceled all his March performances on the advice of his doctors after undergoing minor surgery for removal of a skin growth.
The recital planned for March 19 at Carnegie Hall will not be rescheduled this season.
Subscribers to the Great Artists in Recital series will receive refunds automatically, and those who bought their tickets through Carnegie Charge will receive automatic credit on their accounts.
Tickets purchased at the box office may be returned in person or by mail: Isaac Stern Refund, Carnegie Hall Box Office, 154 West 57th Street, New York, N.Y., 10019.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Cavendish Journal; Shielding Solzhenitsyn, Respectfully
Joe Allen, the affable proprietor of the Cavendish General Store, will chat about the weather, his homemade kielbasa ("the best in the country"), the town budget, even about his former wife.
But when it comes to directions to Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's house, Mr.
Allen isn't talking.
"I don't give directions," he told a visitor this morning.
"I don't care what your story is. That's what Solzhenitsyn wants."


Faulty Furnaces Evade Recall
IN a graphic illustration of the frustrations of trying to recall defective consumer products, the manufacturer of a gas furnace linked to 10 carbon monoxide deaths in the Chicago area three years ago is having trouble finding owners of 4,000 furnaces still in use nationwide.
As part of a settlement with the Consumer Product Safety Commission, the York International Corporation, maker of the Heatpipe Gas Furnace, agreed to send letters to owners warning that the vent system could fail, causing poisonous carbon monoxide to leak into the home.


Forcing Truants Back to Class Will Only Undermine Schools
To the Editor:
You report Feb. 23 that the New York City Police Department and the Board of Education, to get juvenile delinquents off the streets, are planning to round up teen-age truants and force them back to school.
The plan is misconceived.
"A significant number of truants are involved in criminal activities," according to Police Commissioner William J. Bratton.
Thus the joint effort will further burden the city's public schools with these students.


Theater in Review
Quotations From a Ruined City  Text by Reza Abdoh and Salar Abdoh; created and directed by Reza Abdoh; lighting by Jennifer Boggs; sound by Raul Vincent Enriquez and Galen Wade; costumes by Eddie Bledsoe and Gene Barnhart; film by Tal Yarden; video by Adam Soch; technical director, Tad Yenawine; choreography by Ken Roht and Reza Abdoh; produced by Diane White; production stage manager, Sandy Cleary.
Presented by Dar A Luz.
At 448 West 16th Street, eighth floor, Chelsea.
WITH: Sabrina Artel, Brenden Doyle, Anita Durst, Tom Fitzpatrick, Mario Gardner, Mel Herst, Peter Jacobs, Tom Pearl, Ken Roht, Tony Torn, Tom Walker and John Yankee.


Pitt Gets Rid of Coach
PAUL EVANS is out as Pitt's basketball coach despite taking the team to five of the last seven National Collegiate Athletic Association tournaments.
The athletic director, OVAL JAYNES, said yesterday that Evans's contract would not be renewed.
Pitt is on a seven-game losing streak that has dropped its record to 13-12 (7-10 in the Big East).
The Panthers have no shot at an N.C.A.A. tournament bid unless they win the conference tournament. (AP)


Corrections
An article on Feb. 21, about a study showing that the drug AZT drastically reduces transmission of the virus that causes AIDS from infected mothers to their newborns, misstated the treatment given to the babies whose mothers had received placebos.
They also received placebos, not AZT.


Seed by Seed, Row by Row: Hope for Ancient Plants
SAVING seeds is a quiet, time-consuming, inglorious act.
No bells rang in 1978 when Gary Nabhan, a botanist working for the Agriculture Department, descended into an isolated valley in the Grand Canyon and asked the elders of the Havasupai tribe, which has farmed there for 900 years, if he could have some seeds of two ancient sunflowers.
He didn't know that 16 years later this same strain would be one of the few to resist a rust fungus devastating sunflowers around the world.


Penn Clinches the Ivy Title And Seizes N.C.A.A. Bid
The Quakers are the first team going to the dance.
Engaged in a bitter struggle for most of the game, Penn held Princeton without a point for the final 5 minutes 6 seconds and Matt Maloney scored 11 of his team's final 14 points as the Quakers clinched their 15th Ivy League championship with a 53-43 victory tonight before a sellout crowd of 8,711 at the Palestra.


Victor of Budget Battle, Byrd Invokes An Army of Kings, Poets and Patriots
"Once again the Senate has justified my faith in the institution, and the Constitution still lives."
Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia offered that heroic analysis on Tuesday night after the Senate rejected, with three votes to spare, a constitutional amendment to require the Federal budget to be balanced.


With One Goal, Andersson Goes From Zero to Victory
One sign of a good team is the ability to get help from unexpected sources.
The Rangers have been able to do that this season, and it has contributed to their becoming the league's most successful team.
Peter Andersson, the Swedish defenseman, who played in only his fifth game of the season for the Rangers, was the latest surprise contributor.
After not having scored any points this season, Andersson got the winning goal last night in a 5-2 triumph over the Quebec Nordiques at Madison Square Garden.


Use of Research Animals Falls 50% Since 1968
The number of animals used in research in the United States has fallen more than 50 percent since 1968, scientists at Tufts University said today in a report.
Reviewing how the animals are treated, the scientists said the amount of pain caused in research was understated by universities and company laboratories and overstated by advocates for animal rights.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ASTROTECH INTERNATIONAL CORP., Pittsburgh, a producer of storage tank facilities, said it had completed the acquisition of Brown-Minneapolis Tank and Fabricating Co., St.
Paul, a designer and and builder of steel storage tanks, for a combination of about $11.5 million in cash, a $500,000 promissory note, 1.6 million Astrotech common shares and a possible payment based on future performance.
GENERAL SIGNAL CORP., Stamford, Conn., said it had signed a definitive agreement to acquire certain assets of the Benjamin Signaling product line from Thomas Industries, Louisville, Ky.
Terms were not disclosed.


High Court Hears a Senator Argue For Right to Sue on a Base Closing
The last time most members of the Supreme Court attended a formal proceeding in the company of Senator Arlen Specter, he was asking questions as a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee and they were answering as nominees seeking Senate confirmation.
Today the tables were turned, and it was the Justices, looking down from the bench with the comfort of life tenure, who were doing the asking.
Mr.
Specter, a Pennsylvania Republican, was trying to persuade the Court to let him sue the Navy to stop the planned closing of the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard.


American Medical Response reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Straw's In the Wind Again
HE'S SWINGING smoothly again and hitting those towering home runs, at least in batting practice.
His back no longer hurts.
But just when Darryl Strawberry appeared about to be Darryl Strawberry again, the jackals that seem to have stalked his life are surrounding him again.
This time, those jackals might be closing in, possibly threatening or interrupting his career.


Once Again, Suspect's Error Cracks Tough Case for Police
In the end, it was a shattered window and some observant New Yorkers who helped lead the police to arrest Rashad Baz in the drive-by shooting of four Hasidic students on the Brooklyn Bridge, New York City police officials said yesterday.
Cases like this are typically solved when the police capitalize on the mistakes of their suspects, and this case appears to illustrate the rule.
For all the helicopters and patrol cars involved in the search, and for all the assistance of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the police official said, the gunman might have gotten away if he had not stopped at a repair shop in Brooklyn, apparently concerned about his broken car window.


West Bank Palestinians Wander in a No-Man's Land Defined by Soldiers
Yasir Abdallah al-Tarzi has not been able to go home for five days.
Israeli soldiers manning the roadblocks outside Hebron will not let him through because the city has been under a 24-hour curfew.
Other Israeli Army soldiers manning the roadblocks around Jerusalem, where he works, will not let him go there either because many West Bank inhabitants like him are banned from traveling to the city.


Israel Eases Curfew in Territories; Ensuing Riots Deepen Pessimism
Almost as soon as the Israeli army lifted curfews today in the occupied territories, rioting erupted and new deaths followed, suggesting strongly that Palestinian fury over the massacre in Hebron is not about to subside soon.
Continued fallout from the Hebron killings was felt on many fronts, including diplomatic efforts to revive Israeli-Arab peace talks that were stopped cold last week when a Jewish settler gunned down Muslim worshipers at a mosque in Hebron.


For Israeli Right Wing, Massacre Aftermath Feeds Doubts and Vulnerabilities
The Hebron massacre of Palestinian worshipers by a Jewish settler injected anguish in varying degrees across Israeli society, but it was only a matter of time before its aftermath began to seed the country's perennial political debate.
And, as it did so, it revealed as much about the doubts and vulnerabilities of the divided, right-wing opposition as the limits of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's readiness to assuage human grief with political compromise.


BRITISH TELECOM PICKS ORACLE SYSTEMS FOR SOFTWARE
The Oracle Systems Corporation said yesterday that British Telecommunications P.L.C. had selected Oracle to provide the software and systems integration for delivery of interactive multimedia services to the home.
Initial technical trials are under way in England, and services will be delivered to trial homes throughout 1994.
Oracle had previously announced agreements with U S West and the Bell Atlantic Corporation for deploying interactive services.
Best known as a producer of software for corporate data bases, Oracle has adapted its software to the world of on-line interactive services and expanded it to accommodate video, audio and textual data.


Inside Art
"The Art Show" wasn't a showcase just for dealers.
Sotheby's also participated in the five-day event, which closed on Monday at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan.
But the auction house's presence was obvious only to the handful of experts who knew the history of the 20 Miro sculptures on view at the Acquavella Galleries booth.
The sculptures came from Acquavella Modern Art, a subsidiary of the Sotheby's Holding Company, which was formed in partnership with the Manhattan dealer William Acquavella four years ago when they joined forces to buy the contents of the Pierre Matisse Gallery.
Many of that Manhattan gallery's 2,300 works, by artists like Miro, Dubuffet, Giacometti and Chagall, have been sold privately since then.


A Shift in Soloists
Because of scheduling conflicts, the violinist Kyung-Wha Chung will not appear with the New York Chamber Symphony this weekend at the 92d Street Y. In her place, the Czech pianist Ivan Moravec will be the soloist in Beethoven's Fourth Piano Concerto.
The remainder of the all-Beethoven program is unchanged, with Gerard Schwarz conducting the Fourth and Sixth Symphonies.
The concerts are to be tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 at the Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Review/Art; Miniature World of Humans and Gods A
Sex?
Violence?
Exotic scenery?
Current events?
Domestic drama?
Forget television; take a look at Indian painting.
It's all there in "The Greatest Delight: Painting of India From the Williams College Museum of Art" at the Equitable Gallery, an exhibition short on top-of-the-line work but historically wide-ranging and full of individual pleasures.
Most of the paintings are small, meant to be held in the hand and viewed close-up, but each encompasses a whole world of ideas and sensations.
It is, for the most part, a wealthy world, of emperors and courtiers, provincial potentates and fevered lovers, into which, now and then, gods enter, doing pretty much the same things humans do.
It's also a world of amazing cultural diversity.
Miniatures commissioned by the Islamic Mogul rulers were often painted by Hindu artists in a style spiced with Persian, Chinese and European influences, a mix that shows, yet again, that multiculturalism has a long pedigree.


Knicks Finally Put a Stop to Nets' Winning Ways
It was important that the Knicks finally beat the Nets.
It was more significant that the Knicks played as if their self-confidence had returned.
Scoring the first 15 points of the fourth quarter, New York rolled to a 97-86 victory over New Jersey at Madison Square Garden last night.
It was the Knicks' first victory this season against the Nets, who had won the previous three meetings.
And after a skid in which they lost 8 of 12 games, the Knicks (38-19) have regrouped to win their last two.


Blackmun Tackles Question of Who Shall Die; Legislating From Bench
To the Editor:
Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun, who wrote that infamous piece of judicial legislation known as Roe v.
Wade, apparently needs again to be reminded that he was appointed to the bench to adjudicate, not legislate.


It's Not Exactly Moscow on the Hudson, but It Will Do
After less than two seasons in New York, Aleksei Kovalev of the Rangers and Darius Kasparaitis of the Islanders have caught on quickly to the intensity of the local rivalry.
The teams play twice this weekend, tonight at Madison Square Garden, then tomorrow night at Nassau Coliseum.
Kovalev, a flashy and sometimes scrappy right wing, expects that the Islanders "will play like crazy."


Property Tax Changes Are Urged To Help Preserve Northeast Forest
A regional commission examining ways to preserve the 26-million-acre forest of northern New York and New England called yesterday for changes in the way the property is taxed to help individual owners keep control of their land.
But despite the urging of some conservationists, it did not recommend specific changes in forestry practices or major programs to set up natural preserves.
About 85 percent of the forest, which runs almost interrupted from upstate New York through New Hampshire and Vermont to northern Maine, is privately owned, much of it by paper and timber companies.


Grand Jury Is Reportedly Told Of Shredding at Little Rock Firm
An employee of the Rose Law Firm here has told a Federal grand jury that in late January he was ordered to destroy a box of documents from the files of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the White House lawyer whose suicide is under investigation by an independent counsel.
People familiar with the testimony of the employee, an in-house courier, said he had told the grand jury that he and a colleague had used a shredder in the firm's basement to destroy the papers.
He testified that he had done so at the request of a clerk in the firm.


When Arnold Schwarzenegger Made a Movie in Times Square; No Censorship for Koch
To the Editor:
During my tenure as director of the Mayor's Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting in the Koch administration, we were often being challenged by community groups, activists and self-serving individuals who would claim that the premise of certain motion picture and television scripts would be harmful to New York City's image.
Mayor Edward Koch's response to those demands was constant -- he rejected any and all attempts at censorship.


The Good Side of Sharks on Display
Like tigers and tyrannosaurs, sharks are scary predators, but although their monstrous triangular teeth are the stuff of horror movies, real-life sharks rarely devour hapless swimmers.
Still, sharks are interesting creatures even after their evil reputation is reduced to a realistic size, and a traveling exhibition that is now at the American Museum of Natural History is worth a visit.
This modest show, "Sharks: Fact and Fantasy," was created by the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County and has been touring American museums for three years.
In the exhibition's New York incarnation, the American Museum has added a few features of its own and is simultaneously presenting (for an additional admission) a new IMAX film, "Search for the Great Sharks," a large-format movie unencumbered by biological details but long on thrills and blood-slobbered jaws.


Dorette Kruse Fleischmann; Civic Leader, 88
Dorette Kruse Fleischmann, a civic leader and socialite in New York and Cincinnati, died yesterday at the Racquet Club in Chicago.
She was 88.
The cause was cancer, said her daughter, Joan Tobin.


Cortines Orders Bronx Board to Renew a Contract
Toughening his posture after repeated attempts at conciliation, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines ordered a Bronx community school board yesterday to renew the contract of a superintendent who Mr.
Cortines said has enacted reforms and cleaned up corruption.
The action came as Fernando Ferrer, the Bronx borough president, announced plans to appoint a commission to investigate school corruption in the borough.


Olympians on the Farm
The Olympic hockey players BRIAN SAVAGE and JIM CAMPBELL,both centers, were assigned to Fredericton of the American Hockey League by the Montreal Canadiens yesterday.


Rutgers Honors Jordan
EDDIE JORDAN, the point guard who led Rutgers to the Final Four in 1976 and set career marks for assists and steals, was among four people selected for induction into the school's basketball hall of fame.
Former coach BILL FOSTER (1963-71) and two other players, LARRY GORDON ('54) and BUCKY HATCHETT ('50), will also be inducted.
At Rutgers, Jordan had 585 assists and 220 steals, and his 1,632 points are the sixth-best in school history.
He is currently an assistant coach with the Sacramento Kings. (AP)


Clinton Defends Idea of Regional Insurance Pool, but Offers to Bend
Moving to address growing concerns about how his health care plan would work, President Clinton said today that one of its central provisions -- the creation of regional insurance pools known as health alliances -- is neither bureaucratic nor unworkable.
But Mr.
Clinton also suggested that if opposition to the idea of alliances continued to grow he would be willing to support modifications, as long as they still guaranteed that every citizen would receive health coverage.


Big Investors Suffer as Foreign Markets Sour
Investment firms and banks that like to make big bets in the world's financial markets routinely lose millions of dollars here and millions of dollars there on the expectation that taking risks with investments can reap handsome rewards.
But in the last few weeks big bets on European and Asian markets have gone suddenly and unexpectedly bad, and the millions here or there have grown to be more like billions of dollars and more, Wall Street investment experts say.


Laurence Hugo, 76, Stage and TV Actor
Laurence Hugo, an actor who appeared in the original production of "Stalag 17" and starred in the television daytime drama "The Edge of Night" for 11 years, died on Wednesday at Cedars Nursing Home in Charlottesville, Va.
He was 76 and lived in Rockfish, Va.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, said his son, Laurence, of Schuyler, Va.


Three Brothers Are Convicted In Art Thefts
Three brothers accused of spending more than a decade as members of a brazen group that crashed vehicles into fur salons, jewelry stores and art galleries in New York City and then stole millions of dollars in luxury items were convicted yesterday on racketeering and related charges in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
A fourth member of the group, known to the police as the "crash and carry gang," was convicted on a conspiracy charge as well.


Anita Morris, 50, Actress in Theater And Movies, Dies
Anita Morris, an actress who was nominated for a 1982 Tony Award for her exuberant performance as a brassy redhead in black-lace body stocking in the musical "Nine," died on Wednesday at her home in Los Angeles.
She was 50.
The cause was cancer, said her husband, the director Grover Dale.


Russia Agrees to French U.N. Plan on Bosnia
In a surprise move widely seen as confirming Moscow's desire to play a constructive role in ending the Bosnian war, Russia has dropped its objection to a French plan for breaking the Serbian siege of Sarajevo and securing free access to three other encircled towns in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In the new French resolution, the Council, acting on a Charter provision that allows it to enforce its orders, calls for complete freedom of movement for the civilian population of Sarajevo, free circulation of relief supplies and the restoration of "normal life" in the city.


Artexpo Puts Prospective Buyers on the Prowl for a Bargain


Carolyn Wyeth, Realist Artist, Dies at 84
Carolyn Wyeth, an artist and sister of the painter Andrew Wyeth, died on Tuesday at her home in Chadds Ford, Pa.
She was 84.
Her family said she had been ill for some time.


Police Officer Fatally Shoots a Bronx Man
A police officer in the Bronx yesterday killed an emotionally disturbed man who had frightened his mother and her roommate, then attacked officers who responded to their 911 calls, the police said.
The incident began at 11:54 A.M., with a 911 call from a woman identified by police only as the mother of the dead man, Robert Polanco.
She asked for an ambulance at her apartment at 2385 Creston Avenue, in University Heights, but did not say why it was needed, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.
Two minutes later, a woman who shared an apartment with the mother called 911 and asked for the police, Sergeant Haimeck said.


Trudging Through the Latest Northeaster


United Airlines Starts A Two-Tier Pay Scale
Two-tier wages, an idea that many airlines and their unions embraced in the early 1980's to cut costs but later abandoned because it hurt morale, have made a comeback at United Airlines.
Internal documents at United show that the airline has begun offering lower wage scales and giving fewer benefits to new reservation agents and other nonunion, lower-level employees.
The changes affect employees hired after Jan. 1.


P.L.O. Envoy Pushes to Restart Peace Talks
A senior Palestinian official sent here to discuss conditions for resuming peace talks had encouraging words today, saying an agreement with Israel was the best way to ensure security for Palestinians.
Nabil Shaath, the envoy from the Palestine Liberation Organization, told reporters tonight, "We want the peace process to continue and succeed because this is the only guarantee that we will have real security in the long run."


Paul Harris Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Northwestern Steel &amp; Wire (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


An Ancient Ritual and a Mother's Asylum Plea
In trying to deport Lydia Oluloro, the Federal Government has presented a simple case.
A native of a tiny Nigerian village, Mrs.
Oluloro came to Oregon in 1986 and lied when she said she would stay no longer than her one-year tourist visa allowed.
Mrs.
Oluloro, who works as a janitor for $6.25 an hour and says she loves the Oregon rain, concedes the Government its basic point.
But she has raised a defense that seizes on a growing international human rights issue and, if successful, could set a precedent for other asylum seekers.


White House Ethics Meltdown
From now on, President Clinton says, "everyone will be much more sensitive" about attending the improper meetings between White House and Treasury officials concerning the Resolution Trust Corporation's inquiry into a savings and loan association with close ties to him and Mrs.
Clinton.
Sure, that would be progress.
But Mr.
Clinton's tepid response explains why his Administration is easily the most reckless in interfering with the integrity of Federal investigative agencies since that of Richard Nixon.


T. L. Blakemore, 78, Expert on Japan's Law
Thomas L. Blakemore, an American lawyer who was an expert on Japanese law and whose Tokyo law firm represented many United States companies in Asia, died on Feb. 19 at his home in Seattle.
He was 78.
The cause was heart failure, said Griffith Way, a friend.


Proffitt's Department Stores To Buy McRae's Retail Chain
Proffitt's Inc., a regional department store chain based in Knoxville, Tenn., announced yesterday that it was purchasing privately held McRae's Inc. with a combination of $337 million in cash, debt and equity.
The combined companies operate 53 stores in small and midsized towns in the Southeast and are expected to have sales exceeding $700 million this year.


The Iron Man of Congress Ends a Streak in Absentia
For the first time in 40 years, the voting light next to the name of Representative William H. Natcher remained dark today as the ailing Kentucky Democrat chose to stay in the hospital rather than repeat Wednesday's grim spectacle of being wheeled onto the House floor to vote from his gurney.
Mr.
Natcher, 84, who is suffering from heart and intestinal ailments, said in a statement read to the House by Speaker Thomas S. Foley: "After consultations with my physicians this morning, I have very reluctantly decided to remain at Bethesda Naval Hospital for continued treatment. I will not be able to return to Capitol Hill today."


Gold Is Ignoring Wall St.'s Inflation Fears
Why, if gold is such a good indicator of inflation, as Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, recently told Congress, have traders around the world shunned gold?
The price of gold should be rising because of inflation fears.
Stock and bond markets dropped again yesterday over just such concerns, with the Dow Jones industrial average declining 7.32 points, to 3,824.42.
And today's session could be another nervous one if the January employment data defy expectations.


JUDGE ACCUSES G.M. OVER PICKUP DATA
A Federal judge in South Carolina says he believes that lawyers for the General Motors Corporation may have destroyed, or been aware of the destruction of, documents related to a fire-prone G.M. pickup truck that has been the subject of lawsuits.
In findings issued on Monday, the judge, G. Ross Anderson Jr. of Federal District Court, said he believed that there had been a "systematic destruction" of documents concerning Chevrolet and G.M. pickups made from 1973 to 1987 that carried dual, side-mounted gasoline tanks.
Judge Anderson also said he believed that G.M. lawyers might have lied about the matter.


Corrections
A brief report in the Guide column of the Long Island Weekly on Sunday gave an incorrect date for an appearance by Chris Hegedus and D. A. Pennebaker, makers of the film "The War Room." They will speak at the Cinema Arts Center in Huntington at 7 o'clock tonight, not tomorrow night.


GAP INC. (N)
Gap Inc., the T-shirt and jeans merchant that has added fashion merchandise to its racks, said yesterday that net income rose an unexpected 66 percent in the fourth quarter.
The company's shares surged $1.125 yesterday, to $46.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Gap's strategy of mixing trendy merchandise with basics, keeping a tight rein on inventory and avoiding markdowns clearly paid off, said Bruce M. Missett, a retail analyst for Morgan Stanley.
"They weren't lucky; they were smart," he said.


Reviews/ Film; Beware of Kin Bearing Birds of Prey
"Greedy," which has the makings of a gleefully malevolent family comedy, begins on a note of inspired wickedness.
Members of the McTeague clan are making their slavish pilgrimage to the home of Uncle Joe (Kirk Douglas), the foxy old millionaire whose health is very much on their minds.
Nobody likes Uncle Joe, but the McTeagues can agree on this much: they want his money.
Bearing stuffed birds of prey (which the old man apparently loves) and shepherding children with names like Joette and Jolene, they will do anything to win their uncle's favor.
"Try and bring up my cousin Tina's drinking," Carl McTeague (Ed Begley Jr.) advises his family as they all head for the mansion.
Once they arrive, "Greedy" spins out a hilarious scene in which the cousins do their best to embarrass each other for Uncle Joe's benefit.
Fending off one such attack, Frank (Phil Hartman) typically declares: "I guess you have a lot of time to notice these things, Ed, now that you're out of work." Uncle Joe originated the McTeague mean streak, and he thrives on this sort of thing.


Art in Review
Chuck Hoberman
Museum of Modern Art  11 West 53d Street  Manhattan  Through April 12
Few works in art museums come with patents, but Chuck Hoberman's "Iris Dome," the subject of the latest installment in the Museum of Modern Art's Projects series, is an exception.
Trained as both a sculptor and a mechanical engineer, Mr.
Hoberman prefers to be called an inventor; in the "Iris Dome" he has developed an unusual form of retractable dome for stadiums.





Art in Review
James Turrell
Barbara Gladstone Gallery  99 Greene Street  SoHo  Through March 12
This new work by James Turrell is a coup de theatre and very beautiful, and it's only a pity that by encouraging people to see it, some of its impact may be diminished.
"Frontal Passage" is the latest entry in Mr.
Turrell's "Wedgework" series, which he began in the late 1960's.
It is an installation approached through a blackened hallway, which lets out into a chamber barely illuminated on one side by reddish fluorescent lights.
The lights seem to cut, like a scrim, at a diagonal across the room, slicing it in two.
But that is purely an illusion, a "spatial manipulation," as Mr.
Turrell calls it, that goes to the heart of his art: his work is one of visual conundrums, a meditation on perception, light and color, in which there is virtually no there there.
Yet what is there, in a darkened space, vibrating with misty light, has about it a definite and delicate poetry.
The effect is best when the space is silent and empty.
But don't miss this show, in any case.
MICHAEL KIMMELMAN


Fluor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


DELL COMPUTER CORP. (NMS)
Shares of the Dell Computer Corporation rose $2.125 yesterday even though its fourth-quarter earnings were down nearly 50 percent and it posted a loss for the year.
Still, the results exceeded the estimates of most Wall Street analysts.
Analysts had forecast that Dell would report fourth-quarter earnings of 32 cents a share; the company reported profits of $17.7 million, or 39 cents a share.
For its 1994 fiscal year, Dell reported a loss of $35.8 million, or $1.06 a share; analysts had estimated a loss of $1.15 a share.


Dress Barn Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Restaurants
Forget about the discreet setting.
Forget the fact that every woman in the room seems to have come straight from her hairdresser and most of the men are manicured.
Forget the soft golden light, the quiet hush that fills the air, the waiters standing smartly at attention.
When the piadina arrives at your table, roll up your sleeves, daub the round flat bread with tangy squaquerone cheese, pick it up in your fingers, close your eyes and imagine that you are in the Romagna area of northeast Italy eating this rustic dish at some country counter.
Amarcord announces its culinary intentions by putting piadina at the top of the menu.
This simple, slightly crunchy griddled bread looks like a tortilla, tastes like heaven and has been eaten in Romagna for centuries.
Piadina is the soul of the region; the 19th-century poet Pascoli called it the national dish of the Romagnoli.
Could there be a better beginning to a meal featuring the food of Emilia-Romagna?


Review/Film; A Land Grab, This Time In Vermont
The real-life story behind "Where the Rivers Flow North" is the stuff of independent film makers' fantasies.
A Vermonter named Jay Craven put together the money for his film from a variety of sources, ranging from foreign sales rights to local small investors, and made the kind of period piece that would be produced in Hollywood only as a fluke.
Based on Howard Frank Mosher's regional novella, the film is set in 1927 and centers on two unlikely characters.
Noel Lord (Rip Torn), an old man with white hair flowing below his shoulders and a metal hook for a hand, has lived on his land all his life and is resisting a power company's attempt to take it over.
An Indian woman named Bangor (Tantoo Cardinal) has been with him as housekeeper and lover for decades.
She wears a man's crushed hat, is missing a front tooth and holds no illusions about the need to take the power company's money and go.
Mr.
Craven, who directed and co-wrote the script, also persuaded Michael J. Fox and Treat Williams to appear in small roles.


Review/Film; Antihero and Rich Girl Amok on a Freeway
Adam Rifkin's satirical comedy, "The Chase," takes one of Hollywood's most sure-fire adrenaline-pumping devices, a high-speed car chase, and turns it on its ear with a malicious, flailing glee.
Virtually the entire movie takes place on the freeway between the outskirts of Los Angeles and the Mexican border as a routine police action rapidly escalates into a grotesque media circus.
Anyone who has ever loathed the way television news anchors camouflage the medium's insatiable appetite for live-action excitement under a guise of pious concern will get some nasty chuckles out of the film.
The journey begins at a convenience store in Newport Beach, Calif., where 28-year-old Jack Hammond (Charlie Sheen) is being questioned by the police about a car theft.
Pretending it's a gun, Jack shoves a candy bar into the neck of a young woman near the checkout counter, takes her hostage and flees in her red BMW.
Unbeknownst to Jack until it's too late, his hostage, Natalie Voss (Kristy Swanson), happens to be the only daughter of a publicity-hungry billionaire (Ray Wise) known as "the Donald Trump of California." An impulsive act of self-protection is assumed by the outside world to be a premeditated kidnapping.


Actava Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Aides Disavowed
President Clinton and Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen both moved abruptly to disassociate themselves from the conduct of aides who met privately three times in recent months to review the status of a confidential investigation into an Arkansas savings and loan.
Article, page A22.


Nosair Asks for a Halt to Bloodshed
Saying he mourned for Jewish as well as Arab victims of violence, the man acquitted once and accused again in the 1990 murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane has called on both sides to build "the bridge for peace" in the Middle East.
The man, El Sayyid A. Nosair, in a letter to The New York Times from the Metropolitan Correctional Center in Manhattan where he is awaiting a Federal trial on bombing conspiracy and murder charges, said his comments were prompted by last week's massacre at a mosque in the West Bank by a follower of Rabbi Kahane.
The letter, dated Monday, preceded the Brooklyn Bridge attack on a van carrying Hasidic youths.


At the Bar; A California appeals court comes to grips with a question: Just how stupid can some judges be?
Can a judicial edict be so outrageous, so irrational, so megalomaniacal that it simply cannot be real?
Or, given the errant behavior of some judges, can even the most bizarre mandate appear genuine?
That question was recently before an appellate court in California.
In recent years, Judge Ricardo Torres of Los Angeles County Superior Court and Roger Grace, editor and co-publisher of The Metropolitan News-Enterprise, a newspaper serving the Los Angeles legal community, have been locked in combat.
Mr.
Grace says it stems from his paper's gutsy, unflattering coverage of Judge Torres's performance as presiding judge in 1991-92.
In one editorial, the publication called him "a despotic twit."


Union Chiefs Accept Plan On Severance
The leaders of New York City's municipal labor unions said yesterday that they would accept one of the essential components of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's preliminary budget plan: severance payments to cut at least 7,600 jobs from the government payroll.
Details of the severance package have not yet been negotiated, and the unions said they would seek the best possible deal for workers willing to leave city government.


Apple's Newton Reborn: Will It Still the Critics?
As consumer products go, it may be comparable to Ford's seeking a second chance for the Edsel.
On Friday, Apple Computer will bring out an improved Newton.
When the original $799 Newton Messagepad hand-held computer came out last summer, its attempts to recognize handwriting provided such fodder for "Doonesbury" and Jay Leno that the ridicule all but drowned out the machine's cadre of supporters who quietly said, in effect, "Give it time."


Morris Goes Deep, But Nets Fall Flat
Unlike Tuesday night, when he set a club record by making six 3-point shots, Chris Morris didn't find his long-range shot until the buzzer at the end of the third quarter last night.
That gave the Nets their only lead of the second half, a 72-71 advantage to take into the fourth quarter.
But instead of inspiring them to victory, it seemed to fire up the Knicks, who then ran up 15 unanswered points to start the fourth quarter and put the game away.


Tates Locke Dismissed
Indiana State's athletic committee yesterday recommended the dismissal of the basketball coach, TATES LOCKE, whose 4-22 record this season was the worst in his five years at the school.
Athletic Director BRIAN FAISON had asked the committee to endorse his recommendation to release Locke.


Israel Frees More Prisoners, But Arabs Are Not Mollified
Israel released hundreds more Palestinian prisoners today, but the gesture did little to defuse Arab rage and bitterness six days after the massacre of worshipers at a Hebron mosque.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, moreover, pursued political maneuvers that could complicate efforts to ease tensions and restart the peace talks by drawing far-right politicians opposed to a settlement into his minority coalition Government.


The Feud That Froze Secaucus; Voided Election Leaves Town in Bureaucratic Limbo
Like the town he has served for 26 years, Philip J. Kieffer is a little edgy these days.
He wants nothing more than to be left alone to his job as Secaucus' Chief Administrator, tapping away at his computer in soothing bureaucratic anonymity.
But life has not been so simple in Secaucus since a bitter political dispute paralyzed the town's government in January.
There is no mayor.
There is no acting mayor.
There is not even much of a Town Council here in this former pig-farming village now best known as a magnet for its outlet stores.


Review/Music; The Vienna Philharmonic Holds True to Its Traditions
Some of the most remarkable musical experiences of recent seasons have been associated with visits of the Vienna Philharmonic to New York City.
In 1989, there was a gripping, transcendent interpretation of Bruckner's Eighth Symphony led by Herbert von Karajan in his last appearance here.
Two years ago, an architectural map of Mahler's consciousness seemed to be displayed in Loren Maazel's reading of the Fifth Symphony.
But even when the musical results are not on such a high level -- as they were not on Wednesday night in Carnegie Hall when the orchestra began a three-concert visit here under the direction of Riccardo Muti -- there is something uncannily compelling about the organization and its sound.
Though the orchestra is just a few months older than the New York Philharmonic, it actually seems an ancient ancestor.
On the American concert stage, it is even a sociological antiquity: no women are among its members (a female harpist has, a spokesman for the orchestra said, a "special status").


United Nations Journal; The Peacekeeper in Chief Needs More Soldiers
"Frankly, if the response of governments remains the way it is today, we couldn't get another operation off the ground," said Kofi Annan, the soft-spoken Ghanian who heads the United Nations peacekeeping department, as he surveyed his empire from his 37th-floor office, stuffed with African carvings, medals and plaques.
He has a Canadian general and 50 other military officers, most lent by their governments, working for him here at United Nations headquarters as well a civilian staff of 80.
He has a round-the-clock situation room with secure communication links to the 17 operations he is currently running in trouble spots all over the world.


Indistinct Picture of Shooting Suspect
An emerging portrait of Rashid Baz, incomplete and often contradictory, seems notable mostly for its lack of distinction.
Several acquaintances describe Mr.
Baz, the suspect charged with 15 counts of attempted murder in the shooting of a vanful of Hasidic students on the Brooklyn Bridge, as a man of mixed religious background with no particularly strong or sophisticated political beliefs.
He was an unremarkable student, an often unemployed worker.
One acquaintance said he admitted using drugs to relieve his boredom, but the police could not confirm that and said he had no previous police record.


CHRONICLE
VERNON A. WALTERS, the United States Ambassador to Bonn from 1989 to 1991, made himself controversial at home but beloved by many German officials for announcing as soon as he assumed the post that the handwriting was on the wall -- the Berlin wall.
When Ambassador Walters arrived in Bonn in January 1989, he told German officials that since the Russians were pulling out of Afghanistan, it was clear that they also wouldn't be prepared to maintain the artificial division of East and West Germany against the will of the people there and that unification could be imminent.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-15  CLINTON REVIVES TRADE LAW  President Clinton signed an executive order that would allow him to impose trade sanctions against Japan if it did not open its markets.
The move angered the Tokyo Government and GATT officials.
A1  LITTLE ACTION ON ISRAELI SETTLERS  Five days after Israel approved tough measures against militant settlers, no one in Kfar Tapuah has seen an official piece of paper ordering the return of a gun.
A1


When Arnold Schwarzenegger Made a Movie in Times Square; The Hijacked Train
To the Editor:
In 1974, when I was associate producer for "The Taking of Pelham One Two Three," we asked New York City Transit Authority approval to film in the subway system.
The agency first denied us use of the facilities, primarily arguing that Transit Authority employees did not use the profane language depicted in the script, and the T.A. didn't want to embarrass union employees.


Surprising Thorpe Rides the Breeze
As he looked over his final shot of the day in the first round of the Doral-Ryder Open, Jim Thorpe pulled some grass from the ground and tossed it into the air.
He watched as the howling west wind whisked it away, blowing it some 15 yards in a split second, and he smiled.
This was just what Thorpe, 45, had hoped for when he got into the field on the final sponsor's exemption.
Tough, hard conditions, the kind of nasty, gusty stuff that he grew up playing in, would give Thorpe a chance.


Blackmun Tackles Question of Who Shall Die; 'Cruel and Unusual'
To the Editor:
Justice Antonin Scalia argues that the Fifth Amendment "clearly permits the death penalty to be imposed" because it says that the death penalty should not be imposed "without due process of law," (news article, Feb. 23).


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE AU PAIR MAN," Irish Repertory Theater Company, 28th Street Theater, 120 West 28th Street, Chelsea.
Hugh Leonard's comedy about an Irish debt collector who becomes the companion of an Englishwoman, with Charlotte Moore and Ciaran O'Reilly; directed by Brian Murray.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20 for matinees; $25 for Friday and Saturday evenings.
Information: (212) 279-4200.


No Headline
"If they think this is going to prevent other Baruch Goldsteins from going out there, they're very wrong." DAVID AXELROD, a Jewish settler in the West Bank.  [ A10:6. ]


Art in Review
Sherrie Levine
Marian Goodman Gallery  24 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through April 2
Maybe appropriation art means never having to run out of things to borrow.
In her previous two New York shows, the arch Conceptualist Sherrie Levine converted the Malic molds of Marcel Duchamps's "Large Glass" into sculpture and brought Man Ray's Surrealist pool table into three dimensions, all in the name of questioning artistic originality.
Now Ms.
Levine is redoing Brancusi.
At Goodman, she is exhibiting six crystal replicas of "Newborn," the modernist sculptor's 1915 ovoid sculpture of a baby's head, its flat abstracted mouth open to full cry.
Each sculpture is presented on a glamorous if bulky base that is not part of the artwork: a grand piano.
Its lid is closed and silent in contrast with the baby's scream, its form shiny and black, in contrast with the milky translucency of the sculptures, which almost seem lighted from within. (The Brancusi-on-the-piano idea is itself appropriated, from the English author and esthete H. S. Ede, whose Cambridge home, now a museum, was recently reproduced in ArtNews.)


Review/Film; Naughtiness in Pooh Land
In a bosky Australian hideaway, the artist Norman Lindsay (Sam Neill) follows his muse.
Actually there are quite a few muses, scampering through the gardens in various states of undress and posing thoughtfully for what look like Playboy pictorials on "The Girls of Pre-Raphaelite Kitsch." The painter, whose wife and sweet little daughters are also on the premises, makes a point of never being distracted by such goings-on.
After all, he is an artist with a serious mission.
He lives to glorify the human body and appall the bourgeoisie.


Following the Scent: On the Trail Of the Best Burgers in Town
WITH all the talk about the return of the steakhouse to New York, you would think nobody had eaten beef in recent years.
So what's a hamburger, chopped liver?
Back when these new-found steak-lovers were doing their healthful bit, getting to know the chicken breast in its many appetizing guises, they were probably sneaking hamburgers on the side.
Even in the lean years for steak, hamburgers continued to sell by the millions. (Or was it billions?) And efforts by restaurants to take the fun out of hamburger-eating, with low-fat offerings like McDonald's McLean Deluxe, never caught on.


Books of The Times; Detective Work, 400 Years Later
The Reckoning
The Murder of Christopher Marlowe
By Charles Nicholl
Illustrated. 413 pages. Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $24.95.
It was, even by Elizabethan standards, "a sudden and fearful end": on Wednesday, May 30, 1593, at the age of 29, the playwright Christopher Marlowe was stabbed to death, through his right eye, as he sat at supper with three men.
According to the official story, Marlowe and the man who stabbed him, one Ingram Frizer, had quarreled over the bill.
Ingram, who claimed he'd killed Marlowe in self-defense, subsequently received a pardon from the Queen, while Marlowe -- the celebrated author of "Tamburlaine the Great," "Dr. Faustus" and "The Jew of Malta" -- was buried in an unmarked grave.


Ailing Van Basten Out of World Cup
The Dutch soccer star MARCO VAN BASTEN will miss the World Cup because his ankle injury is healing too slowly, Dr.
MARC MARTENS said yesterday from Brussels after examining the forward.
Van Basten did not want to put his career at risk for a shot at this summer's tournament in the United States, Martens said.
Van Basten, 29, a three-time European player of the year, plays for A.C.
Milan.
Martens operated on Van Basten's right ankle in June. (AP)


Giants' Collins A Coveted Cover Man
A good cover man is hard to find, and that is why Giants cornerback Mark Collins is one of the hottest free agents in the market.
"In my opinion, he's the best cornerback out there," said one American Football Conference general manager.
There are at least six teams interested in him, and one of those, of course, is the Giants.


50-Off Stores (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Saberhagen Shoulder A Worry On Day 1
Maybe the Mets want to trade Bret Saberhagen, and maybe they want him to be one of the top pitchers in their rotation.
Either way, they couldn't have been happy with what happened this afternoon.
Saberhagen was expected to start in an intrasquad game today at Thomas J. White Stadium -- the Mets' first game of spring training -- but was pulled moments before game time because of a twinge in his pitching shoulder that left him with a self-described "dead arm." The move forced the Mets to pitch Bob Apodaca, their Class AAA manager, for the first inning, and it forced Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' general manager, to apologize to a group of scouts seated behind home plate.


Esiason Doesn't Shy From Business
Jets quarterback Boomer Esiason looks around the National Football League and cannot understand why the players voted in favor of a collective-bargaining agreement that stands to divide them into two categories: the haves and the have-nots.
Esiason is dismayed that a former teammate, receiver Chris Burkett, was put in a position where he decided to retire rather than accept a pay cut because the Jets are trying to make room under the salary cap to sign unrestricted free agents.


Art in Review
Alice Neel
Robert Miller Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through March 19
These 24 paintings and 20 drawings date from 1938 to 1961 when Alice Neel (1900-1984) lived in Spanish Harlem.
Her subjects were people from the neighborhood and sometimes (inventively but not always successfully) the neighborhood itself.
Neel was at her best as a portraitist, and she was one of the finest America produced at the time.
Her works are wonderfully free in their handling, sharp in their characterizations and always full of a humane and vibrant spirit.


Genovese Drug Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Advanta Corp., is selling $174.5 million of certificates backed by home equity loans through Lehman Brothers and Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The issue is rated Aaa by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and AAA by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Federal Home Loan Bank, Washington, is selling $169 million of notes due in 1996 priced at 100 to yield 4.89 percent through J. P. Morgan Securities Inc.
The issue is noncallable.


A New Joint Test of Interactive TV
In the latest linkup of computing and communications giants, the Microsoft Corporation and Tele-Communications Inc. said today that they had agreed to jointly test interactive cable television systems.
Tele-Communications will supply the network for the systems, while Microsoft will supply new software that will control the movement of the interactive media.
The systems will first be tested among Tele-Communications and Microsoft employees in the Seattle area later this year.
The second phase will include a marketing test of interactive television services among Tele-Communications cable customers in the Seattle and Denver areas, beginning in 1995.


Critic's Choice/Dance; Freshness and Energy Of Well-Trained Youth
Spring arrives a little early this year: tomorrow afternoon at the Joyce Theater, to be exact.
The occasion is a heartwarming, spirited program put together by Feld Ballets/NY starring the children of the company-associated New Ballet School, in new and recent works choreographed for them by Eliot Feld and others.
The youngsters are advanced students who look ready to step right into a ballet company.
The centerpiece of the program is "23 Skidoo," which takes its 13 performers from a bouncy opening dance to a duet for snake-people and on to a finale that fills the stage with jitterbugging, jogging dancers.
Mr.
Feld's star-spangled "Half Time" is also on the bill, along with "The Envelope," a teasing whodunit of a dance choreographed by David Parsons.


A Lineup Change At Warner-Lambert
The Warner-Lambert Company has begun to make expected changes in its agency lineup by dismissing Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York from its consumer brands account, advertising executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity said yesterday.
Y.&amp; R. is losing billings estimated at $60 million to $70 million on products like Certs mints, Dentyne gum and Rolaids antacids, the executives said.
Executives at Warner-Lambert in Morris Plains, N.J., could not be reached for comment; the company was closed because of the weather.
Richard McGowan, a Y.&amp; R. spokesman, declined to comment.


A Long Struggle for a Longer Runway
For nearly six years La Guardia Airport has been seeking permission to add a safety area beyond a notoriously short runway where an accident occurred on Wednesday evening, but the effort has been slowed by bureaucratic reviews and local opposition, officials said yesterday.
The airport, long criticized by pilots for its tight approaches and short runways, began planning to add 460 feet of overrun to its east-west runway in 1988 by filling in part of Flushing Bay.


In Proposal, Vincent Memoir Airs Criticisms
In a proposal for a memoir about his three years as baseball commissioner, Fay Vincent snipes at high-profile owners such as George M. Steinbrenner 3d, Peter O'Malley, Jerry Reinsdorf and Bud Selig, describes Bart Giamatti's unhappiness as National League president before becoming commissioner and says unequivocally that Pete Rose gambled on baseball.
The 40-page proposal is for a book called "And The Horse They Rode In On: My Tumultuous Years as Baseball Commissioner," which would be written with David Kaplan of Newsweek.
The title refers to a favorite phrase of Giamatti's.


Making the Pain Go Away
Nothing is more maddening to a patient suffering from severe pain than the refusal of doctors to prescribe potent painkillers.
The patient knows the suffering is unbearable and cries out for medication, but an insensitive or unknowing medical profession withholds adequate relief.
Even after years of warnings that doctors do a poor job treating pain, far too many physicians still shy away from prescribing narcotics or other strong pain relievers.
Distressed patients can only hope they will change their habits after reading new Federal guidelines, issued this week, for relieving the pain caused by cancer.


The Way Back to the Mideast Table
Yasir Arafat is undoubtedly sincere in telling Washington he wants to get back to the bargaining table with Israel as soon as Palestinian anger over the Hebron massacre subsides.
He wants to complete arrangements for the beginning of Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories.
But he insists that Israel first take steps that go well beyond the framework for self-rule that both sides agreed to last summer.
That reaches too far.
By raising issues that are not ripe for resolution at this time, like uprooting Jewish settlements, disarming all settlers and deploying international peacekeepers, Mr.
Arafat invites new and dangerous delays in the timetable for self-rule.


Ralph Bennett, 93, Physicist and Head Of 2 Research Labs
Dr.
Ralph Decker Bennett, a physicist who retired as research director of the Martin Marietta Corporation in 1966, died in Concord Hospital on Feb. 15 while visiting friends in Concord, N.H.
He was 93 and lived in Silver Spring, Md.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Fire in Jersey City Hotel Forces Evacuation of 60 People


Bitter Goodbye: Russians Leave Germany
As several companies of Russian soldiers bid their farewells to Germany one recent evening, their mood was as cold and bitter as the night air outside the shabby train station here.
"We're leaving because we're under orders to leave, but none of us want to go," an officer in his mid-40's said as he prepared for the 36-hour ride to Moscow.
"I won't have a place to live when I get back home. The Germans killed millions of our people and burned a third of our country, and now they're all rich and we're being kicked out like dogs."


Metall Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Conservative U.S. Judge Offers A Word on Drugs: Decriminalize
A conservative Federal judge whose confirmation to the bench was delayed two years by the opposition of liberals says that after hearing cases in the District Court here since 1990, he is convinced that drugs should be decriminalized and that the nation's antidrug policy is as misguided as Prohibition was.
"I make no bones about my personal view that the best course of action for us to take is exactly the same course of action we took after Prohibition, and that is decriminalization," the judge, Vaughn R. Walker, told The Recorder, a legal affairs newspaper here, in an interview published on Tuesday.


AIDS Work at a Nation of Islam Clinic Is Questioned
Its $213,000 contract may not be the biggest awarded to a business affiliated with the Nation of Islam.
But the money paid to the Abundant Life clinic here to treat AIDS patients may have drawn the most attention.
The clinic, one of 10 around the country run by the Abundant Life Foundation, has a $213,000 Federal contract and treats symptoms associated with AIDS with low-dose alpha interferon, a treatment Government scientists have questioned.


Treasury Prices Drop On More Inflation Fears
Prices of Treasury securities declined yesterday, despite a return to relative stability in world bond markets.
On Wednesday, a plunge in world bond markets set off selling of American Treasury securities.
Weakness in yesterday's session was traced to those bond investors still concerned with inflation ahead of today's scheduled employment report for February.
Also weighing on the market was fear of a potential trade confrontation between the United States and Japan, which some analysts termed overblown.
But other analysts say the threat is just as real for a market where nerves have frayed more each day over the last month.


America's Scholarly Palestinian Raises Volume Against Arafat
When Edward W. Said, the writer, critic and literary scholar, decided to step down from the Palestinian parliament-in-exile three years ago, he did so in silence.
Beset by illness and doubts about Yasir Arafat, whom he had supported for nearly 20 years, Mr.
Said exited so quietly that even those who follow Middle Eastern politics hardly noticed.
But since Mr.
Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, agreed to an accord with Israel that provides for Palestinian self-rule in Gaza and Jericho, Mr.
Said's pen has not been still.


An idealistic promoter takes center stage in an effort to teach Broadway how to promote itself.
ADVERTISING executives who believe they face arduous assignments ought to consider what Susan Lee confronts.
Ms.
Lee is the marketing director of the League of American Theaters and Producers, the trade association for productions appearing on Broadway and touring throughout North America.
Her goal is to make the words "marketing" and "Broadway" go together as harmoniously as Rodgers and Hammerstein.


Canadian Imperial Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


TV Weekend; That's Entertainment, by Way of Jerry Herman
Public television is starting another pledge period and that means at least one glitzy tribute to the Broadway musical.
Carrying the big banner this time is tonight's "Jerry Herman's Broadway at the Bowl," taped last summer at the Hollywood Bowl.
Mr.
Herman, of course, has composed the music and written the lyrics ("When God handed out talent," Carol Channing tells the audience, "Jerry stood in line twice.") for several of Broadway's most successful shows: "Hello Dolly!," "Mame" and "La Cage aux Folles." Even less commercially successful efforts like "Dear World" and "Mack and Mabel" are dotted with memorable moments.


Market Place; Ways for investors to hitch their stars to suppliers for electric cars.
SHOULD investors grab a ride aboard the embryonic electric vehicle industry?
There are already half a dozen publicly traded companies that are developing components, like Valence Technology Inc.'s rechargeable lithium battery, Electrosource Inc.'s lead-acid battery, and Unique Mobility's electric motors, which could be used in emission-free cars.
These tiny, cash-hungry companies are attempting a breakthrough that American auto makers say is impossible: design the components of an electric car that would have the range, speed, refueling convenience and cost of a gasoline-powered rival.


Gary Wood, 52, Giants Quarterback And Cornell Star
Gary Wood, the stocky, scrappy quarterback who set Cornell and Ivy League records before joining the Giants in 1964, died Tuesday night at his home in Dix Hills, L.I.
He was 52.
His family said he died of a heart attack.


Bon-Ton Stores Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Diner's Journal
Private Fun
Prive, you may remember, opened on Dec. 2 after sending cards to 1,000 lucky people entitling them to make reservations.
The rest of us, presumably, were out in the cold.
The owner, Michael Ault, was looking for what he called "fun people" ("people I met on the beach in Southampton, skiing in Gstaad, at a party at my home in Palm Beach").
The ploy must not have worked because, with no credentials in the fun department, I was able to make reservations in a variety of fictitious names.
Three meals later, I wondered why I had bothered.
The room is very pretty, all bare brick walls and flowers and wood-burning fireplaces.
But drafts come whistling through the dining room, leaving you to shiver over dinner.
The wine list is small and unimpressive.
The service is ditsy: one night a waitress described the special of "six Dungeness crabs" (she had confused large crabs with small oysters), and told us the cassoulet was made with haricots verts (it was made with the usual haricots blancs).


Exploration Co.
Shares of the Exploration Company of Louisiana, whose 52-week low was 37.5 cents a share in December, closed yesterday at $1.125 a share, down 6.25 cents.
The company got a boost on Wednesday when an analyst on Dan Dorfman's program on CNBC said that Exploration's shares could rise to as high as $10 if an offshore oil well in China is successful.


Home Video
Two new releases from Home Vision of Chicago amply demonstrate how much videos of the fine arts benefit from inventive approaches.
News of tapes and disks of museum collections, as well as profiles of artists and the museums themselves, ordinarily doesn't reach out and grab the viewer.


Art in Review
Richmond Burton
Matthew Marks Gallery  1018 Madison Avenue (near 78th Street)  Through March 19
Although his new paintings are the best he has made in several years, and reflect a new ease of touch previously beyond his grasp, there's not enough madness in Richmond Burton's method.
A careful academicism still shrouds these loosely systemic works, in which pulsating dabs of a single color provide the finishing touches to an elaborate infrastructure of brushwork, penciled grids and glimpses of raw canvas.
The results are a little like Op Art in slow motion and without the taped edges.


It's All Up to Rangers; That About Covers It
What a pleasure watching the professional professionals back on center ice, whacking each other's knees with a glad, uncomplicated malice, rarely complaining or explaining, never crying over a split lace, never taking a victory lap with a babe in arms.
And when the pro pros go to Disney World, it is because one of their teams is a sideshow there.
And this is the time of the pro pros again; the amiable hard cases of the National Hockey League are in the final six weeks before their pay-offs begin.
Tonight and tomorrow night, the leading National Hockey League team will play an area rival that. . . .


Art in Review
Morris Hirshfield
Sidney Janis Gallery  110 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through March 19
Morris Hirshfield (1872-1946) will always be known as the Brooklyn dress manufacturer and slipper designer who helped to bring down the great Alfred H. Barr Jr. from his post as the founding director of the Museum of Modern Art.
In 1937, Hirshfield retired from the slipper business and took up painting. (He had actually made painted sculptures as a young man in Eastern Europe.) Sidney Janis, the collector (and retired shirt designer) saw the paintings, and as a member of the Modern's advisory board, introduced Hirshfield to Barr.


Chevrolet to Replace 'Heartbeat' Theme
Chevrolet will soon introduce a replacement campaign for "The Heartbeat of America," a theme that has become one of the most familiar in advertising since it began appearing in the fall of 1986.
The new campaign, by Lintas Campbell-Ewald in Warren, Mich., will carry the theme "Genuine Chevrolet."
"Chances are that sometime, somewhere, you've probably had a Chevy in your life," says a print advertisement that appears in the April issue of Premiere magazine.
"For more than 80 years, we've been helping people get to the places and people they want to see most." The text is accompanied by warm, portrait-style photographs of families.


On My Mind; The Mideast Fantasy
Five years ago this month about 50 Arab and Israeli intellectuals and diplomats met near a lake in Switzerland to pretend that their nations and peoples were at peace.
What would they do with that peace?
How could they join to enrich the economy and cultures of the Middle East?
How could they best work together after decades of war and rage?


15th Storm Brings Northeast's Misery to New Depths
In Manhattan, mostly, it was annoying -- again.
In the rest of the Northeast, it was blustery, powdery and treacherous -- again.
It was the 15th major storm of the winter, a classic Northeaster that wheezed and gasped and lost its strength after a rampage up the Atlantic coast, but only after battering seaside communities in New Jersey with gale-force winds.
It made the weather-weary dream -- again -- of places where it was warm, like Los Angeles (87 degrees yesterday) or Athens (66 degrees) or Bogota, Colombia (69 degrees).


Whitman's Plan For 5% Tax Cut Passes in Senate
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman made good on the first installment of her principal campaign promise today as the New Jersey Senate, following the Assembly's lead, readily approved her plan to cut the state income tax by 5 percent retroactive to Jan. 1.
The tax cut will save the average New Jersey taxpayer $82 a year, and most taxpayers will net less than $1 a week.
Nevertheless, the cuts provide a wealth of political capital for Mrs.
Whitman.
She became Governor four months ago largely on her promise to make the largest tax cut in state history -- a 30 percent reduction in income tax rates over three years, or some $1.5 billion in total reductions.


Violence Against Hasidim Shatters Barriers Among Jews
When racial violence engulfed the Lubavitch Hasidic community of Crown Heights in 1991, it was more than a week before New York City's mainstream Jewish establishment rallied to the side of the Lubavitchers with expressions of support.
But on Tuesday, when a group of Lubavitch students were shot by a gunman, there was no such delay.
Within hours, officials of midtown Manhattan Jewish organizations were on the phone and using the fax machine to express shock and sympathy to their counterparts in Crown Heights.
Jewish leaders who might never agree on the definition of a Jew stood side by side at hastily called City Hall briefings, agreeing with one another that the students were shot simply because they could be identified as Jews.


Political Memo; G.O.P. on Health Care: Seeking a Second Opinion
The health care issue should be rich with opportunity for the Republicans these days, with President Clinton's plan sagging in the polls and the Democrats still struggling for consensus in the relevant committees on Capitol Hill.
After all their campaign promises and all their photo opportunities on "health care that's always there," the Democrats are in an embarrassing stall, divided among several health care plans and ideological camps.
They have created a perfect moment for an opposition party to step boldly into the void with an alternative.
But the Republicans have deep and abiding problems of their own.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Tuesday about the sale of The Chicago Sun-Times misstated the timing of The Chicago Tribune's price increase to 50 cents a copy.
The price went up in September 1992, not last spring.


De-Icing at 'Outer Limit' On Jet Involved in Crash
The jet that skidded off a runway at La Guardia Airport on Wednesday, missing a plunge into Flushing Bay by four feet, had been de-iced once and had reached the "outer limit" of that treatment's effectiveness, a Federal aviation official said yesterday.
But the official stopped short of saying that ice was suspected as the cause of the accident.
The official, Susan Coughlin, vice chairwoman of the National Transportation Safety Board, said at a news conference that the plane, a Continental Airlines jet that was carrying 115 passengers and crew members, tried to take off in a blinding snowstorm 34 minutes after the last time an ice-dissolving chemical had been sprayed on the aircraft.
The chemical, she said, "had a 35-minute range."


Private Guards Urged for U.S. Aides in Somalia
The commander of United States forces in Somalia said today that he had recommended that the State Department hire private security to guard American diplomats after American troops leave Somalia this month.
The officer, Gen.
Joseph P. Hoar, head of the United States Central Command, said 50 specially trained marines, who now provide security for the two dozen American officials in the mission in Mogadishu, would stay until civilian security guards arrived.


Complex Picture Is Emerging Of Gunman in Van Shootings
The man accused in the Brooklyn Bridge shooting was arraigned under heavy security early yesterday with the prosecution emphasizing that he was alone in attacking a van of rabbinical students and with no official evidence yet emerging that he might have been part of a larger conspiracy.
The suspect, Rashid Baz, 28, stood without comment, slowly rocking back and forth as he faced attempted murder and weapons charges in Manhattan Criminal Court.
The Brooklyn livery driver, an alien with a Lebanese passport who has resided in New York for the last decade, was held without bail.


Blackmun Tackles Question of Who Shall Die
To the Editor:
Justice Harry A. Blackmun's opinion that the death penalty cannot be constitutionally applied (front page, Feb. 23) provides an eloquent answer to a question frequently faced by opponents of capital punishment.


Kenetech Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Britain Accused of Tinkering on Malaysian Dam
A huge aid project to construct a hydroelectric dam in Malaysia has turned into a source of grief for the British Government, leading to a trade boycott from Kuala Lumpur and a costly political fight over using foreign aid to obtain defense contracts.
The dispute centers upon $346 million in aid -- the largest single project in the current budget -- that was pledged by the Thatcher Government in 1989 to construct a dam across the Pergau River.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
President Clinton signed an executive order restoring "Super 301," the heaviest weapon in America's trade arsenal, in an effort to intensify pressure on Japan to open its markets.
The move angered Japanese officials, who said the Clinton Administration's actions violated the principles of free trade that the United States was trumpeting around the world.  [ Page A1. ]
The U.S. and Japan are moving closer to a deal that might avert sanctions against Tokyo by giving American equipment makers more access to Japan's cellular telephone market.  [ D2. ] Markets
Some big bets on European and Asian markets have gone suddenly and unexpectedly bad, producing losses of billions of dollars for investment firms and banks that are used to losing just a few million dollars on risky investments.  [ D1. ]
Why are investors shunning gold if it is such a good indicator of inflation?
Stock prices dropped again on inflation concerns, yet the gold market was basically flat.
The Dow Jones industrials lost 7.32 points.  [ D6. ]  Treasury bond prices also declined on those same worries, despite a return to stability in world bond markets.  [ D14. ]
The grain markets were shaken by President Clinton's threat to impose trade sanctions against Japan, as prices fell to three-month lows.  [ D13. ]  The escalation in the trade dispute also sent the dollar lower against the Japanese yen.  [ D13. ] Companies
Chrysler is so bullish about its prospects after introducing several highly acclaimed new cars and trucks that it plans to spend $1.8 billion to increase its manufacturing capacity.  [ D1. ]  Automotive sales shot up 19.8 percent last month.  [ D5. ]
Retailers reported surprisingly strong sales gains in February, a month marked by severe weather in several regions.  [ D1. ]
Apple is rolling out an improved Newton computer, in a move comparable to Ford's seeking a second chance for the Edsel.  [ D1. ]
Lawrence A. Kudlow abruptly quit as chief economist of Bear Stearns, and there were hints that he had been forced out.  [ D1. ]
Tyson Foods is making a hostile takeover bid of $30 a share for WLR Foods, a large turkey processor.  [ D4. ]
Internal documents show that United Airlines has begun a two-tier wage and benefit system for some nonunion employees.  [ D4. ]
Intel will introduce two faster versions of its Pentium microprocessor in its drive to accelerate acceptance of its chips.  [ D4. ]
The Proffitt's department store chain is buying the McRae's chain for $337 million in cash, debt and equity.  [ D4. ]
Microsoft and Tele-Communications are planning a joint test of interactive cable television systems.  [ D5. ]
A steelworkers' strike against Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel attracted little notice and ended after 48 hours.  [ A16. ]
A jury awarded three women $27.9 million in damages in a suit against 3M and two other makers of silicone breast implants.  [ A16. ]
G.M.'s lawyers may have known of the destruction of documents related to a fire-prone G.M. pickup truck, a judge said.  [ A20. ]
Con Edison is testing an electric van built by Ford.  [ B4. ] The Economy
Factory orders rose 2.1 percent in January, their sixth consecutive rise, helped by strong demand for aircraft.
But shipments fell, suggesting a leveling off in the manufacturing pace.  [ D14. ] Today's Columns
A large market could be tapped by companies planning to make electric cars, but industry analysts see reasons for investors to remain cautious.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]
Making the words "marketing" and "Broadway" go together as harmoniously as Rodgers and Hammerstein is the tough task of a Broadway marketing director.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D17. ]


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing weapons the police said they found in the possession of a suspect in the shooting on the Brooklyn Bridge transposed photographs of two handguns in some editions.
The Ruger pistol has a silver barrel, part of which is visible at the top; the Glock is all black.


Review/Fashion; In Milan, Women Create a Melting Pot
There is a mythical male fashion designer who appears in the mind of outraged women shoppers, taking the blame for all of fashion's foibles: a Machiavellian figure sticking pins into a squealing fitting model, a helium giggle escaping from him as he imagines a woman in Oklahoma arriving at her neighbor's barbecue in a negligee.
Or a baby-doll dress.
Pity the male designers who absorb the blame for designers of both genders, since women can't imagine that some of the atrocities being proposed today could have been designed by one of their own.


Record Price In a Sale of Art Owned By Streisand
Barbra Streisand's collection of Art Deco and Art Nouveau was auctioned by Christie's yesterday for $5.8 million, well above the $4 million the auction house estimated the sale would bring.
More than a third of the total, $2 million, came from a single painting, Tamara de Lempicka's "Adam and Eve" from 1932, a record for a painting by that Art Deco artist and well above Christie's top estimate of $800,000.
The purchase was made anonymously, and Christie's would not identify the buyer.
"We screamed when the Lempicka price went over $1 million," Ms.
Streisand said by telephone from her Beverly Hills, Calif., home after the sale.
"I was working out with my exercise teacher and when the bidding went over the top I screamed. I paid only $135,000 for it 10 years ago." The previous high for Lempicka was $1.32 million paid at Sotheby's in New York in 1989.
If It Was Offered, It Was Sold
Buoyed by presale publicity, the bidding on the 176 items from Ms.
Streisand's collection was heavy throughout.
All the items sold, most of them for more than the presale estimates.


In Trash Crunch, Giuliani Looks Out of State
With New York City's only remaining landfill filling up, the Giuliani administration has decided to search for out-of-state landfills willing to take about a third of the garbage the city produces each year, city officials said yesterday.
New York has never before exported the garbage collected by its trucks from residences and institutions, although garbage hauled by private carters from businesses often goes to out-of-state landfills and incinerators.


INSIDE
Giuliani Severance Proposal Accepted by Union Leaders
While criticizing Mayor Giuliani's overall budget plan, municipal labor leaders have accepted an integral part of his proposal: severance payments to trim 7,600 jobs.
Page B1.
U.N.
Seeks More Troops
United Nations officials called for more peacekeepers in Bosnia, urging American help.
But Washington indicated its opposition.
Page A3.
G.O.P.
Split on Health Plan
Democratic divisions offer Republicans a golden opportunity.
But Republicans cannot agree on an alternative.
Political Memo, page A24.


Man Held In Slaying In Subway
A purse-snatching suspect was arrested Wednesday and charged with pushing a subway rider into a moving train 11 days ago, the transit police said.
The victim of the attack, Sonia Hernandez, 32, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital from her injuries in the Feb. 19 mugging at the subway station in Park Slope, Brooklyn.


Indian Chief and Waterbury's Mayor Announce Plan for a Casino
The leaders of an embattled Indian tribe and a financially struggling Connecticut city joined today in an imaginative economic development project intended to solve all their problems and realize all their dreams: a gigantic casino that would generate more than a billion dollars a year.
The city, Waterbury, would give the tribe, the Golden Hill Paugussetts, land for a casino, resort hotel, museum, bingo hall and tribal village, relieving the nearly landless tribe of the need for a legal war it is waging in several towns and cities to win back ancestral territory.


Kenyan Breaking Marks at a Record Age
On Saturday, when the USA/Mobil indoor track and field championships are held for the first time in the Georgia Dome, Moses Kiptanui will try to break his world indoor record for 3,000 meters.
Today, in an interview that told much about the race and the man, the gifted 23-year-old Kenyan talked of how and why he hoped to lower his record.
Kiptanui may be the best runner going.
Supposedly, distance runners need years of running 100 miles a week to build strength.
But in February 1992, a month after Kiptanui turned 21, he set the world indoor 3,000-meter record of 7 minutes 37.31 seconds.
Six months later, he lowered the world outdoor record to 7:28.96, and three days later lowered the world record for the 3,000-meter steeplechase to 8:02.08.


Punter Gets $2 Million
CHRIS MOHR is staying with the Buffalo Bills under a $2 million, three-year deal that will make him the highest-paid punter in the National Football League.
The contract, agreed to Wednesday, will pay the kicker about $670,000 a year, including a $700,000 signing bonus.
Mohr earned $350,000 last season.


U.N. Seeks More Troops to Keep the Peace in Bosnia
As gunfire and explosions rocked the short-lived truce in Sarajevo today, United Nations officials said they need more than 10,000 new peacekeeping troops to prevent more violations there and in other parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and urged the United States to begin contributing troops to the peacekeeping force.
The Administration has already rejected the idea.
President Clinton has said he would consider deploying American troops in Bosnia only after all three rival factions sign a peace accord and it is substantially in effect.


Bullish Chrysler Moves To Beef Up Auto Plants
The Chrysler Corporation, bullish about its long-term prospects after introducing several highly acclaimed new car and truck models, said today that it would spend $1.8 billion over three years to increase its manufacturing capacity by 17 percent.
Chrysler's move could be among the first of many in spirited jockeying among the Big Three auto makers to capitalize on rising vehicle sales -- particularly of sport-utility vehicles, pickup trucks and mini-vans -- over the next two to three years.
The Ford Motor Company has been trying to squeeze extra capacity from its assembly lines, especially for its hot-selling utility vehicles and light trucks, and the General Motors Corporation recently announced actions to increase truck capacity.
Thousands of New Jobs
Chrysler said it was undertaking a series of actions, including canceling its plans to shut down one of its two assembly plants near St.
Louis.
Over all, Chrysler will increase its worldwide vehicle-making capacity to 3.5 million units a year from about 3 million currently.
The increase is expected to generate as many as 6,000 jobs in the United States and Canada, the auto maker said.
Some jobs will go to laid-off union members but at least several thousand new workers will be hired.


Blackmun Tackles Question of Who Shall Die; Not 8th Amendment
To the Editor:
Justice Antonin Scalia's response to Justice Harry A. Blackmun's condemnation of the death penalty (news article, Feb. 23) misses a point.


Confessions of a Video Glutton
STOP me before I rent again.
The last several weeks have been especially bad.
Snow and bitter cold have sent New Yorkers rushing to the video stores, desperate to stock up on tapes and wait out the weather with nonstop triple features.
The carcass was picked clean.
One grim evening, my hand hovered over the box of "Stop, or My Mom Will Shoot."


Israeli Curbs on Far-Right Settlers Provoke Only Scorn From Targets
Lenny Goldberg, one of six Jewish settlers here who are targets of Israel's announced get-tough policy against militants, slung his army-issue Uzi over his right shoulder today, the same weapon the Government says is supposed to be taken from him.
How long it will take the Government to do it is a real question.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.24
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.46
3.46
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.67
3.66
2.98
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.33
6.25
5.82
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.83
6.76
6.73
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.63
7.58
7.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.97
5.94
5.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


NBC Not Sharing Olympics in 1996
NBC has decided to go it alone without a cable partner -- either TNT, ESPN or the USA Network -- for the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta and is considering adding 15 to 20 hours of daytime Olympic programming.
The reason, said Dick Ebersol, the president of NBC Sports, was the decision of NBC's owned stations and affiliates to give back to the network commercial time valued at more than $50 million.
Part of NBC's decision may be the enormous success of Winter Olympics broadcasts, which reaped huge benefits for CBS.


When Arnold Schwarzenegger Made a Movie in Times Square
To the Editor:
Last year Times Square faced the question the New York City Transit Authority now confronts: Is a movie, any movie, worth yet another bad image of an already unfairly maligned place?


Belmont and Saratoga Plan Schedules and Changes
Racing in New York was shut down by wintry weather today for the 15th time in two months.
But racing officials, taking the long view, announced a schedule of 41 stakes for the 67-day springtime meeting at Belmont Park plus some changes in the distance of races at the 34-day summertime meeting in Saratoga.
But the most symbolic change may be the 25 percent drop in the purse for the Travers Stakes, the "midsummer Kentucky Derby" that will be run for the 125th time this year, on Aug. 20.


Sports of The Times; Sometimes Assists Go Beyond Court
IN a world that features warning sirens after turnovers on consecutive possessions, it somehow makes sense that the recent four-game Knick losing streak would be considered the beginning of the end of civilization as we know it.
At the very least, the struggle has forced a group of players operating under championship demands to rearrange the Steinberg maps in their heads.
Somewhere to the west, those imposing obstacles in Chicago, Houston, Phoenix and Seattle have recently been replaced, at least temporarily, by the threat of a duplex in Sacramento and a rapidly growing skyscraper across the Hudson.
Sacramento?
East Rutherford?
They don't make vistas like they used to.
But maybe, in their interminable, guess-the-area-code existence, a lull well before the playoff push may be remembered as a showcase for the inspirational genius of the coach with the slicked-back hair.
Pat Riley's search for the winner within produced two recent decisions that could one day go down in Knick history on the level of having Dave Stallworth guard Wilt Chamberlain.
Or maybe not.


President Criticizes Briefings on Inquiry
President Clinton and Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen moved today to disassociate themselves from the conduct of aides who met privately three times in recent months to review the status of a confidential investigation into an Arkansas savings and loan association.
"I think it would have been better if no conversations had taken place," Mr.
Clinton told reporters this morning, hours after news accounts detailed two previously unknown discussions between senior Treasury officials and White House aides about the investigation of the Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan.


Review/Dance; Cinematic Impressions Of Desire's Intensity
There was a time when nothing seemed more French than a movie in which Jean Gabin, with jaded eye, watched Brigitte Bardot raise her dress above her thighs.
L'Esquisse, an admirable French experimental dance troupe directed by Regis Obadia and Joelle Bouvier, has infused the same 1950's film noir atmosphere into "Welcome to Paradise."
Yet this ferocious hourlong dance-theater piece seemed just as inspired by the cult American director Sam Fuller when Ms.
Bouvier and Mr.
Obadia presented the work's New York premiere on Wednesday night at Gould Hall.
True, there was a scene in which Mr.
Obadia repeatedly drew up Ms.
Bouvier's dress (which she pulled down with a demureness foreign to Miss Bardot).
But the accompanying fragments of dialogue on tape were actually drawn from Fuller's movies and the theme song was a recording of Marilyn Monroe singing, "I Want to Be Loved by You."


COMPANY BRIEFS
AETNA LIFE AND CASUALTY CO., Hartford, will close four of its buildings in the city and move 1,500 workers to other sites in the Hartford area.
LESLIE FAY COS.
INC., New York, won bankruptcy court approval for the sale of the assets and trademarks of its Hue Inc. hosiery unit to Kayser-Roth Corp., New York, a hosiery manufacturer.
Kayser-Roth will pay about $4.5 million for the rights to the Hue name and also acquire Hue's existing inventory for more than $2 million.


Hayes Wheels Int'l reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Vatican and Jordan Opening Ties
Less than two months after a recognition agreement between the Roman Catholic Church and Israel, the Vatican today announced the establishment of diplomatic ties with Jordan.
The accord reflects the church's abiding interest in the status of Jerusalem as a holy city.
East Jerusalem was seized by Israel from Jordan after the 1967 Middle East war.
King Hussein of Jordan lays claim to a protectorate, disputed by other some Arab countries, over Al Aksa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem.


U.S. Ready to Help Ukraine and Georgia, if They Help Themselves
With Ukraine having tentatively agreed to destroy its nuclear weapons, Administration officials said today that President Clinton would double aid to Ukraine, to about $700 million a year.
The announcement is to be made when Mr.
Clinton meets here Friday with Ukraine's President, Leonid M. Kravchuk.
Administration officials said they were seeking to reward Mr.
Kravchuk for agreeing to eliminate Ukraine's nuclear arms and encourage him to press for economic reforms.


PRESIDENT REVIVES TOUGH TRADE STEP TO PRESSURE JAPAN
President Clinton signed an executive order today that gives him authority to impose strong trade sanctions quickly against Japan if it fails to open its markets.
The move angered Japanese officials, who said the Administration's actions violated the principles of free trade that the United States was trumpeting around the world.


Father Requests Return to Israel For Boy in Religious Tug-of-War
The tangled struggle over a 15-year-old yeshiva student, Shai Fhima, grew more complex today when his father filed a petition asking that the youth be ordered to return to Israel with him.
The father, Michael Reuven, stepped into the case as a Family Court judge in Rockland County started a hearing on the youth's request that an Orthodox rabbi, Aryeh Zaks, be appointed his guardian and that he be allowed to continue living with Rabbi Zaks and his family in Rockland County.


Islamic Figure's Speech Plunges Howard University Into Debate on Racism
A week after a series of speakers railed against Jews at a rally at Howard University, the prestigious black institution has been plunged into the debate over black anti-Semitism.
On Wednesday the president of Howard, Dr.
Franklyn G. Jenifer, condemned "all forms of ethnic bias, including anti-Semitism." But school officials said today that they did not plan to punish a student who led anti-Semitic chants at the rally and that they had no plans to bar appearances by members of groups like the Nation of Islam.


Corrections
A brief report about best-seller lists in the Book Notes column on Wednesday misstated the number of categories in the lists published by The New York Times and their headings.
There are six categories, three each in hard cover and in paperback.
They are fiction; nonfiction; and advice, how-to and miscellaneous.
The report also misstated the day on which faxes of the Times's lists become available; it is Thursday of the week in which they are compiled, not Wednesday.


METRO DIGEST
BROOKLYN BRIDGE SHOOTING: COMPLEX PICTURE OF SUSPECT EMERGES
The man accused in the Brooklyn Bridge shooting was arraigned under heavy security with the prosecution emphasizing he was alone in attacking a van of rabbinical students, and with no official evidence of a larger conspiracy.
A1.
TO SOME, AN UNREMARKABLE MAN
Acquaintances describe Rashid Baz as a man of mixed religious background, with no strong or sophisticated political beliefs.
B2.
Jews said they have been brought together by a shared sense of vulnerability and anger.
B2.


Abroad at Home; A Lesson Too Late
Opponents of firm Western action to stop Serbian aggression and genocide have argued that we would only make things worse by intervening.
And besides, they said, we have no security interest in a far-off conflict in the Balkans.
On those grounds we sat by while Serbian gunners fired more than one million shells into the Croatian city of Vukovar in 1991, flattening it.
We sat by while the Serbs forced two million people from Bosnia because of their religion, and seized 70 percent of the country.


Getting Ready for Opening Night


3 Are Awarded $27.9 Million In Implant Trial
A Houston jury has awarded three women a total of $27.9 million in damages in a lawsuit charging the 3M Corporation and two smaller companies with making silicone breast implants that leaked, causing severe illnesses.
The women, Darla Lawson, Judy McMurry and Susan Doss, asserted that the leaking silicone caused various nervous system and immune system disorders before they were removed in 1992.
The defendants said the scientific evidence did not support such a verdict.


Reviews/Film; Emotional Adventures Of a Spunky Heroine
The title character in "Angie" is supposed to be a tough, wisecracking, not-too-worldly office worker from Bensonhurst, Brooklyn.
She may be spirited and feisty, but her basic attributes hardly bring Geena Davis to mind.
In light of that, Ms.
Davis's presence doesn't guarantee "Angie" much verisimilitude, but rarely has authenticity counted for less.
Ms.
Davis, whose performance is exhilaratingly funny and touching, compensates for her lack of grit by sending this film's goddess quotient over the moon.
Ms.
Davis's star turn anchors a film that, as directed ebulliently but unevenly by Martha Coolidge, might otherwise be dangerously adrift.
As the story of an unmarried woman whose pregnancy forces her to reassess her life, "Angie" is oddly torn between contemporary feminism and the comforting tenets of an old-fashioned women's picture.
Angie's search for meaning and independence finally leads her to a surprisingly traditional destination, but she has her share of eye-opening experiences along the way.
Luckily "Angie," for all its "Moonstruck"-type and nagging inconsistencies, succeeds in making those experiences matter.


Art in Review
Lyubov Popova
Leonard Hutton Galleries  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through March 31
This exhibition of illustrations done by Lyubov Popova in 1920 for a collection of fairy tales shows this Russian avant-garde artist working in a distinctly minor mode.
But it also documents a special moment in her career.
It was in this year that she designed her first sets and costumes for the theater, and her gouache-ink-and-pencil sketchs for "Tales of Wonder" conjure up a mythic world that might easily be set to a Rimsky-Korsakov score.


Healthy Gains in Retail Sales Despite February's Big Chill
Neither rain, sleet, snow nor credit cards charged to the limit thwarted shoppers, who turned out in force to make February the best retail sales month since the robust Christmas spending spree in 1992.
From Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company to the Gap, retailers around the country yesterday reported surprisingly strong sales gains last month, a month marked by severe weather in several regions.
Consumers continued their love affair with hard goods like appliances, consumer electronics and furnishings, which have sold briskly for more than a year.


Ex-N.H.L. Union Leader Is Facing Federal Charges
Alan Eagleson, whose overlapping roles as an agent, union leader and tournament organizer made him one of hockey's most powerful individuals for more than two decades, has been charged with 32 counts of racketeering, fraud and embezzlement, the United States Attorney and the Federal Bureau of Investigation announced today.
Eagleson -- who rose to prominence as Bobby Orr's agent and then founded the National Hockey League Players Association, the union that he led from 1967 until he left under pressure in 1991 -- was charged with defrauding his union's members in an indictment that was unsealed this afternoon by the United States Attorney for the District of Massachusetts, Donald K. Stern.


Nassau Legislature Plan Seeks 2 Minority Districts
Nassau County's new legislature would be drawn from 19 legislative districts, two dominated by minority voters, under a plan devised by demographic consultants for the county's charter revision commission.
While the exact lines for each district remain to be determined, the demographers have said that 19 districts would provide sufficient opportunity for the election of minority legislators as required by the Federal Voting Rights Act and the one-person, one-vote provision of the Constitution.


The Organization Man: Showalter Lives Details
Practice had been over for more than four hours.
It was dark.
The Yankees' spring training complex was empty, or so Buck Showalter thought.
His work finally done, the Yankee manager decided to shower.
As he lathered away, Showalter found himself thinking of lineups and practice schedules and pennant chances.
Suddenly, his shower curtain shuddered, accompanied by a loud noise.


Art in Review
Lester Johnson
Edward Thorp  103 Prince Street  SoHo  Through April 2
The deft, vaporous recent watercolor views of southern France in Lester Johnson's show are evidence of a long career still very much under sail.  (Mr. Johnson is 75 years old.) But the real attraction here lies in the dozen oil paintings done in the 1960's, when the artist occupied a studio loft overlooking the Bowery on the Lower East Side.


Mickelson Breaks Leg Skiing
Phil Mickelson, the brightest young star on the PGA Tour, suffered a broken leg in a skiing accident in Flagstaff, Ariz., today.
Mickelson, 23 years old, fell while skiing at the Arizona Snowball ski area and broke his upper leg.
"Phil was involved in a one-man accident," said J. R. Murray, the general manager of Arizona Snowball.
"He fell and slid into a tree."


Berkley (W.R.) Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CML Group reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Jordan: Two Strikeouts and One Error
If Michael Jordan was His Airness in the National Basketball Association, he proved to be His Errorness in the first game of his baseball career.
Jordan, the world's most famous and most chronicled baseball rookie, played in a six-inning intrasquad game with and against his fellow Chicago White Sox today at Ed Smith Stadium.
It was not a memorable or pretty performance, to be sure, as Jordan went hitless in three times at bat, striking out twice.
He also made a costly error on one of the only two balls hit to him in a treacherous, wind-swept right field.
The error allowed the decisive run to score as Jordan's "home" team lost to the visitors, 12-7.


Intel Will Accelerate Drive For Acceptance of New Chip
The Intel Corporation will accelerate its drive to make the personal computer market rapidly accept its new generation of chips with the introduction on Monday of two faster versions of its Pentium microprocessor.
For Intel, the world's largest semiconductor maker, the strategy of pushing the market quickly toward Pentium chips serves to fend off growing competition on two fronts.
Intel is under increasing pressure from makers of PC clones, like Advanced Micro Devices and Cyrix, whose chips mimic the performance of Intel's 486 microprocessors, and a new chip architecture, the Power PC, developed by I.B.M., Motorola and Apple Computer.
Later this month, Apple will begin selling the personal computers equipped with the Power PC chip.


Notice the Steel Strike? 48 Hours Sum Up a Slide
A steelworkers' strike used to be feared as a catastrophic event, with the President sometimes preparing the nation for an economic jolt.
But on Tuesday, steelworkers staged a strike against a major manufacturer here in the Rust Belt, and hardly anyone outside this region noticed.
By this morning, the strike was over and workers were returning to the mills.
The 48-hour job action, which mainly concerned health care and pension benefits, began after talks broke down between the United Steelworkers of America and the Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corporation.
The company, one of the nation's 10 largest steel manufacturers, is notable for almost making a profit last year, just three years after it emerged from bankruptcy.


Review/Fashion; Armani Adds Tunics to His Galaxy
What makes Giorgio Armani so special?
Every designer here has access to fine materials and great workmanship.
But for 20 years, Armani has been a star, attracting women who care about clothes and want to be comfortable in them.
He changes his styles modestly, not making a point of obsolescence.
This is a watershed season for him.
To the jackets and pants for which he is best known (he is, after all, a tailor) he has added the tunic.
It slopes gently over the body, flaring a bit at the bottom.
Shorter versions serve as overblouses under his suit jackets.


Review/Theater: Damn Yankees; A Faustian Fable From the Era Of Eisenhower
LATE in the second act of "Damn Yankees," the Devil, otherwise known as Applegate, and Lola, his chief henchwoman in damnation, are picking their way across the stage, blanketed in fog.
Where are we? she asks.
Pointing a flashlight at the audience and peering out into the darkness, he says, "Look, this is limbo."
How right he is. Musical-comedy limbo.


As Farrakhan Groups Land Jobs From Government, Debate Grows
The four security guards sit serenely behind the plexiglass barrier in the barren lobby of the Flaghouse Courts housing project.
They tell visitors to pass through a metal detector, show identification and name the residents they want to visit.
Occasionally, one of the four -- all young blacks whose contract says they earn $11 an hour -- picks up a walkie talkie, zips up his blue jacket and leaves the booth to patrol the building's hallways and staircases.
For the most part, the guards look and act like any other guards keeping watch over a public housing project.
Only a patch on the left sleeve -- a white crescent and star and "N.O.I. Security" stitched on a red background -- indicates they represent something different.
For Some, a Ray of Hope
To many residents at Flaghouse Courts, near downtown Baltimore, the presence of the guards from a company affiliated with the Nation of Islam provides a ray of hope for halting the drug dealing and violence that infest the project.


On Stage, and Off
Defending Henry Higgins
"I think of Henry Higgins as a New Yorker, but with an English accent," said Michael Moriarty, who is to succeed Richard Chamberlain on Broadway as the famous phonetics professor in "My Fair Lady." "He's an outrageously outspoken Democrat, with an impeccable delivery."
That last part might describe the actor himself.
Mr.
Moriarty, who has been noisily negotiating his departure from the NBC television series "Law and Order" and wrangling, just as noisily, with Janet Reno, the Attorney General, over violence on television, isn't shy about his opinions, nor is he lacking in self-esteem.
It has been 20 years since his Tony-winning Broadway debut in "Find Your Way Home" (he was last on Broadway in 1983 as Queeg in "The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial"), but he had no trouble recalling his competition.


Russia Shows Life Signs Beyond Moscow
To the Editor:
In "Russia's Vicious Circle" (Op-Ed, Feb. 28), Yuri N. Afanasyev, a Russian historian, offers a cynical, Moscow-centric and totalitarian image of Russian politics, which fails to recognize positive regional developments that bode well for the development of Russian democratic institutions and for continuation of market reforms, precisely because they make Moscow less relevant to the political process.


Reviews/Film; The Detective as Accessory
"China Moon" is such a shameless rip-off it should have been called something more honest, like "Body Heat: The Return," or "The New Adventures of Body Heat," or "Body Heat With a Couple of Different People." This film is a lot less effective than the genuine "Body Heat," the steamy 1981 thriller in which Kathleen Turner found in William Hurt just what she was looking for: a guy dumb enough to help her kill her rich husband.
But even second-generation copies have their modest charms, and "China Moon" is absorbing and twisty enough to keep an audience watching.
This time Madeleine Stowe plays the most beautiful bored wife in Florida, Rachel Munro, and Charles Dance is her handsome but abusive husband, Rupert.
Mr.
Dance's Southern accent comes and goes, but he always seems elegantly at home in their large, white-columned house.


Canadian TV Gets Olympics Right
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 20 editorial criticizing CBS coverage of the Winter Olympics is on target.
But in fairness, fluff coverage of a major international sporting event was evident in past Olympic telecasts by other networks.


For Children
Woodbury Ski Area
Route 47  Woodbury, Conn.  (203) 263-2203; (203) 263-2213  Recommended ages: 4 and up
The drive from New York City to Woodbury in Litchfield County lands you in the heart of a New England town with a definite aura.
The road to the resort is lined with well-kept 18th- and 19th-century houses along with Connecticut's oldest inn, Heritage Inn, in Southbury; one expects to overtake Paul Revere cantering by.
Coupled with an overnight layer of snow on old drifts, the scene is as picturesque and unreal -- especially to Manhattanites -- as one from a travel magazine.


6% of Women Report Beatings While Pregnant
At least 6 percent of pregnant women are battered by their spouses or partners, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said in a study released today.
The estimate is the first based on a sampling of a large number of women.
About 13,000 women who are representative of the populations in four states were asked just after they gave birth whether their husbands or partners had physically hurt them during the preceding 12 months.


Corrections
An article and headline on Feb. 23 about allegations of a kickback scheme in the space program referred imprecisely in some copies to the criminal charges filed.
Charges were filed against only one NASA contractor; the Martin Marietta and General Electric corporations were not charged.


Mexico's Fine Line
As peasant rebels roamed the highlands outside this city in early January, bombs exploded in the capital and investors began to sell off their Mexican stocks, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari shelved plans for a crackdown on rebel supporters, dismissed his hard-line Interior Minister and declared a unilateral cease-fire.
What did not work, Mr. Salinas said, had to be changed.


Getting to Top of Empire State: Opening the Way for Disabled
The disabled will finally be able to visit the site of King Kong's final stand.
Under an agreement announced yesterday by the Justice Department, the Empire State Building will remove all barriers barring disabled visitors from tourist attractions atop the building, allowing them for the first time to ascend into the clouds of the midtown Manhattan landmark.


Motive Described in Abortion Doctor's Death
The prosecution's final witness in the trial of a man charged with murder in an abortion doctor's death told the jury today that she had overheard the defendant admit killing the doctor "to save a baby."
The witness, Brenda Fuqua, a jail guard, testified that on March 11, 1993, the day after Dr.
David Gunn was shot outside an abortion clinic, she escorted the defendant, Michael F. Griffin, to a visiting room to meet his wife, Patricia, and two children.


Surpassing Predictions, Vehicle Sales Jump 19.8%
Automotive sales shot up 19.8 percent last month, compared with February of last year, exceeding even the optimistic expectations of industry executives, forecasters, retailers and Wall Street analysts.
Sales of light trucks were particularly strong as the Big Three auto makers capitalized on their advantages over Japanese competitors in mini-vans, pickups and sport-utility vehicles.
But the strong sales, combined with recent price increases by the auto makers, could provoke further moves by the Federal Reserve to ward off inflation.


Toyota May Set U.S. Goals
The chairman of the Toyota Motor Corporation suggested today that his company would be willing to set voluntary goals for increasing its purchases of American-made automotive parts.
The statement by Shoichiro Toyoda, made at a news conference in Nagoya, is the clearest indication to date that at least some of Japan's auto companies are planning to announce purchase plans for foreign components as part of a market-opening package that Japan is now preparing in response to complaints by the United States.


Moe Climbs Another Mountain and Finds a Shoebox Filled With Cookies
For Tommy Moe, being here for a World Cup ski race means being back home in America among adoring fans and a shoebox filled with the freshly baked cookies that his grandmother sent from Whitefish, Mont.
"It's kind of a culture shock to be back in the West," said Moe, the Olympic medalist from Girdwood, Alaska.
"It's just great being back in the U.S., and having everybody speaking English. It's all starting to sink in." Flush With Success
Moe is here flush with a gold medal in the downhill at Lillehammer, Norway, and a silver in the super-giant slalom.
He is exuberant, but not cocky; self-assured, but not boastful.


CHRONICLE
It will be the little engine that could -- with the help of LUCIANO PAVAROTTI.
An engine that will take trains through the Channel Tunnel, the 31-mile link between Folkestone, England, and Calais, France, was named for the renowned tenor yesterday.
And he was on hand to christen the first of the locomotives at the naming ceremony in Folkestone.
All 38 of the engines will ultimately be named for opera singers, but a spokeswoman for the locomotive maker, Le Shuttle, said that she couldn't divulge the other names.
The spokeswoman, Vicky Shorthose, said of the unlikely link between opera and the engines, "We wanted to link them with people of international status, with prestige."


U.S.-Japan Cellular Pact Held Near
The United States and Japan are moving closer to an agreement that would avert pending sanctions against Japan by vastly accelerating access to Japan's cellular telephone market for American equipment.
The talks, in which a powerful Japanese politician is playing a behind-the-scenes role, could still veer off course.
But people involved said an agreement could be reached as early as this weekend.


Kudlow Out at Bear, Stearns; Outspoken Chief Economist
Lawrence A. Kudlow, the outspoken chief economist of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, abruptly resigned yesterday.
Mr.
Kudlow was a partner at the investment banking and securities firm and chairman of its investment policy committee.
But he is as well known for other roles -- as economic adviser to Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, pitchman for a New York regional organization of Cadillac dealers and supply-side tax cutter in the Reagan budget office -- as for his economic forecasts.


Corrections
A chart with an article about European stock markets in Business Day yesterday transposed the closing figures for two indexes in some copies.
The FTSE-100 index of British stocks closed Wednesday at 3,248.1; the DAX-30 index of German stocks closed at 2,020.33.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Robinson Keeps Purdue in Big Ten Race  Glenn Robinson, Division I's leading scorer, had 31 points last night night and No. 9 Purdue defeated No. 18 Minnesota, 86-70, in West Lafayette, Ind., keeping alive its chances of winning the Big Ten championship.
Purdue (24-4 over all, 12-4 Big Ten) moved within one-half game of first-place Michigan (12-3) by beating Minnesota (19-10, 9-7) for the 12th consecutive time in Mackey Arena. (AP) Kansas 97, Iowa St. 79: Richard Scott had a career-high 24 points in his final home game as No. 12 Kansas routed Iowa State in Lawrence, Kan. (AP)


Gallego Determined To End Up At Short
At 5 feet 8 inches and 175 pounds, Mike Gallego has always seen the bright side of looking like a Little Leaguer in a big-league uniform.
After all, the Yankee infielder said, "most taller infielders have to work on getting down on the ball. I'm already there."
As a hitter, Gallego has the discipline to force pitchers to throw the ball into a small strike zone.


Critic's Notebook; A Recognition in Contrast to the Grammy Glow
Swarms of men in tuxedos and women in party dresses invaded midtown Manhattan this week, drawn by the Grammy Awards on Tuesday and assorted peripheral events.
Piggybacked onto the Grammy extravaganza, which brought a quorum of performers and recording-company honchos to New York City, was another ceremony on Wednesday night: the fifth annual Pioneer Awards, presented by the Rhythm-and-Blues Foundation.
This ceremony, at Roseland, gave plaques and checks for $20,000 (for groups) or $15,000 (for individuals) to 12 rhythm-and-blues acts.
Some were as famous as Ben E. King; others were lesser known, like Earl Palmer, the New Orleans drummer who has played more than 11,000 recording sessions, and Mable John, who wrote "Your Good Thing (Is About to End)" and led Ray Charles's Raelettes for six years.
Other award winners included Otis Blackwell, Jerry Butler, Clarence Carter, the Coasters, Don Covay, Bill Doggett, Johnny Otis and Irma Thomas.
Performers sang, played and reminisced; the three surviving Shirelles harmonized together for the first time in 19 years, then burst into tears.


G.O.P. Senators Fail To Reach Consensus On Health Measure
Senate Republicans finished a two-day retreat here today on health care legislation with pledges to keep meeting, keep searching for a consensus and, once they find one, to work with the Democrats to pass a bipartisan bill.
But there was no sign of a major breakthrough.
The divisions in the party, participants said, remained the same: whether they should seek to guarantee universal coverage and how to achieve it if they do, what role government should play and how much restructuring was needed.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The U.S. unemployment rate dipped an unexpected two-tenths of a percentage point, to 6.5 percent, in February.
Unusually severe winter weather and statistical quirks again muddied the results, which also included the greatest shrinkage in the workweek in 10 years, a second consecutive drop of 20,000 jobs in the construction industry and a reduction of 10 percent in the ranks of the partly unemployed.  [ Page 39. ]  Bad weather pushed up the unemployment rates for both New York and New Jersey, while the jobless rate fell for New York City.  [ 47. ]


P.L.O. Aide Confers on Resuming Peace Talks
A P.L.O. envoy met here today with Secretary of State Warren Christopher to discuss conditions for resuming peace talks with Israel and said afterward that Washington largely agreed with the P.L.O. demand for "an international presence" to guarantee the safety of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza.
Nabil Shaath, the envoy sent by Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O.'s chairman, said the Administration had largely agreed that the United Nations Security Council should endorse such an international force.
He also said the P.L.O. wanted to reopen peace talks but could not do so until the security issue was resolved.


Chavez Gets 7 Days
The jockey JORGE CHAVEZ was suspended for seven days by stewards at Aqueduct yesterday for careless riding aboard Ocean Course in the second race on Tuesday.
Ocean Course was disqualified from second place and placed sixth in the field of seven.
The suspension begins Sunday. (AP)


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the merger of Proffitt's Inc. and McRae's Inc. omitted the full name and title of the person who discussed the strengths of the two retailing companies and misspelled his last name.
He is Jeff Branman, a managing director of Financo Inc., which advised McRae's.


Streisand Auction Exceeds Estimates
The two-day auction of Barbra Streisand's collection of Art Deco and Art Nouveau furniture, objects and art at Christie's in New York ended yesterday with total sales of $6.2 million, well in excess of Christie's expectations of $4.5 million.


Airlines Rediscover Short Trips
Air fare wars come and go these days as predictably as a flight delay out of Chicago on a Friday evening.
And with such a steady stream of cut-rate deals -- two rounds of cuts were announced this week alone -- many travelers refuse to buy anything but a sharply discounted ticket.
But for short flights between dozens of cities in the Eastern United States, some large airlines like Continental and USAir have in recent weeks responded to growing competitive pressures by offering lower fares that the carriers say are permanent.
And while few things remain the same for long in the volatile airline industry, there are many indications that these changes will be a lasting boon to millions of travelers.


Review/Jazz; Clarinetist Beyond Bounds
The clarinetist Don Byron is a cantankerous musician.
His improvisational lines end up in odd, dissonant places.
Rhythmically he's jerky, at times even clumsy.
And although he can play in tune, he doesn't always; his improvisations give a sense of randomness, as if he weren't completely in charge of what came out of his horn.
Mr.
Byron isn't after grace; he's after wild energy.
On Tuesday night at the Village Vanguard (178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village), where he is appearing through Sunday, Mr.
Byron played a few original pieces -- among them "The Press Made Rodney King Responsible for the Los Angeles Riots" and "Shelby Steele Would Be Mowing Your Lawn" -- that were difficult, forcing the band's improvisers to wind their way through a chord-strewn harmonic path.
Mr.
Byron made his way easily; he knew the material.
But as if he wanted to resist easy pleasure, he then unleashed his band (which at times sounded like a fusion group), drowning out the sumptuousness of his instrument.


'Manhood Training' at the Mosque: Hope, Discipline, Defiance
More than two dozen black men, many dressed in work boots and baggy slacks and a few in business suits with briefcases at their sides, recently climbed the steep concrete stairs to Muhammad's Mosque No. 7 in Harlem in search of two things the Nation of Islam promised they could find inside: brotherhood and proper direction.
The men dutifully trudged through a fresh coat of snow to the unadorned blond-brick building that houses the mosque as well as a supermarket, a combination barber shop and beauty salon, a boxing gym and a black theater company, all stacked in three stories near the northeast corner of 125th Street and Fifth Avenue.


A Vulnerable Lautenberg? He'll Do What It Takes to Win
A dozen years as New Jersey's junior United States Senator has brought Frank R. Lautenberg three things: unrivaled Washington influence on anything related to transportation, a reputation as a gritty and well-heeled campaigner, and an unshakable image as a man whose forced retirement from politics is just an election away.
As Mr.
Lautenberg, a two-term Democrat, readies for another fight, Republicans feel that this will be the year, and that the Speaker of the State Assembly, Chuck Haytaian, will be the one to defeat him.


Southwest Gas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New U.S. Pressure on Trade Doesn't Seem to Spur Japan
With the Clinton Administration turning up the heat against Japan, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa conceded today that he had not yet begun to enact the sweeping economic reforms his country needs but vowed "to insure that the Japanese market is open to the rest of the world."
Nonetheless, there was little evidence that President Clinton's strategy -- to threaten action by the United States against a broad range of Japanese products unless progress is made -- was spurring Mr.
Hosokawa's Government to make concessions or even generate new ideas about how to close the $59.3 billion trade gap.


Proffitt's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARTHUR J. GALLAGHER &amp; CO., Itasca, Ill., has acquired two insurance brokerage companies: Donald P. Pipino &amp; AssociatesInc., Youngstown, Ohio, and Steel Agency, Wayne, N.J.
Terms of the transactions were not disclosed.
JETFORM INC., Waltham, Mass., agreed to acquire closely held DVS Communications Inc., Ottawa, for an undisclosed amount of cash.


Attention Ed Rollins
Ed Rollins lit up the sky last fall when he boasted of having lavished Republican cash on black churches in New Jersey during the campaign for governor.
Mr.
Rollins managed Christine Todd Whitman's campaign, and she won -- barely.
But he cast a pall over her victory by asserting later that the campaign had laid out a half-million dollars in "street money" to discourage get-out-the-vote efforts by black clergy and Democratic workers.
Mr.
Rollins later swore he had lied, and after investigators were satisfied that he had, the issue faded.
Meanwhile, Democrats professed shock that anyone, except maybe Republicans, would spend such an obscene sum on such crude tactics.


Hollywood Casino (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Don't Forget the Disabled in Giving Grand Central New Exits; And Half-Fare Cards?
To the Editor:
A Feb. 20 news article calls the introduction of automatic farecards on the New York City subway system a success, and it foresees increased passenger convenience and use, as more stations are made able to accept farecards.


Titan Wheel Int'l(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hebron Massacre Further Wounds Arafat's Image
A week after the massacre of Palestinian worshipers by an Israeli gunman, Yasir Arafat, plagued by mounting defections from his dispirited P.L.O. and widespread disillusionment over his efforts to promote peace, has become one of most reviled figures in the occupied territories.
Since the accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization was signed last September, numerous P.L.O. leaders have quit, disgruntled with what they see as unconscionable concessions to Israel and high-handed manipulations by Mr.
Arafat.


Marijuana Ban Owes Everything to Politics
To the Editor:
In "Why Marijuana Should Remain Illegal" (letter, Feb. 26), Stephen H. Greene, acting administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration, seems to believe that marijuana smokers only desire stronger strains of marijuana, in a quest for ever higher highs.
Even cursory examination of alcohol consumption will show that in a free market there is a demand for both strong and mild intoxicants (a good beer is far more than watered-down Scotch).


China Detains And Then Frees A Top Dissident
After re-arresting and detaining the country's most prominent dissident, Wei Jingsheng, for one day, China's public security authorities released him today, just a week before a visit by Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
There was no immediate word from Mr.
Wei about the reason or circumstances of his detention, but it seems possible today that this arrest and the detention of a half-dozen other dissidents was part of a crackdown in advance of the visit by Mr.
Christopher, whose mission is to press Beijing on its human rights record.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Missing Pieces; Convictions in World Trade Center Trial Solve Only Part of a Big, Intricate Puzzle
For nearly five months the evidence poured in, filling nearly 10,000 pages of trial transcript.
But despite its great length and the huge numbers of witnesses (207) and exhibits (1,003), the World Trade Center trial left unanswered some of the most compelling questions about one of the worst terrorist attacks in American history.
Who was behind the plot?
Who gave the orders?
Where did the money come from to finance it?
Were the men now convicted operating on their own or were they mere foot soldiers in a larger, albeit invisible, terrorist army?


Little Glamour, Lots to Do on This Space Trip
The space shuttle Columbia and five astronauts roared into space today on a two-week mission to grow crystals, melt metals, test magnets, solidify molten salts, measure space radiation, collect urine and see if a new drug can slow some of the debilitating effects of weightlessness.
The flight will have no dramatic highlights -- no spacewalks, no satellite captures or repairs.
And unlike the last mission, this one has no Russian guest on board.
Rather, the 61st mission of the shuttle program is an exercise in hard science featuring five Americans and a dozen rats.


'Home Rule' Factor May Block S.I. Secession
A major and perhaps insurmountable obstacle to Staten Island secession arose yesterday as officials of the New York State Assembly's Democratic majority said the State Legislature could not act on a bill to make the borough an independent city unless New York City itself requested the action.
After reviewing the bill introduced this week, the officials said that in their view the State Constitution required a "home rule message" from New York City -- a formal request to the Legislature to consider a measure that would dismember the city a century after its five boroughs were consolidated.


An Old-Fashioned Shootout Ends Without One
Last night's 3-3 tie between the Rangers and the Islanders at Madison Square Garden prompted an obvious question about a hot debate: Should the National Hockey League adopt a shootout to settle tie games in the regular season?
"Yeah!" said Pierre Turgeon, whose Islanders rallied from a 3-0 deficit in the first period.
"Especially now, for us. We need points in the standings to try to make the playoffs."


Hillary Clinton Seeks Balance In News Coverage of Violence
Hillary Rodham Clinton said today that excessive news coverage of violence might be just as damaging to children as violence on television programs and in movies, and she urged journalists to strike a better balance.
"I am not suggesting that all news coverage of violence is bad or wrong," Mrs.
Clinton said as she spoke via satellite from the White House to an audience of about 80 television and newspaper journalists here.
"I think there must be balance. Good caution and prudence do not violate First Amendment rights."


Bridge
New scientific evidence suggests that a slow bidder is less likely to make a well-judged call.
This is plausible in a bridge context, though hard to prove.
What is certain is that the slow bidder, or player, often gives information to his opponents, as witness the diagramed deal from the Macallan International Tournament in London in January.
East and West were Ron Rubin and Michael Becker, one of four American pairs taking part.
North and South were Irving Gordon and Barnet Shenkin, who landed in a 3-4 heart fit and were the only pair to play four hearts.
The last bid came slowly, so Becker inferred correctly that South held only three hearts.


Knicks Get Time to Regroup
A rare weekend off will give the Knicks time to rest and regroup.
The Knicks (38-19) do not play again until Monday, when they visit the Detroit Pistons at the Palace in Auburn Hills, Mich.
Thursday's 97-86 victory over the Nets was the Knicks' second consecutive victory.
They are 2-0 since Pat Riley changed three-fifths of the starting lineup, replacing Greg Anthony, John Starks and Charles Smith with Derek Harper, Hubert Davis and Anthony Bonner.
Those changes have given the Knicks more bench scoring, enabling them to avoid the offensive lulls that plagued them during their recent 4-8 slump.
New York's bench outscored the Nets' bench, 46-19, led by Anthony, who was superb with 18 points and 8 assists.
Starks added 17 points.


4 ARE CONVICTED IN BOMBING AT THE WORLD TRADE CENTER THAT KILLED 6, STUNNED U.S.
A Federal jury yesterday convicted all four of the men on trial in the bomb attack that killed six people at the World Trade Center last year, causing hundreds of millions of dollars of damage and sending a jolt of fear through a nation abruptly aware of its vulnerability to terrorism.
The jury forewoman, speaking in a clear, firm tone, pronounced the word "guilty" 38 times as the clerk of the court asked her the verdict on each of the charges against the four men.


Harding Reports Assault
A day after Tonya Harding was slightly injured in what she told police was a late-night assault as she headed to her apartment in Oregon, the United States Figure Skating Association rejected yesterday an appeal by the skater's lawyers to postpone a disciplinary hearing regarding an assault on Harding's Olympic teammate, Nancy Kerrigan, two months ago.
The hearing, scheduled to begin next Thursday in Colorado Springs, could result in Harding's removal from the skating association and her banishment from the United States team for the world championships later this month in Japan.


Poll Says Most Blacks Don't See Farrakhan's Ideas as Theirs
Black Americans reject the notion that Louis Farrakhan and the Nation of Islam represent the views of most blacks in the country, yet many seem to share at least some of the racial views associated with the group, according to the latest New York Times Poll.
At the same time, a preponderance of blacks say more leaders, both black and white, should publicly criticize racist statements when made by either blacks or whites.


Hofstra Triumph Keeps Van Breda Kolff Coaching
The senior Pat Cosgrove scored 20 points to lead a balanced Hofstra attack as the Flying Dutchmen defeated Chicago State, 86-77, today in the first round of the East Coast Conference tournament at the University of Buffalo.
Butch van Breda Kolff, 71, returned to the bench after being hospitalized two weeks ago for an irregular heartbeat.
"I'm not worried about one more game," said van Breda Kolff, the oldest active Division I coach, who will step down at season's end.
"Whatever happens, happens."


Rangers Reward Graves With Big Contract
In what could be a wise and profitable deal for both sides, the Rangers and Adam Graves announced a new contract yesterday that should keep the left wing on the team for this season and the next five.
Although terms weren't announced, people familiar with the negotiations said that Graves will earn an average of about $2.5 million per season, a hefty raise from his current salary of $400,000.


No Headline
This verdict should send a clear and unmistakable message that we will not tolerate terrorism in this country. - MARY JO WHITE, United States Attorney, on the World Trade Center conviction.  [ 28:1. ]


A Verdict Against Terror
New Yorkers and all Americans have reason to be satisfied with the successful prosecution of four men who bombed the World Trade Center a year ago.
The Government has not supplied all the answers to this frightening act of terrorism.
But yesterday's verdict demonstrates that authorities caught at least some of the culprits and delivered a compelling case for convicting them.
The Justice Department's achievement caps several effective responses to the explosion that killed six people, injured 1,000 and came close to accomplishing its apparent purpose of tearing up a mighty symbol of New York City's skyline.


Grupo Casa Autrey SA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


St. Joe Paper Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Risking a Trade War
President Clinton's decision to invoke a trade law provision that would enable him to impose tough sanctions against Japan if the Japanese fail to open their markets to American goods is unnecessary, dangerous and misguided.
The political logic behind the President's move is understandable.
Polls show that a significant majority of Americans favor a tough stance toward the Japanese, and protectionists in Congress are pushing hard for retaliation against Tokyo.
But any crackdown by the U.S. could undermine the elaborately constructed international apparatus for resolving trade disputes.


Sturm, Ruger &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Credit Card Goodies, With Lower Interest
MANY credit cards now offer goodies, from frequent-flier miles to discounts on cars and candy bars.
Tempting as they may be, these cards are not always great deals.
That's because the cards with the perks often carry higher interest rates than those without.
Some people, of course, pay their bills every month and lap up the bonuses.
But most people -- even those who say they pay their bills -- occasionally borrow money on their cards.


Renovations Continue on New Jersey State House Annex


'Highlights in Jazz' Concert
Gerry Mulligan, and the Billy Taylor Trio are to be the featured performers in a concert on Thursday at 8 P.M. at the Pace Downtown Theater, 3 Spruce Street, lower Manhattan.
The concert is part of the "Highlights in Jazz" series.
Tickets are $15; $11.50 for students.
Information: (212) 346-1715.


Indigent Is Sentenced To Death for Slaying
A 23-year-old man who was convicted of murdering a convenience store clerk last March in Anniston, Ala., was sentenced yesterday to die in the electric chair.
The case was the subject of an article in The New York Times on Feb. 14 quoting death penalty experts who said the case demonstrated shortcomings common in the defense of indigent defendants charged with capital offenses.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about a new rock-and-roll radio format known as adult album alternative misstated its availability in the New York City area.
WFUV-FM, the public radio station licensed to Fordham University, broadcasts in that format for about 80 hours a week; no commercial stations in the New York City area have adopted the format.


Torrence Breaks a Record
Gwen Torrence, the 1992 Olympic champion, achieved an unusual distinction tonight.
She broke an American track and field record in a preliminary heat.
The meet was the USA/Mobil national indoor championships, the sport's first competition in the Georgia Dome.
In the trials of the women's 200 meters, the 28-year-old Torrence, from suburban Decatur, won her heat in 22.84 seconds.
That cut a hundredth of a second from the American indoor record she set 13 months ago.
She led six qualifiers into Saturday's final.


Towering Over the Abortion Foe's Trial: His Leader
Officially it is Michael F. Griffin who is on trial for the killing of a doctor outside an abortion clinic here a year ago this month.
But looming over the case is the brooding figure of John Burt, a charismatic local anti-abortion leader who, Mr.
Griffin's lawyers say, brainwashed their client and drove him to commit murder.
No one disputes that Dr.
David Gunn was shot to death last March 10 outside the Pensacola Women's Medical Services clinic during an anti-abortion demonstration organized and led by Mr.
Burt, the Northwest Florida regional director of the national anti-abortion group Rescue America.


Yeltsin Denounces Amnesty But Concedes to Parliament
President Boris N. Yeltsin today denounced as unconstitutional, illegal and immoral the amnesty given his opponents by the Russian Parliament.
But he conceded the Parliament its victory, saying that the country's economic crisis required "maintaining and expanding common ground for interaction and cooperation in the state and society."
Speaking in the Kremlin at a formal Government meeting, which had been postponed because of infighting about the draft 1994 budget, Mr.
Yeltsin and his Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, both promised fiscal discipline to control inflation, although Mr.
Yeltsin said, "It is a mistake to reform the economy at any price."


Blues Sign Nedved
The free agent center PETR NEDVED, a contract holdout with the Vancouver Canucks, signed an offer sheet yesterday with the St.
Louis Blues and could be playing for them as early as Monday in Toronto.
Nedved, 22, had been seeking a contract worth at least $3 million over two years.
Last season, his third in the National Hockey League, he had career highs of 38 goals and 33 assists for Vancouver.


Seminara Gets Off to Rocky Start
This is not how Frank Seminara, a Brooklyn native, wanted to make his Mets debut.
The Mets played the Dodgers today at Thomas J. White Stadium in their first exhibition game, and Seminara was scheduled to be New York's second pitcher.
After Pete Smith threw the first three innings -- all scoreless -- Seminara was supposed to take care of the next two.


John Williams, 71, a Novelist, Editor and Professor of English
John Williams, a writer and educator whose 1972 novel "Augustus" won a National Book Award, died on Thursday at his home in Fayetteville, Ark.
He was 71.
The cause was respiratory failure, his family said.


Mars Gains In Its Plans For Russia
Master Foods Russia, a subsidiary of Mars Inc., has received preliminary approval from Moscow's regional administration to build three food-product factories for the Russian market.
The company expects to make Mars and Snickers bars, Uncle Ben's sauces and converted rice, and Whiskas and Pedigree Pal pet foods.


Croatian Leader Backs Pact by Bosnia's Muslims and Croats
Breaking with the hard-line nationalists who have backed him in the past, President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia has endorsed a peace accord signed this week by Bosnia's Muslims and Croats and asserted that only people who hold "narrow-minded" or "extreme" views could oppose them.
In a nationally televised address Thursday evening, Mr.
Tudjman formally approved the pacts, under which Croats and Muslims in Bosnia are to form a federated state that will then join in a loose union with Croatia, and said they had "a far-reaching and even crucial historical meaning" that would protect the interests of Croats whether they were in Bosnia or in Croatia.


3 Prep School Students In Foiled Train Robbery
Wanda Mosby was horrified when her 15-year-old son was the victim of an attempted armed robbery aboard an early-morning Metro-North train last month as he was going to a private school here.
But she was outraged to discover that the robbers were themselves students, on their way to a different private school.
The suspects attended the prestigious Fairfield Preparatory School, a Jesuit-run secondary school that is part of Fairfield University.


Ezra Stone, 76, Henry Aldrich On the Radio
Ezra Stone, who played the comically trouble-prone teen-ager Henry Aldrich on radio as a young man and then became a successful theater and television director, died on Thursday in an automobile accident near Perth Amboy, N.J.
He was 76 and lived at Stone Meadows Farm, near Newtown, Pa.
For 15 years, first on Broadway and then on radio, Mr.
Stone was known to millions as the youth who answered, in a high-pitched, put-upon voice, "Coming, Mother," when summoned by the cry "Hen-REE! Henry Aldrich." He originated the role in 1938 in the Broadway show "What a Life," which ran for more than 600 performances and was later translated into an enormously popular weekly radio program, "The Aldrich Family."


Review/Dance; Eliot Feld On Trials Of the Trade
"Doghead &amp; Godcatchers." That's what Eliot Feld calls his new ballet, which received its premiere at the Wednesday night performance of Feld Ballets/NY at the Joyce Theater.
It's an odd title.
But lovers of word games may chuckle over it, for "god" is "dog" spelled backward.
If the letters of the first syllable of Mr.
Feld's nouns are reversed, this ballet becomes "Godhead &amp; Dogcatchers." Although still an unusual title, it's not as bizarre as "Doghead &amp; Godcatchers."


INSIDE
Farrakhan's Followers: Discipline Plus Defiance
The Nation of Islam built its membership by retrofitting generations of young men with old-fashioned values and self-respect, then adding heavy doses of mysticism, separatist ideology and angry, hate-charged rhetoric aimed at anyone -- white, Jew or black -- thought to impede black progress.
Page 8.
New Thinking on Air Fares
Continental's and USAir's reductions of fares on the East Coast amounts to the most drastic restructuring of airline pricing in two years.
Page 39.
Yeltsin Opts for Conciliation
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia made a gesture to Parliament, saying cooperation was needed to solve the country's economic crisis.
Page 5.
John Candy Is Dead
The star of such comedies as "Uncle Buck" and "Cool Runnings" had a heart attack in Mexico, where he was making a film.
He was 43.
Page 12.


Suspect in Attack on Hasidim Is Linked to Two Drug Cases
The man accused of firing on a van of Hasidic students on the Brooklyn Bridge was linked to suspects in two drug cases in 1991 and was viewed as a small-time player in the city's drug underworld, Federal and New York City law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The suspect, Rashid Baz, 28, was not arrested or charged in either of the 1991 drug cases, and law-enforcement officials had no information that those cases were related to the shooting on Tuesday.


Americans Lose Their Edge
Hans Trinkl, a soft-spoken, self-effacing Austrian who has been emerging from the shadows of his ski team, stepped boldly into the sunshine today with a victory in the World Cup downhill.
In winning, the 26-year-old Trinkl edged out Cary Mullen of Canada by a mere three-hundredths of a second.
Trinkl completed his run in 1 minute 38.95 seconds.
But the native of St.
Pankraz, Austria, scored an even greater conquest, perhaps as much mental as physical, by also beating 30-year-old Marc Girardelli of Luxembourg.
A native Austrian, Girardelli is an elder statesman of the World Cup circuit and something of a mentor to Trinkl.


COMPANY NEWS: Multimedia Annual Reports; A Company's Biggest Hits, on CD-ROM
Everyone from rock groups to encyclopedia publishers is scrambling to come out with CD-ROM programs, so it was probably only a matter of time before corporations decided to put their yearly show-and-tell statements -- annual reports -- on the silvery disks.
This year, it seems, is the start.


Q &amp; A
Dependent Care Benefits  Q. Both my spouse and I are eligible for dependent care benefits, up to $5,000, through our employer-sponsored flexible spending account.
Should I take the full $5,000 dependent care reduction or should my spouse?
EDWARD IMPERATI, Annandale, Va.
A.
Through a dependent care flexible spending account, a family can be reimbursed for up to $5,000 a year for expenses in caring for an eligible dependent.


It Hasn't Been Easy Being John Daly; Back On PGA Tour After Battling Alcoholism, a Suspension and a Failed Marriage
He walked uncertainly into the tiny airport terminal today, looking much like any other soon-to-be divorced father picking up his visiting daughter.
John Daly passed unrecognized through the crowds and worked his way over to check on the 12:10 flight from Orlando.
It was on time.
Daly leaned on the counter and tried to affect aplomb.
It wasn't working.
He had not seen his daughter, Shynah, who is not quite 2 years old, since October.
Would she recognize him?
Would she cry?
Would she have grown?


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Reaction; Convictions Greeted With Jubilation and Big Sighs
The convictions in the World Trade Center bombing trial elicited jubilation and relief throughout New York City yesterday, though there was also righteous anger among some Arabs.
But many who were bruised by the traumatic event were certain that no verdict by a jury or punishment by a judge will exorcise the pain and terror that remain.
"I got really nervous when I heard that a verdict had been reached, and then when I heard it, I just said loudly, 'Yes!' " said Jo Ann Hilton, a secretary with the Port Authority police whose chair fell through the basement floor of the trade center after the explosion.
"Oh, my, am I relieved. Maybe we can put this horror behind us now."


Nets Leave Defense Back in Garden State
The Nets got off to a slow start and never recovered tonight.
They had trouble scoring points and couldn't stop the Pacers on defense.
Derrick McKey scored a game-high 24 points to lead Indiana to a 126-110 victory at Market Square Arena before 13,725 fans.
It was the Pacers' fourth straight victory and the most points New Jersey had allowed this season.


Sarah Patton Boyle Author and Rights Advocate, 87
Sarah Patton Boyle, an author who was active in civil rights matters, died on Feb. 20 at her home in Arlington, Va.
She was 87.
The cause was complications from Alzheimer's disease, said her son Roger.


10 CLINTON AIDES CALLED IN INQUIRY ON ARKANSAS S.&amp;L.
Ten senior White House and Treasury Department officials were subpoenaed tonight for testimony and documents related to an inquiry into a failed Arkansas savings and loan with ties to President Clinton and his wife.
While Federal Bureau of Investigation agents were serving the subpoenas, President Clinton met with the White House counsel, Bernard W. Nussbaum, who was one of those subpoenaed, to arrange the lawyer's resignation.
Mr.
Nussbaum told Mr.
Clinton that he would step down on Saturday, aides said.
On an extraordinary day in which Mr.
Clinton and his aides tried to contain the political damage, they battled a rising tide of bad news, including signs that some Democrats were quietly joining the Republican clamor for Congressional hearings into Mr.
Clinton's investment in an Arkansas real estate venture, the Whitewater Development Company.
The Clintons were partners in the venture with James B. McDougal, the head of the savings and loan.
Information Quest
The subpoenas were issued by Robert B. Fiske, the special counsel appointed to look into the Whitewater matter, but there was no indication that they were for any purpose other than the gathering of information.
All 10 of the officials were named in news accounts this week as having taken part in unusual meetings to discuss the Federal investigation of the Arkansas savings institution, Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan.
Mr.
Fiske has broad-based authority under his charter to determine whether the Government has handled itself properly in that case.
Not since the Iran-contra affair has a Federal law enforcement agency reached this deeply into the White House as part of an official inquiry.
The subpoenas of top aides to Mr.
Clinton and to Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen handed the White House a major embarrassment as officials tried to steer attention away from Whitewater.
Sensitive Subject
At those meetings, the Treasury and White House aides reviewed the status of an investigation by the Resolution Trust Corporation into Madison Guaranty, a sensitive subject that would ordinarily be kept from political officials and anyone with a connection to the institution.
No one has suggested that there was anything criminal about such discussions, but they might have violated Government ethics regulations.
The six White House aides subpoenaed to testify were Mr.
Nussbaum; Bruce Lindsey, a senior adviser to Mr.
Clinton; Harold M. Ickes, the deputy chief of staff; Mark D. Gearan, the communications director; Maggie Williams, the chief of staff to Hillary Rodham Clinton, and Lisa Caputo, Mrs.
Clinton's press secretary.
All were ordered to appear in Federal District Court in Washington on March 10 to provide testimony for a grand jury in Little Rock, Ark.
A separate subpoena demanded that the White House surrender all documents and communications relating to contacts between the White House and Treasury Department officials about Madison Guaranty.
In response, Joel I. Klein, the deputy White House counsel, issued four memorandums ordering the White House staff, janitors and technicians not to destroy information and documents in files, computers, waste baskets and burn bags.
Howard Schloss, a spokesman for the Treasury Department, said Deputy Secretary Roger C. Altman; Jean Hanson, the department counsel, and Josh Steiner, Mr.
Bentsen's chief of staff, had also been subpoenaed to appear before a grand jury under the direction of Mr.
Fiske.
A participant in the meetings said that Jack DeVore, Mr.
Bentsen's closest aide at the time, was also told to appear before the grand jury.
Associates of Mr.
Nussbaum said that he had hoped to postpone his resignation long enough to diminish the impression that he had been dismissed but that he had recognized as the day progressed that he had little option but to step down immediately.
As soon as the first meeting was disclosed, Republicans began demanding a new inquiry into the Clintons' investment and put pressure on Mr.
Clinton to act firmly to disavow the talks.
Today, some Democrats also seemed to be considering hearings on Whitewater.
Expectations for a Day
Mr.
Clinton had to cope with the question of Mr.
Nussbaum's fate on a day in which a meeting with President Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine was supposed to be the main event.
At a picture-taking session and a joint news conference in the East Room, the first question to Mr.
Clinton was whether Mr.
Nussbaum, who is 57, would remain at his post.
Mr.
Clinton later added discussions with top aides to his afternoon calendar to consider that very question.
But the White House agenda became even more complicated late this afternoon, when the F.B.I. told William H.  Kennedy 3d, an associate White House counsel, that it planned to serve the six subpoenas.
Mr.
Kennedy told Thomas F. McLarty 3d, the White House chief of staff, who told Mr.
Clinton about 6 P.M., just before he began to talk with Mr.
Nussbaum.
An F.B.I. agent served the six subpoenas about an hour later in the White House counsel's suite.
In a written statement tonight, Dee Dee Myers, the White House press secretary said, "The White House will comply fully and promptly with the subpoena."
Before the latest round of criticism over his role in the Whitewater affair, Mr.
Nussbaum had already been at the center of a series of White House political miscues, including the failed nomination of Lani Guinier to a top Justice Department post, the torturous search for an Attorney General and the removal of files from the office of Vincent W. Foster Jr., Mr.
Nussbaum's deputy who killed himself in July.
Officials said that history, coupled with Mr.
Nussbaum's most recent actions, had left his position difficult to defend, especially after officials said that the once-unquestioned support of his political patron, Hillary Rodham Clinton, was in doubt.
A Telling Symbol
"If this was the first time in the barrel for him, maybe we could fight for him," a senior White House official said.
"But the third time is hard."
Earlier today, Mr.
Clinton refused twice to comment about Mr.
Nussbaum's fate, a telling symbol in the Washington political lexicon.
The President was said by aides to be particularly upset that the White House lawyer had not anticipated trouble from the series of meetings with senior Treasury Department officials on the investigation into the bankrupt Arkansas savings and loan.
Associates of Mr.
Nussbaum said he would have preferred that a decent interval pass before he resigns his post.
But they said Mr.
Clinton's failure to express confidence in him during public appearances today could only have been intended as a message that it was time to leave.
Other officials said aides to Mrs.
Clinton had told associates in the Administration that she was disappointed in the way Mr.
Nussbaum, her one-time mentor, had handled the matter.
Because of her close friendship with Mr.
Nussbaum, Mrs.
Clinton's views on the issue are crucial.
Even this morning, a close friend of Mr.
Nussbaum's said, "None of us see how he can survive much longer."
Before this week's first disclosure of his participation in an unusual meeting, Mr.
Nussbaum had told friends that he believed his job was to be a kind of a lightning rod for the Administration.
But he told the friends that he hoped to stay in the White House for at least another year, if not until the end of Mr.
Clinton's first term, and had recently bought a residence at the Watergate Apartments.
Consequences of a Resignation
By this afternoon, senior White House officials were discussing what the consequences of a resignation by Mr.
Nussbaum might be, and whether it might help close the political wounds inflicted by the disclosure of the meetings.
Mr.
Clinton on Thursday expressed dismay that the meetings had taken place, but that only led Republicans in Congress today to voice new complaints about the White House's conduct.
After poking for months at Whitewater's embers, the Republicans expressed new confidence that the missteps would finally force Congress's Democratic majority to undertake hearings.
And, more dangerously for the White House, some Democrats began to echo them privately.
In the Senate, where Republicans were already pledging to hold up approval of important White House nominations until a Whitewater hearing was scheduled, aides to senior Democratic senators said there was growing uneasiness among their bosses.
Saying that they were growing resigned to the possibility that some kind of inquiry might be necessary, if only to quiet the mounting furor from Republicans and other critics, the aides said the matter had been referred to Senate Democratic leaders.
In addition to Mr.
Nussbaum, only Ms.
Hanson, the Treasury Department's general counsel, took part in all three of the briefing sessions.
The two were the only participants in what White House officials have described as the most troublesome encounter, on Sept. 29.
In that meeting, Ms.
Hanson told Mr.
Nussbaum that the Clintons would be mentioned as possible beneficiaries of illegal actions in a request for a Justice Department investigation of Madison Guaranty by the Resolution Trust Corporation, which is responsible for failed S.&amp; L.'s.
That was more than a week before the R.T.C. formally referred the case to the Justice Department and before the decision became final, giving Mr.
Nussbaum advance knowledge of information that under other circumstances is regarded as highly sensitive.
Meetings in Question
Another meeting took place in October and the third, last month.
The others who were served subpoenas attended these meetings except Ms.
Caputo.
She acknowledged this week that she had received a brief telephone call from a Resolution Trust Corporation official whose name she did not know.
At his news conference with President Kravchuk today, Mr.
Clinton sought to emphasize that with new procedures imposed on Thursday the White House has now erected a "a clear and appropriate firewall" to prevent further contacts between his aides and Federal investigations into Madison Guaranty and the Whitewater case.
Seeking to turn the focus to his critics' conduct, Mr.
Clinton accused the Republicans of engaging in "fairly blatant, bald and totally political" efforts to make an issue of the meetings, in which he said he had not been accused of "doing anything wrong."
The Senate Democratic aides who spoke of uneasiness about the turn the Whitewater case is taking said the chamber's leaders were already mulling over the possibility of Banking Committee hearings into the propriety of the meetings, if only to cut their political losses.
"They have the discomfiting feeling of watching the Administration make every mistake they could think of," said one aide, who spoke only on the condition of not being identified.
"Now they're thinking, 'How many more town meetings can I go to before being asked about this? What do I say if I'm asked about it on 'Meet the Press?' "


CHRONICLE
SYLVIE GUILLEM, the charismatic and sometimes temperamental star of the Royal Ballet, has caused a tempest in the ballet world over her refusal to appear at a tribute in London on March 13 for her mentor, Rudolf Nureyev.
She had initially agreed to be on the program, which will include dancers like Mikhail Baryshnikov and Natalya Makarova, but backed out when organizers refused to let her dance a work of her choice.


Executive Changes
ADC TELECOMMUNICATIONS INC., Minneapolis, named William J. Cadogan, its president and chief executive, to the additional position of chairman.


Woolworth Corp. reports earnings for 13wks to Jan 29


Before You Take the Vegetarian Vow
To the Editor:
The vegetarianism-will-save-the-world monster has raised its mendacious head in "Help Your Heart and Your Planet" (letter, Feb. 19).
Studies show that while a low-animal-product, low-cholesterol diet contributes to a decline in, but not elimination of, coronary heart disease, such a diet results in higher death rates from stroke, cancer, suicide and violence (see "Low Serum Cholesterol and Suicide" by Hyman Engelberg in The Lancet, March 21, 1992).


Don't Forget the Disabled in Giving Grand Central New Exits; Ahead of My Time
To the Editor:


Tracor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 CHINA ARRESTS DISSIDENT  China arrested and then freed its most prominent dissident, who had been conducting an increasingly vocal campaign for democracy.
RETREAT  Senate Republicans finished a retreat on health care with pledges to keep meeting, to seek consensus and to work with the Democrats to pass a bipartisan bill.  7  FRENCH FOOD -- AS IN FRIES  The White House has accepted the resignation of its chef because he cooks French food.
Huff and Jordan.  31  Golf: Daly set to return to tour . 31  Hockey: Rangers and Islanders tie.  31  Horse Racing: Dehere fractures an ankle.  31  Skiing: Trinkl wins downhill event; Kitt 14th, Moe 55th.  33  Obituaries 12  John Candy, actor.
Ezra Stone, actor.
John Williams, writer and educator.
Melvin M. Tumin, professor of sociology at Princeton University.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  Risking a trade war.
A verdict against terror.
Attention Ed Rollins.
On with the Packwood case.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: In hot water.
Russell Baker: The ears of the ages.
Gilles Peress: Bosnia dismembered.
Katie Leishman: The writing cure.
Bridge 19 Chronicle 24 Crossword 18


Review/Opera; Freni as Adriana Is One Argument Against Supertitles
Though I am a strong advocate of the plan to install supertitles or their equivalents at the Metropolitan Opera House, there are also strong arguments against them.
One is Mirella Freni.
The distinguished soprano took the title role in this season's first performance of Francesco Cilea's "Adriana Lecouvreur" at the Met on Thursday night, and when she sang I didn't want to look away from her for even an instant.
It is not a matter of glamour or divaesque charisma.
It is that, in her best performances -- and this role inspired one of them -- there is no way to separate the sounds she produces and the character she creates.
The voice is intimately linked to the meanings of words and gestures, and that connection is made without artifice or mannerism.
There is more to gain from undistracted attention to that artistry than there is from following a projected translation of the text.


Review/Theater: Allegro; Revival of a Famous Pair's First Flop
Just when they had reached a pinnacle of glory with the back-to-back successes of "Oklahoma!" and "Carousel," the musical theater team of Rodgers and Hammerstein took a wrenching swerve in direction and wrote "Allegro." The show, which opened at the Majestic Theater in 1947 and ran for 315 performances, was their fourth collaboration (if you count the movie "State Fair") and their first commercial flop.
At "Allegro's" concert revival at City Center on Wednesday evening, it was abundantly clear why the show failed but also why it deserves such an ambitious resurrection.
The production, directed by Susan H. Schulman, features a mostly strong cast of 28, including Stephen Bogardus, Karen Ziemba, Jonathan Hadary and Christopher Reeve (narrating), along with a full theater orchestra.


At Western Wall, Israel Bars Jews


After Month's Orbit, War Satellite Has Power Loss
A military communications satellite built primarily for nuclear war and launched last month at a cost of $1.3 billion has experienced a power failure in orbit, the Pentagon said today.
Senior Pentagon officials described the problem as minor, but critics of the satellite program inside and outside the Pentagon said it was significant.
Pentagon and Congressional officials said information on the implications of the failure was classified as secret.


Mary Hemingway, 76, Author of Cookbooks
Mary Moon Hemingway, an author of food-processor cookbooks and a former editor of Vogue, House &amp; Garden and Bride's magazines, died yesterday at her home in Kittery Point, Me.
She was 76.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said her husband, Booth Hemingway.


Clinton Vows to Improve Relations With Ukraine
President Clinton pledged a new era of warm relations with Ukraine today and told its President, Leonid M. Kravchuk, that the United States would double its aid to Ukraine to $700 million this year.
Mr.
Clinton made clear that the key to the improved relations was Ukraine's making good on its promise to eliminate its 176 long-range missiles and 1,800 nuclear warheads, most of which are aimed at the United States.


A Death They Cannot Put to Rest; Slain Man's Friends Struggle to Explain Mysterious Killing
Motives for murders in New York are often unnecessary for mourners trying to come to terms with a death.
This is, after all, a city where errant bullets cut down people as they water the plants in their living rooms.
It is a city where people pause, briefly, to consider headlines about a bowling ball being dropped off an overpass and killing an infant sitting serenely in a car.
Death happens in peculiar ways.
Logic is not always in the vicinity.
But without a motive, it seems that there can be no final peace in the mysterious death of Albert Boyars.


Bonds With Equity Features Doing Best
To have invested successfully in bonds so far this year, an investor has had to pick the issues that are the least like traditional bonds.
The stock and bond markets have finally diverged, with the equity market advancing modestly and bonds falling in response to rising interest rates.
The two types of bond funds that have performed the best in the first weeks of 1994 have equity characteristics.
The first are junk bonds, which tend to track the equity markets as a strong economy increases corporate sales, reducing the risk of default.
The second are convertible bonds, which normally track the prices of their underlying common shares.


GFC to Buy Bell Atlantic Unit for Cash
The GFC Financial Corporation, a leasing services company based in Phoenix, yesterday announced an agreement to acquire the Tricon Capital Corporation, a subsidiary of the Bell Atlantic Corporation.
The announcement said it was an all-cash transation but the terms were not disclosed.
The stock market applauded the move, driving the shares of GFC up $2.625, to $32, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Shares of Bell Atlantic advanced as well, rising 12.5 cents, to $53, on the Big Board.


Lost Daughter's Images Touch a Mother's Heart
ON Dec. 22, Claire Avery, 82, left her retirement home in Stuart, Fla., and came to New York City to visit her 57-year-old daughter.
The elderly woman knew that Rose Avery had not been feeling well, but she was not prepared for what she saw when she arrived at Ludlow Street on the Lower East Side, where her only child had lived and painted for the last 20 years.
"She had been protecting me," Mrs.
Avery said, sitting in the fourth-floor walk-up and stroking Murdock, her daughter's cat.
"She never told me how sick she was or that the cancer had come back. It was terrible. When I got here she could barely walk."


A Glance at Some Other Nominees
All three of the films nominated this year for Academy Awards in the category of "best documentary short subject" deal with women's issues.
Elaine Holliman and Jason Schneider's cozy 22-minute film, "Chicks in White Satin," follows the preparations for a lesbian Jewish wedding.
"Defending Our Lives," a half-hour film produced by Margaret Lazarus and Renner Wunderlich, is a grueling polemical study of battered women that focuses on the testimony of women who killed the men who attacked them.
The third, "Blood Ties: The Life and Work of Sally Mann," explores the world of the controversial photographer whose studies of her own three children have been criticized for using nudity and being otherwise exploitative.
This half-hour film, in which Ms.
Mann, backed by her husband and children, vigorously defends herself, raises questions about the rights and responsibilities of motherhood.


Don't Forget the Disabled in Giving Grand Central New Exits
To the Editor:
Let us hope the proposed new north exits from Grand Central Terminal (news article, Feb. 21) are made easily accessible (with seats and ticket agents) for disabled New Yorkers, in line with the federally mandated Americans With Disabilities Act.


United Industrial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wolverine World Wide Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Hope Springs Eternal


'Name of the Father'
To the Editor:
Rose Styron appears to have difficulty distinguishing between fact and fiction in "Justice Depraved" (Op-Ed, Feb. 23), on Paul Hill, one of the Guildford Four.
If Ms.
Styron had read the reviews of the film "In the Name of the Father," she would have seen that the release of the Guildford Four had nothing to do with the release of a 1977 file marked "not to be shown to the defense" as the movie suggested.
This was fiction.
In addition, it is ridiculous to suggest that conditions in prisons in Britain compare with the third world in the 1970's.
Joe Doherty, who returned to jail in Northern Ireland after some years in United States jails, wrote an article declaring conditions there far better than in New York or Pennsylvania.
BRIAN KIRK  Information Consul, N. Ireland British Information Services New York, Feb. 23, 1994


Perry Drug Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Corrections
The Federal Reserve table in Business Day yesterday gave incorrect figures for the average of extended credit in the two-week periods ended on March 2 and Feb. 16 and in the three months that ended in February.
The figure for each of the periods is zero.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.26
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.51
3.46
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.72
3.67
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.36
6.33
5.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.83
6.83
6.73
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.67
7.63
7.67
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.99
5.97
5.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Public &amp; Private; In Hot Water
It is a truth universally acknowledged that a change in the political landscape makes an enormous difference in the world view of some part of the electorate.
And so it is that the letters and phone calls once filled with cries of "Why aren't you slamming them more on Iran-contra?" and "What about Neil Bush and Silverado?" now reverberate with the complaint "How come you're being so hard on the Clintons?"
Those complaints have grown with the slow spiral of Whitewater and the plethora of questions about what the President and Mrs.
Clinton knew and exactly when they knew it.
The choice of language is neither flippant nor coincidental, for over this enterprise and perhaps every politically suspect action/reaction for the foreseeable future hangs a long shadow.


PCA Int'l(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


We Need Aid Leverage to Slow Nuclear Race; Too Late to Stop It
To the Editor:
In "Bomb Scares" (Op-Ed, Feb. 22), Representative Lee Hamilton draws attention to the threat of nuclear war in South Asia.
However, nuclear nonproliferation, either under the aegis of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty or under some other arrangement, is not the answer because:


Parents Can Authorize Sterilization, Judge Rules
A judge has agreed to let the parents of a developmentally disabled woman have their daughter sterilized, despite the objections of the woman's court-appointed lawyer.
Judge Joseph S. Mattina of Erie County Surrogates Court signed an order today approving the sterilization, pending medical and psychological examinations of the woman, the lawyers in the case said.


Man Is Sentenced to 25 Years in Strangling of 4-Year-Old
Anguish and anger agitating her voice, a 36-year-old foster mother stood before a judge yesterday and spoke of her dashed dreams for a normal family life.
"I never wanted anything out of life except my health, a child, a nice home and a husband," Dana Blackledge-Poole said in a Brooklyn courtroom.


Casino Magic (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


John Candy, Comedic Film Star, Is Dead of a Heart Attack at 43
John Candy, the outsized comedian who brought a manic bonhomie to his starring roles in some of Hollywood's most successful comedies, including "Splash," "Uncle Buck" and "Cool Runnings," died yesterday in Mexico where he was acting in a movie.
He was 43 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was a heart attack, said Anna Perez, a spokeswoman for Creative Artists Agency, which represented him.


Zulu Party and White Separatists Register for South Africa Election
The Zulu nationalists of the Inkatha Freedom Party and an alliance of white separatists registered tonight to put their names on the ballot for South Africa's first universal elections.
Both groups insisted they were not abandoning their threat of a boycott but were keeping their options open until they see whether international mediation delivers on their demands for greater autonomy within the new South African order.


Review/Dance; Baryshnikov Introduces Masters and Novices
Two master choreographers, along with an unknown and a novice, were featured on Thursday night when Mikhail Baryshnikov's White Oak Dance Project presented its second program at the New York State Theater.
The masters were Jerome Robbins, 75, who created a solo, "A Suite of Dances," for Mr.
Baryshnikov, and Hanya Holm, the modern-dance pioneer who died two years ago at the age of 99.
"Jocose," the piece she began in 1981 and completed in 1984, was easily the best work on the program.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Prosecutors; 2 Government Lawyers Bask in Glow of Victory
For the first time since the World Trade Center bomb trial began last September, J. Gilmore Childers and Henry J. DePippo, the two senior prosecutors on the case, appeared slightly flushed yesterday as praise rained down on them for the successful prosecution of four men charged in the bombing.
They "did a remarkable job," said William Gavin, director of the New York regional office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney for Manhattan, beamed as she introduced her assistants to a throng of reporters.


Security Tight at Holy Sites to Prevent Repeat of Riots
Seeking to prevent explosive protests on the first Friday of Muslim prayers since the Hebron massacre, Israel poured police and military forces into Jerusalem today, and took an unheard-of security measure by keeping Jews from the Western Wall, their most sacred site.
The smothering police presence, especially in and around the walled Old City, was effective in that Jerusalem was calm today, one week after a Jewish settler sprayed Palestinian worshipers with automatic rifle fire in a Hebron mosque.


Cowboys' Tackle Jumps For Rams' $7.7 Million
JIMMIE JONES, a defensive tackle on the Dallas Cowboys' championship teams the past two years, jumped to the Los Angeles Rams yesterday for a multiyear contract.
The Los Angeles Times reported that Jones had agreed to a four-year, $7.7 million package that included a $2 million signing bonus.


Dow Up 7.88 as Market Likes the Jobs Report
Are the numbers inflationary or not?
After both the stock and bond markets plunged in early trading, traders soon disagreed about the significance of the Government's seemingly robust employment statistics released yesterday.
Traders in the equities markets bid up the leading stock indexes after concluding that the jobs numbers meant modest growth and subdued inflation, which would be good for stocks.
But bond traders saw signs of brisker growth and, therefore, rising inflation.
So the prices of intermediate Treasury securities fell while the long bond, after trading down for most of the session, finished slightly higher.


Recycling Compliance Put at $100 Million
The administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that it would cost New York City at least $100 million to comply with the requirements of the city's own recycling law, raising the gap in the next fiscal year's budget to $2.4 billion.
The Mayor said the city would almost have to double the size of its recycling program to comply with the 1989 law.
The city now recycles almost 20 percent of the garbage it collects.
In his preliminary budget plan last month, Mr.
Giuliani proposed saving $5.7 million by cutting recycling in most neighborhoods from weekly to every other week.


Two Blazers Arrested
CLIFF ROBINSON and ROD STRICKLAND of the Portland Trail Blazers were arrested early yesterday after a pushing and shoving match with a truck driver in Chicago.
The trouble apparently began with a minor traffic accident about 4 A.M., which led to an argument in a parking lot, said Lieut.
PATRICK LOGAN of the Chicago Police.


Watsco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Schools' Biggest Boss Makes a New York Visit


We Need Aid Leverage to Slow Nuclear Race
To the Editor:
I cannot agree with Representative Lee Hamilton's conclusions in "Bomb Scares" (Op-Ed, Feb. 22), concerning the Pressler Amendment.


CHRONICLE
JUDY HENDREN MELLO has been named the president and chief executive of World Learning, formerly known as the Experiment in International Living.
The organization sponsors exchange programs for students and conducts higher education courses in international studies, management training and languages, as well as international development programs.


Village Super Market reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 22


Buffett Stake In Salomon Grows to 19%
Warren E. Buffett has bought more stock in Salomon Inc. and now controls 19 percent of the company's voting power.
But even a billionaire financier like Mr.
Buffett can make mistakes when filing documents with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Review/Theater; Mystic vs. Rational in South Africa
On the stage of the Helen Carey Playhouse at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Evil is stalking the South African village of Nebo in high-topped black sneakers.
A demonic spirit has assumed a corporeal form suggesting both an urban street hustler and something far more primitive.
Beneath his tailored Western coat peeks a fringe of animal pelts, and the traditional staff he carries slithers in serpentine curves.
This sinister hybrid, who may or may not be a figment of a troubled man's imagination, embodies the conflicting cultural forces that shape and warp the world of "Sacrifice of Mmbatho (Daughter of Nebo)," a starkly eloquent folk opera that was created at the fabled Market Theater in Johannesburg under a commission from the academy.
The work was conceived and written by Hilary Blecher (who brought her "Frida" to the academy in 1992), with music by Victor N'Toni and Rashid Lanie.
It portrays a drought-stricken village in the Eastern Transvaal in which ancient traditions are distortingly woven with elements of modern colonialism.


Schools Suffering as Winter Plays Havoc With Calendar
In May, the students in Mirla Morrison's history class at Ossining High School are to take a national exam that could exempt them from studying history in their first year of college.
But there is a problem: snow and ice storms over the last nine weeks have forced the cancellation of school in Ossining 11 times, most recently on Thursday, and have left Ms.
Morrison wondering whether she can adequately prepare her students for the test.


Weather Lifts Joblessness In New York and New Jersey
Dampened by winter storms, the overall unemployment rate for New York and New Jersey took a turn for the worse last month, while the rate for New York City improved, reflecting the growing strength of the city's economy.
In New York State, the unemployment rate, adjusted for normal seasonal fluctuations, increased to 7.8 percent last month from 7.1 percent in January, according to figures released yesterday by the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics.
It was the first big increase since October.


Melvin M. Tumin, 75, Specialist in Race Relations
Prof.
Melvin M. Tumin, a Princeton sociologist who wrote widely on human nature and the individual's place in society, died on Thursday in the Medical Center at Princeton, N.J.
He was 75 and lived in Princeton.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Tokyo Journal; Electronics District Hits Hard Times
In a nation where it is considered impolite to call attention to oneself, the Akihabara district stands out, with its neon lights, its signs painted hot pink and emerald green and its hundreds of garish discount stores and back-alley stalls bursting with gadgetry, from televisions the size of postage stamps to remote-control toilets that provide a spray of water in lieu of paper.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Bulls Stay on the Skids  Clyde Drexler scored 27 points and the Portland Trail Blazers continued Chicago's home woes, 115-96, last night.
It was the Bulls' fourth consecutive loss at home and their sixth defeat in eight games at Chicago Stadium, where they won 17 consecutive games before their slump.


President Condemns Beijing; Christopher Visit Questioned
President Clinton condemned the detention by China of Wei Jingsheng, its most prominent dissident, and several others, and Administration officials said the detentions could change Secretary of State Warren Christopher's plans to visit China next week.
[ An associate of Mr.
Wei reported early Saturday that he had been released.
Some other dissidents who had been detained by the Government were also freed, but the status of others was uncertain. ]


Sports of The Times; He Doesn't Want to Be Like Mike
MIKE HUFF is not one to go around saying he wants to be like Mike.
He is not one to demand star treatment from football as well as baseball, like Deion Sanders.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Palestinian scholar Edward Said attributed a criticism of him incorrectly.
The remark, "it is easy to criticize like this when you live far from the people," was made by the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, not Nasser al-Kidwa, the P.L.O. envoy to the United Nations.


MAJORITY LEADER IN SENATE DECIDES NOT TO RUN AGAIN
George J. Mitchell, the son of a janitor and an appointee to the Senate who became majority leader in less than a decade, startled Washington today by saying he would not seek re-election this fall.
He gave no specific reason for his decision, saying he was in good health, enjoyed his work and was certain that the voters of Maine would have returned him to office.
He said in a statement that it was the right time for him to do something else, but he did not say what.
"No doubt some will search for other reasons for my decision," he said.
"But there aren't any."


Monroe Couper, 40, Composer and Teacher
Monroe Couper, a composer and an associate professor of music at the Brooklyn College campus of Kingsborough Community College, died last weekend in a climbing accident in New Hampshire.
He was 40 and lived in South Orange, N.J.
Mr.
Couper and Eric Lattey, 28, of River Vale, N.J., froze to death in bad weather while ice-climbing on Mount Washington, the United States Forest Service said.


Peace Effort in Bosnia Could Lose Its Momentum, U.N. General Says
With Serbs testing his resolve as he pleads for more Western troops, the United Nations military commander here said today that he feared that the nascent peace effort in Bosnia was in danger of losing its momentum.
"This is a very, very fragile and sensitive time," the commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, said.
He warned that unless more troops arrive to help police the cease-fire he is expanding from Sarajevo to central Bosnia, "inevitably, the thing will crumble in the end, I fear."


Rodman Sits but Beefs
DENNIS RODMAN of the San Antonio Spurs missed last night's game with Utah to serve a one-game suspension and was fined $5,000 by the National Basketball Association yesterday for head-butting JOHN STOCKTON of the Utah Jazz on Wednesday night.
Rodman protested his innocence, asking why the league was "always picking on me."(AP)


Saints, Haynes Agree
Wide receiver MICHAEL HAYNES, a transitional player for the Atlanta Falcons, will sign an offer sheet with the New Orleans Saints today, both he and the team said yesterday.
The Saints offered Haynes a four-year contract, but did not give any other details.
Atlanta has a week to match the offer.
Haynes had 72 receptions for 778 yards and 4 touchdowns in 1993. (AP)


METRO DIGEST
EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: CONVICTIONS AND QUESTIONS
A Federal jury convicted all four of the men on trial in the bomb attack that killed six people at the World Trade Center last year and caused millions of dollars in damage.
Page 1.
ONLY PART OF PUZZLE SOLVED
Despite its great length and the huge numbers of witnesses and exhibits, the trial left unanswered some of the most compelling questions about the attack.
News analysis.
Page 1.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Wilson Alvarez, Larry Thomas and Jeff Schwarz, pitchers; Matt Merullo, catcher; and Warren Newson, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
Renewed the contract of Jason Bere, pitcher.


Bonds Plunge but Then Improve
Prices of short- and intermediate-term Treasury securities were lower yesterday, but improved significantly from an early plunge after a larger-than-expected increase in the February nonfarm payroll data issued by the Labor Department.
The unexpectedly strong number was taken by some in the market as another signal that inflation pressures might be building and that the number could be the catalyst that the Federal Reserve needs to push up short-term interest rates to slow economic growth and contain inflation.


Brainwashing Defense In Anti-Abortion Killing
As the defense neared the close of its case, the man accused of killing an abortion doctor here last year broke down and wept today when a local anti-abortion leader, John Burt, described the burial of two dismembered fetuses recovered from a Dumpster.
Defense lawyers have asserted that Mr.
Burt's graphic depictions and videotapes of abortions provoked the defendant, Michael F. Griffin, to kill Dr.
David Gunn, 47.


Cementos Mexicanos SA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Triple Crown Jinx Strikes Again: Dehere Fractures Leg
The rocky road to the Kentucky Derby claimed its biggest casualty today.
Dehere, the juvenile champion of last year and the early favorite to win the Derby, fractured a bone above his right hind ankle and was withdrawn from racing in the Triple Crown series and possibly beyond.
The 3-year-old colt was booked for surgery sometime in the next three or four days, and his future won't be known until then.
His owner, Robert Brennan, expressed hope that "his racing career is not concluded." But it has been a career marked by heavy racing, great success and recurrent speculation, and it seemed most likely that he would not return until next year at the earliest.


High Calories (and Chef!) Out at White House
The White House has accepted the resignation of its executive chef, Pierre Chambrin, with all the usual polite formality that accompanies such events in Washington.
He was asked to resign on Thursday, the White House said, because he cooks French food and the Clintons want American food -- preferably of the low-fat variety.
The other three members of the kitchen staff were also asked to submit their resignations.


Minority Council Members Assail Plans for Hospitals
The president of the municipal hospital system ran into a barrage of criticism from black and Hispanic members of the City Council yesterday as he defended the Giuliani administration's plan to reduce the scope of reconstruction at Kings County Hospital Center and to close a burn unit at Harlem Hospital.
At a budget hearing in the Council Chamber, several lawmakers said they would fight to save the Kings County reconstruction project from being scaled back or delayed further.
They also strongly urged the Health and Hospitals Corporation president, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, to keep the burn unit open at Harlem Hospital.


Observer; The Ears of the Age
CBS cut off Frank Sinatra for a commercial Tuesday night.
Sic transit gloria.
I wept when I heard the news.
In the old days Frank Sinatra would have cut off CBS.
Frank was where the power was at.
"Chairman of the Board," we called him.
Can-do guys and, more importantly, will-do guys clustered around him, moth-to-the-flame style.


U.S. Jobless Rate Eased Last Month
The job market improved further in February as payrolls expanded and the unemployment rate eased to 6.5 percent, the Government reported today.
Unusually severe winter weather and statistical quirks again muddied the results, which also included the greatest shrinkage in the workweek in 10 years, a second consecutive drop of 20,000 jobs in the construction industry and a reduction of 10 percent in the ranks of the "partially unemployed."


On With the Packwood Case
"No one's private papers are safe," Senator Bob Packwood complained after his latest legal setback -- this one in the Supreme Court -- over the diaries he has refused to turn over to the Senate Ethics Committee.
His objection is no less frivolous than the others he has raised during a yearlong effort to divert the Senate from dealing with sexual misconduct charges against him.
The Senator invokes great principles: the right to privacy, the privilege against compelled self-incrimination and the freedom from dragnet search warrants.
But in so doing he asks the public to forget, as the courts and Congress have not, why the committee asked for the diaries in the first place.


Marcus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3


Premdor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Feb. 21 about a Justice Department investigation into automated teller networks misidentified the owner of the MAC network.
It is Electronic Payment Services Inc., not the Electronic Payments Corporation.


For The Elderly, Yet Another Way to Tap Home Equity
Marvin Kells, 70, of Los Angeles, recently used the equity in his house to buy a lifetime annuity.
A retired freelance film editor, he had little savings and just $500 a month in income from Social Security.
His 40-year-old house had been payed off long ago but was in desperate need of repair.
The financial arrangement is similar to a reversed mortgage, allowing a homeowner to tap the equity in his home for a stream of payments while he is still alive.
Mr.
Kells took a loan on his home from Freedon Home Eqiuty Partners Inc., in Irvine, Calif., and used the amount to purchase the annuity from the Union Labor Life Insurance Company.


The Education Of Luisa Chan, Board Member
Louisa M. Chan, the first non-white member of School Board 24, considers herself an unlikely battler in the rough and tumble of ethnically charged city politics.
Born 49 years ago in northern China and brought up in Hong Kong, she says her heritage discourages confrontation.
But Mrs.
Chan says that Mary A. Cummins, the board's formidable leader, who spearheaded the fight against a controversial curriculum meant to teach tolerance, and against the schools Chancellor who championed it, is helping her change her ways.


PROTESTER GUILTY OF KILLING DOCTOR
After jury deliberations that lasted less than three hours, Michael F. Griffin was found guilty late this afternoon of first-degree murder in the shooting death of a doctor during a demonstration outside an abortion clinic here last year.
Judge John Parnham of Escambia County Circuit Court immediately sentenced Mr.
Griffin, a 32-year-old abortion opponent who originally claimed to have acted in God's name, to life imprisonment, the mandatory sentence in Florida for first-degree murder cases in which the death penalty is not sought.
As a result, Mr.
Griffin must serve at least 25 years before he becomes eligible for parole.


At Least the Snow Kept the Plants Warm
THOUGH it will take some months to know what really happened to plants during the severe winter temperatures just gone by, gardeners have some solace.
The low temperatures occurred when there was snow on the ground.
Snow is nature's blanket and the plants underneath were well insulated.
The ground was frozen when all the bad weather started and it stayed frozen.
With the snow on top, there was no chance of winter thaw from warm sunny days.
For the plants, at least, this was a good thing.


Layers of Meaning
At first glance, the closet of the Senior Grand Empress Tashi, one of the taste makers of 12th-century Japan, would hardly look like a mine field.
But imagine yourself faced with its 500 robes, meant to be layered in a subtle array of fabrics, colors and designs, each appropriate to a particular season, occasion or mood -- and each, if improperly chosen, the social equivalent of wearing a sealskin coat to a Greenpeace rally.
Small wonder, then, as Liza Crihfield Dalby points out in KIMONO: Fashioning Culture (Yale University, $30), that modern Japanese women, who may wear their national costume only a few times a year, can be turned into fashion victims by traditional dress that is "woven of meanings as much as it is of fiber." Ms.
Dalby's belief that while innocents may wear their hearts on their sleeves, we all reveal something of our personality there.
ALIDA BECKER


Detroit Demonstrates Health System's Strengths
To the Editor:
The gist of "The Graying Factory" (Feb. 20) is that American auto workers, despite a lifetime of grueling labor, are more productive than their Japanese counterparts who are almost two decades younger.
Our health care may be costly, but if it keeps American labor working longer and more productively, it is worth the money.
JOHN.
L.
OLSON  Detroit, Feb. 22  The writer is an industrial engineer who worked for the Ford Motor Company for 35 years.


The Beauty Behind Function
A VISIT to the Museum of Early Trades and Crafts here is a welcome reminder that functional objects can be strikingly handsome.
While many of the craft items and tools on display possess almost sculptural forms, creating art was never the intent of the 18th- and 19th-century coopers, blacksmiths and woodworkers who made them.
"Form follows function" was their guiding principle, long before the Chicago architect Louis Sullivan came up with the phrase and Frank Lloyd Wright adopted it as his own.


Mutual Funds; Guarding the Shareowner's Interest
PERSONAL trading by mutual fund portfolio managers was largely ignored by the industry and investors until January.
That's when the star manager John Kaweske was dismissed after Invesco accused him of violating the company's rules on reporting his own trades, and Donald Dougherty left Putnam Investments during an inquiry that ultimately cleared him.
Since then, there has been a flurry of activity in the fund industry, among regulators and in Congress.
While some industry executives say the issue has been blown out of proportion, it deserves all the attention it has gotten, and more.


Investors Short-Changed in Penny-Stock Settlement
To the Editor:
The Securities and Exchange Commission's recent settlement with Stratton, Oakmont of accusations that the penny-stock firm had used boiler-room tactics to sell the initial public offerings of three companies does not appear to adequately protect the public interest ("For Three I.P.O.'s, the Story Seems the Same," Wall Street, Feb. 13).
After a formal S.E.C. investigation, the firm was given a relatively insignificant fine, and one of the principals was permitted to remain as president.
Stratton's lead counsel has been quoted as saying he is "extraordinarily pleased" with the settlement.
And well he should be -- unlike the investors who lost their money.
RALPH A. GANT  New York, Feb. 14  The writer is a lawyer in Manhattan who has represented several investors in cases involving Stratton, Oakmont.


FAME, FRAMED
Years ago, when I was working as a clerk at the city's old afternoon newspaper, The Washington Star, a pair of photographs arrived in the mail from a freshman Congressman.
In one picture, the Congressman was smiling; in the other, he was not smiling.
An accompanying letter instructed the editors to use the smiling picture with any story in which the Congressman had reason to be proud, and the other, lugubrious picture in the more likely event that he found himself without a reason to smile.


Carnival Air at a New Steakhouse
"A REVOLUTIONARY dining experience" is the promise of Insurrection, a new restaurant in Roslyn Heights.
The lighthearted steakhouse will please lovers of red meat, but its culinary innovations will not spark a rumble, let alone a revolution.
The decor does take a sharp turn from the familiar masculine woody-steakhouse look.
The scene is somewhere between New Orleans bordello and way-out modern.


Off Broadway: Food's the Thing
BARBETTA * (212) 246-9171; 321 West 46th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
The town-house setting at this Northern Italian restaurant is stunning, with its 18th-century Piedmontese crystal chandelier dominating the grand main dining room, silk drapes, brocade-upholstered chairs and tuxedoed waiters.
Barbetta offers a $39 pre-theater menu.
Appetizers include a soup of carrots and broccoli, roasted beet salad, meat-and-cheese-filled tortellini with Alfredo sauce, and handmade tagliarini with a tomato-and-basil sauce.
Among the entrees are braised rabbit in white wine with mushrooms and leeks; charcoal-grilled sirloin, sliced and served with an herbed vinaigrette, and sauteed veal kidneys with a red wine sauce. (Review: 1/22/93)


INSIDE
The Second Bomb Case
Having won convictions in the World Trade Center bombing, prosecutors turn to the coming trial of a blind cleric and others charged with a widespread terror plot.
Page 33.
As New York Goes. . .
Governor Cuomo's proposal to move New York's 1996 Presidential primary from early April to early March seems certain to pass, with major implications for candidates.
Page 33.
A Guided Tour in China
China gave American reporters a highly orchestrated tour of a prison where officials had been accused of torturing a jailed dissident.
Page 12.
Salvadoran Left Biding Time
El Salvador's leftist former rebels, behind in the first national election campaign since the civil war ended, view the voting as just the beginning of a long struggle for power.
Page 3.


At Least the Snow Kept the Plants Warm
THOUGH it will take some months to know what really happened to plants during the severe winter temperatures just gone by, gardeners have some solace.
The low temperatures occurred when there was snow on the ground.
Snow is nature's blanket and the plants underneath were well insulated.
The ground was frozen when all the bad weather started and it stayed frozen.
With the snow on top, there was no chance of winter thaw from warm sunny days.
For the plants, at least, this was a good thing.


Wall Street; Eager U.S. Investors Missed the Warning Signs
BOTH American and foreign markets have had a rocky beginning to 1994, with rising volatility and, in many cases, sharp setbacks.
Whether or not the markets recover, one thing is clear: American mutual fund investors did not see these declines coming.
The riskiest American stock funds are aggressive growth funds, which typically invest in smaller-company stocks.
Figures released last week showed that investors poured a net $3.7 billion into those funds in January, or 35 percent more than the old monthly record, set in November 1992.


It's Yanks vs. Mets, and Ojeda Shows Fire
It was different, even with John Franco and Dwight Gooden, two of his old friends.
Bob Ojeda expected that.
It is different now with everyone -- the looks on their faces, the questions they ask, the way they respond to his presence.
Today, Ojeda returned to Thomas J. White Stadium, his home for the final three springs of his five-season career with the Mets.
It was the first exhibition game of the spring for the Yankees, a game televised back in New York, and it seemed to be a carbon copy of last season for these two ball clubs: the Mets looked shaky and went scoreless; the Yankees pounded three home runs and won, 8-0.


Government Reinvention: A Seminar With a Master
The top officials of every municipal agency in New York City gathered at Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's home yesterday for a unusual seminar on "reinventing government," featuring a man the Mayor often cites as one of the great reinventors: Mayor Edward G. Rendell of Philadelphia.
During the daylong seminar, held at Gracie Mansion, Mr.
Rendell related his experiences in saving Philadelphia from fiscal collapse.
That task involved taking on the city's once-powerful unions and privatizing an array of municipal services, from guarding the Philadelphia Museum of Art to cleaning up City Hall.


The Color of Mondex
In England, starting next year, something called the Mondex system -- digital money -- is going to get a trial run.
Meanwhile in this country, Lloyd Bentsen, the Secretary of the Treasury, is still waiting to get his signature on currency so he can have souvenirs for his grandchildren.
With Mondex, he would have to wait a long time.
The Mondex system is based on a kind of cash card, not a credit card really or a debit card.
It's more like the new Metrocard for New York City subways, in that it stores cash.
The Metrocard is worth what you pay for it, and when popped into a turnstile, the proper amount is deducted.


The Doctor Who Gave Silk Stockings a Second Life
"SAVE YOUR OLD SILK stockings," Sir Wilfrid Thomason Grenfell wrote in a 1928 issue of the Grenfell magazine, a quarterly that publicized his medical mission in what were then the British colonies of Newfoundland and Labrador.
After working for 35 years among impoverished Eskimos and British settlers, the physician was seeking more used hosiery to be made into hooked rugs under the mission's banner.
A year later he renewed his plea, writing, "When your stockings run, let them run to Labrador!"
The silk and rayon stockings were ideal for hooked rugs, because they were readily available and absorbed dyes beautifully, especially pastels and earth tones.
In response to Grenfell's urgings, crates of stockings came from across North America and from Britain to his headquarters in St.
Anthony, Newfoundland.


South African Village Forges Pact of Peace
In a eucalyptus-shaded courthouse here on Wednesday, the villagers of Mgendwa settled one of the countless, unremarked little conflicts that add up to make the countryside of Natal Province so worrisome for politicians facing South Africa's first free elections.
With their latest victim just 30 hours dead, the village partisans of the Inkatha Freedom Party and the African National Congress promised to stop killing one another.
They exchanged apologies, shook hands effusively, and then adjourned for a barbecue.


Lillehammer
To the Editor: You have done first-time visitors to Norway a disservice by not describing the outrageous pricing of alcoholic beverages for consumption with meals.
A mixed drink before dinner can cost more than $10.
Beer and wine are priced a little lower but not by much.
The old saw goes that the Dane lives to eat and the Norwegian eats to live.
Appropriately, Denmark encourages restaurant-going and imbibing.
The Norwegians have yet to view food as a source of pleasure and consequently heavily tax both dining out and drinking as well.


INTO THE WHITE IVORY TOWER
It seems to me that at a distance of three miles, Brent Staples had ample opportunity to steer a brother 10 years his junior on a more viable path.
Perhaps if he had not seen "less and less" of his family in the interim, a collegiate brother might have offered a more beneficial role than an inconsistently present, hard-drinking father.
Even within the most fractured of families, an older sibling wields no little influence.
K.
JAI RAJ Boston


Devils Roar Back To Win 4th in Row
The mistakes were few and far apart this afternoon for the Devils.
They fell behind after scoring an early goal but came on strong with five unanswered goals and skated away with a 6-3 victory over the Calgary Flames.
Stephane Richer and Valery Zelepukin led the offense with two goals each, with Claude Lemieux and John MacLean also getting goals before a sellout crowd of 19,040 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Nussbaum's New York Tactics Falter in Washington
When he first became White House counsel, Bernard W. Nussbaum told an interviewer that he viewed his mission as preventing legal problems from becoming political ones.
By that standard there are few, if any, White House officials who would today contend that his was a successful tenure.
Many of the Clinton Administration's worst political setbacks blossomed from law-related issues that Mr.
Nussbaum was charged with handling.


A Busy Schedule At School
THINGS are really humming at the Hoff-Barthelson School in Scarsdale this week.
Today at 4 P.M. the violin-piano team of Christina Khimm and Albert Lotto plays Vivaldi, Bruch and Franck at the first of two concerts in the School's Faculty Recital Series.
Then on Tuesday at 1 P.M., six teen-age members of the Honors Program at the school will be introduced in a short concert to "showcase the extraordinary talent of these young performers." They are the clarinetist Ira Berman, the cellist Michael Buck, the pianists Shaunna Eberhard and Sayaka Tanikawa and the violinists Jacqueline Geissinger and Katherine Kelly.
Another recital at Hoff-Barthelson takes place Friday at 8 P.M. when the B.S.Q.
Quartet (named for Bodhan Sochan, an instructor of jazz piano at the school) presents an evening of jazz.


Waging War on the Brown Paper Bag
Community leaders say they are convinced that the biggest public nuisances in the Village -- late-night rowdyism, noise, fighting, vandalism, graffiti -- are caused by young people who drink alcohol on sidewalks and in parks, their beverages often concealed in brown paper bags.
Having an open container of alcohol in public is illegal, and the Greenwich Village Block Associations, a coalition of 22 local organizations, wants everyone to know it.
In the next several weeks dozens of metal warning signs will be posted on major streets and at subway and PATH stations.
Thousands of posters and leaflets will repeat the message.


DeMille Would Have Applauded
Uptown - Forty stories above Park Avenue, it was religiously quiet, the way it might be in the chamber of a high priest about to step out into a temple to make a sacrifice to the gods.
Ben Kingsley, who plays a Jewish accountant in "Schindler's List," was sitting quietly in his suite high up in the Waldorf Towers.
In a few minutes, he and his date, Julette Simpson, would be descending to the grand ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria for the blowout salute to Steven Spielberg benefiting the American Museum of the Moving Image.


Dr. Donald H. Swinney; Drama Professor, 75
Dr.
Donald H. Swinney, a retired drama professor at Hofstra University, died on Thursday at Winthrop Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
Dr.
Swinney, who lived in Uniondale, L.I., was 75.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son, David.


EXIT THE CRITIC
Those who say that Frank Rich added a little drama to the sleepy world of Broadway should have been thrilled to see him take one last swipe at all of his critics over the years.
Rich wrote exactly about what he saw, and if producers of the many shows to which he gave negative reviews were unappreciative of this, why were they the ones who were first to use whatever quote they could from his reviews to bolster ticket sales?
B.
J.
KIRSCHNER Narberth, Pa.


Double Winners
To the Sports Editor:
Britta Lindgren, referee for figure skaters, ("The Judges' Judge Says Baiul Deserved the Gold," The New York Times, Feb. 27) contends that Oksana Baiul's skating "really came from the heart, the inside . . . Nancy's was more cold . . . not coming from the inside."


Manning Remains Hawks' Winning Edge
Hawks 90, Pacers 88
Danny Manning drove from midcourt for the winning layup with 7.3 seconds left, then blocked a shot by Byron Scott to give Atlanta a 90-88 victory over visiting Indiana last night, the Hawks' sixth consecutive victory.
The Hawks have a 4-0 record since Manning joined the team in a trade for Dominique Wilkins.
The Pacers, who won 14 of their previous 16 games, led by 86-83 with 2 minutes 8 seconds left before a layup by Kevin Willis and Mookie Blaylock's 3-pointer put the Hawks ahead, 88-86.
Dale Davis tied it with a dunk for Indiana before Craig Ehlo inbounded to Manning at midcourt, and he drove to the basket.
Manning blocked Scott's shot with 3.0 seconds left to preserve the victory.
Manning finished with 17 points and 12 rebounds, Willis had 22 points and 11 rebounds and Blaylock 14 points and 10 assists for the Hawks, who have won 9 straight games at home.
Reggie Miller led the Pacers with 18 points and extended his streak of free throws without a miss to 37.
Heat 120, 76ers 83
Glen Rice scored 32 points as host Miami won a franchise-record seventh straight game and handed Philadelphia its 12th consecutive loss.
The 37-point difference was the largest margin of victory in team history.
The previous mark for the Heat was a 35-point rout of the Los Angeles Clippers on Feb. 2, 1990.
Rony Seikaly hit his first eight shots for Miami and scored 22 points on 9-for-13 shooting.
Jeff Malone paced the Sixers with 21 points, and Dana Barros scored 15 for Philadelphia, whose only two leads in the game were 2-0 and 4-2.
Miami dominated from that point on.
SuperSonics 114, Kings 98
Shawn Kemp didn't start because of a sore right elbow, but he had 25 points and 14 rebounds, and sparked a third-quarter rally for host Seattle.
The Sonics outscored Sacramento by 34-19 in the third period, turning a 59-55 halftime deficit into an 89-78 lead.
Seattle improved its record to 23-3 at home and 41-14 over all, both the best in the league.
Rockets 124, Clippers 107
Hakeem Olajuwon had 30 points and 10 rebounds and host Houston used a 19-4 run in the second and third quarters to turn a close game into a rout of Los Angeles.
Kenny Smith scored 13 of his 24 points in the third quarter when the Rockets outscored the Clippers, 37-23.
Otis Thorpe and Robert Horry scored 13 points apiece for Houston, which had a season-high 16 steals.
Dominique Wilkins led Los Angeles with 20 points, followed by Charles Outlaw with 17 points and 11 rebounds and Mark Jackson with 16 points and 10 assists.
Jazz 103, Mavericks 90
Karl Malone had 34 points and 13 rebounds, helping visiting Utah extend its season-best winning streak to eight games.
Malone made 14 for 21 shots and fell 1 point short of matching his season high for scoring as the Jazz pushed their winning streak against the Mavericks to 13 consecutive games.
Bucks 117, Pistons 108
Jon Barry scored two baskets in a 6-0 run that gave host Milwaukee the lead for good in the fourth quarter, and Eric Murdock had 28 points as the Bucks overcame 42 points by Joe Dumars to defeat Detroit.
Vin Baker, the league's rookie of the month for February, had 24 points, 10 rebounds and 6 assists for the Bucks, who are 4 games ahead of the last-place Pistons in the Central Division.
Isiah Thomas had 17 points and 10 assists for Detroit. Bullets 124, Lakers 118
Michael Adams set a team record with six 3-point baskets, and Washington scored a season-high 71 points in the first half on the way to the victory over Los Angeles in Landover, Md.
The Bullets took advantage of five 3-point baskets by Adams to open a 39-27 lead after one quarter.
Adams scored 17 of his 29 points in the period.
Washington increased the lead to 69-53 with 1:09 remaining in the first half before settling for a 71-57 halftime advantage.
Los Angeles crept back into contention in the third quarter, using a 27-16 run to close to 87-84 with three minutes left on a pair of free throws by Sedale Threatt, who led the Lakers with 32 points.


EXIT THE CRITIC
Frank Rich's piece must surely touch the hearts of his longtime enemies, as it shows this much vilified critic in the light of his true humanity, decency and integrity.
But why was there no mention of the tragic death of his dog, Checkers?
I.
GOLDSTEIN Meadowbrook, Pa.


Robin Rubinstein, Robert H. Gibson
Robin Shari Rubinstein, a daughter of Lillian Rubinstein of New York and the late Seymour Rubinstein, was married last evening to Robert Harris Gibson, the son of Maxine M. Gibson of White Plains and the late Leonard R. Gibson.
Rabbi Jacob Rubenstein officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is an account executive at La Blanca in New York, a division of Apparel Ventures Inc., a swimwear company.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  Jordan Scores His First Run  Michael Jordan, making his first spring training start, drove in his first run yesterday with a sacrifice fly and scored his first run despite going 0 for 3 in Chicago's 15-7 victory over Texas in Port Charlotte, Fla.
Jordan, 31, wasn't expected to start, but White Sox Manager Gene Lamont changed his lineup, pulling left-hander Dan Pasqua because the Rangers were starting a left-hander, Kenny Rogers.
After striking out and grounding out twice in his three previous at-bats, Jordan came to the plate in the seventh inning with the bases loaded and one out against Cris Carpenter.
He lunged at a 1-2 pitch, lofting a weak fly ball to center that Oddibe McDowell bobbled for an error.
Jordan was credited with a sacrifice fly and a run batted in as pinch runner Ray Durham scored from third.
Clemente Alvarez followed with a grand slam, driving in the White Sox's celebrated rookie. (AP)


Blending In, Standing Out
The distinctive camouflage pattern from World War II is having a revival.
Some of the earliest people to adapt the military surplus jackets were the Manhattan bike messengers, who have established a fashion language of their own. (One messenger wrapped the frame of his bicycle with strips of camouflage fabric to match his jacket and trousers.) The colors of camouflage are usually olive, sand and fir-tree green, but recently teen-agers have adapted the beige-and-cocoa camouflage of Persian Gulf War uniforms and the fashion camouflage print in gray, white and black.


Caroline Bergman, M. R. Gottschalk
Caroline Fern Bergman, the daughter of Allan H. Bergman of Short Hills, N.J., and Isobel A. Beitler of New York, was married last evening to Michael Richard Gottschalk, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Gottschalk of Brookfield, Conn.
Cantor William Wolff performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


One Cog In the Gear
To the Editor:
As a former member of Musical America's advertising staff and the former manager of advertising and marketing for the Dance magazine publication Stern's Performing Arts Directory, I know that many artists and managers take advertisements with sadly unrealistic hopes.
Occasionally, an ad draws phone calls and maybe even a booking.


Journal; What Now My Love
The heterosexual life style took a small step backward last Tuesday night when Frank Sinatra, a man who has done more for romance than any other American, accepted his Grammy Award.
In only a few minutes -- all it took for a merciful CBS to give him the hook -- he barked for his wife ("Where's my girl?") as if she were a trained seal and pumped his arm to show how he might have belted another "girl" backstage had she added water to his drink.
Just five minutes later, many Americans switched channels to watch a small step forward for the stirring of homosexuals into the American melting pot.
The event was the supposedly controversial "lesbian kiss" episode of one of the most watched entertainments in the land, "Roseanne." In case you tuned in late, this was the show that ABC threatened to censor, thereby prompting Roseanne Arnold, its star, to threaten to bolt to a competing network.
After much public vacillation (or was it Machiavellian promotion?), ABC honored its stockholders and let the show air uncut.


BEST SELLERS: March 6, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
2
2
7
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
3
3
82
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
4
4
18
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
5
7
4
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an accident, creates familial tension.
6
6
47
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
5
6
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a sylvan Vermont town.
8
12
2
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths investigate a series of catastrophes.
9
11
2
SAREK, by A.C.
Crispin. (Pocket, $22.) The stormy life of Spock's father, an illustrious ambassador for the "Star Trek" Federation.
10
8
7
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
11
2
MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) Archy McNally's search for the thief of a family's heirlooms uncovers a string of surprises.
12
10
28
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
13
13
2
RAMA REVEALED, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $22.95.) The concluding volume in a series about the voyage of a starship.
14*
9
6
HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) Three American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities in Buenos Aires in 1942.
15
1
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
43
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
11
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
3
8
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
4
6
22
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
5
4
26
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
6
5
28
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
7
9
2
LEAVING HOME, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $22.95.) From a childhood in foster homes to a column for The International Herald Tribune: the humorist's memoir.
8
11
2
ANN-MARGRET: My Story, by Ann-Margret with Todd Gold. (Putnam, $23.95.) The autobiography of the Swedish-born, Illinois-bred actress and entertainer.
9*
10
3
A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.
10
8
14
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
11
7
16
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
12
1
MY LIVES, by Roseanne Arnold. (Ballantine, $23.) The television personality discusses her professional life and private affairs.
13
1
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
14
12
20
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
15
14
22
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
7
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
2
2
41
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
3
19
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
4
4
32
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 19, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind (Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest) EXCURSIONS IN THE REAL WORLD: Memoirs, by William Trevor. (Knopf, $23.) Not an autobiography but a series of sketches from the life of the marvelous Irish short-story writer; well mannered, persuasive, showing exceptional powers both of re-creation and forgiveness.
GEORGE WALLACE: American Populist, by Stephan Lesher. (William Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $29.95.) Governor Wallace presented as above all a populist protest politician, articulating the complaints of "average" people.
HARRIET BEECHER STOWE: A Life, by Joan D. Hedrick. (Oxford University, $35.) A substantive, scrupulously researched life of the author of "Uncle Tom's Cabin," with cogent analyses of the book and the moral universe that gave rise to it.
IMAGES: My Life in Film, by Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $27.95.) At 75, the great Swedish film maker confronts and reveals himself as artist and man in this evocation of his career, based on a fresh viewing of all his movies.
THE LANGUAGE INSTINCT, by Steven Pinker. (Morrow, $23.) A lucid guide for lay people to current Chomskyan linguistics and its central thesis: we are born programmed for language, with all the grammar we need right in our heads.
THE LATE SHIFT: Letterman, Leno, and the Network Battle for the Night, by Bill Carter. (Hyperion, $24.95.) It wasn't as easy as offering Mr.
Letterman $1 zillion, as this detailed, gripping account by a Times reporter shows.
LIBERTY AND SEXUALITY: The Right to Privacy and the Making of Roe v.
Wade, by David J. Garrow. (Lisa Drew/Macmillan, $28.) A monumental account of the transformation in attitudes about sexuality that culminated in the 1973 Supreme Court decision making abortion a constitutional right.
THE MAKING OF MEMORY: From Molecules to Mind, by Steven Rose. (Anchor/Doubleday, paper, $12.95.) By studying memory, a neurobiologist seeks to bridge the gap between chemistry and consciousness, supporting his argument with experimental results.
ON THE REAL SIDE: Laughing, Lying, and Signifying -- The Underground Tradition of African-American Humor That Transformed American Culture, From Slavery to Richard Pryor, by Mel Watkins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) The creative dealings of black folk with the paradox of life in a land professing equality; by a former editor at the Times Book Review.
PARALLEL TIME: Growing Up in Black and White, by Brent Staples. (Pantheon, $23.) This memoir by an editorial writer for The New York Times is a vivid portrait of the worldly education of a young black man who made it, haunted by the specter of a brother murdered at 22.
THE RIFLES, by William T. Vollmann. (Viking, $22.95.) The hyperactive dream logic of this third book in a projected meganovel of North America conflates Franklin's fatal Arctic expedition of 1845 with a novelist's adventures in 1989.


Winter Storm No. 15 (Yes, 15) Knocks Northeast Off-Balance


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Ticket Price Drops to $2 At West Side Movie House
The $2 movie has returned to New York -- at Cineplex Odeon's Worldwide Cinemas.
Concerned about its attendance, the six-screen theater on West 50th Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues began the new ticket price policy Friday, and it will last indefinitely.
In addition, through the end of this month, movie-goers will be able to buy all the popcorn and soft drinks they can consume for $2.99.


Nancy C. Bahr, Scott F. Nelson
Nancy Corroon Bahr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Bahr of Greenville, Del., was married yesterday to Scott Forrester Nelson, a son of Robert T. Nelson and a stepson of Joanne C. Nelson of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Stephen J. Connell, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's on the Brandywine in Greenville.
The Rev.
Kenneth M. Reeves, a Unitarian minister, assisted.
The bride, 32, is a communications specialist in the community relations department at St.
Francis Hospital in Wilmington.
She graduated from Hollins College.
Her father is a senior vice president at Dean Witter, the investment banking concern, in Greenville.
Her mother, Joanne K. Bahr, retired from Ursuline Academy in Wilmington, where she taught English and history.


What Will Riverhead Say About Calverton?
In "Fate of Calverton Airport in Navy's Hands"  [ Feb. 6 ]  you stress that what will happen at Calverton depends largely on what the Navy decides to do after Grumman leaves.
What also needs to be emphasized is that what happens or doesn't happen at Calverton will depend mainly on people from the Riverhead community, and the region, reaching a consensus.


Tea and Information
IT is 7:30 P.M. at a Chinese restaurant in Gravesend, Brooklyn, and the owner is terrified.
An Asian teen-ager has just swaggered in, pulled him aside and announced he will now "protect" the restaurant from other Chinese gangs.
On a piece of paper he scribbles his name, his beeper number and "$108," the monthly fee for his services, and hands it to the owner.
"If anybody bothers you," he says, "show them the receipt. Nobody can touch me."


Got Problems? Dial a Shrink
An assortment of troubled characters has just paraded across the television screen: a single woman approaching 40 who thought that by now, she'd be a happy wife, mother and homeowner; another woman who complained that her husband touches her only in bed, and a middle-aged man who said he's just not getting any satisfaction out of life.
Enter Jacklyn Zeman, the soap opera queen who is a star of "General Hospital." She wears a long dress of green crushed velvet, her eyes radiating empathy.
"You don't have to have a serious or complicated problem," she says in one of the latest infomercials.
"Yours may be so simple you feel like it's insignificant. But what's important is that you don't keep it bottled up inside. Talk to a phone counselor now." A "900" number flashes at the bottom of the screen.


Katherine Hughes, Robert J. Del Tufo
Katherine Nouri Hughes, the vice president of communications for the Foundations of the Milken Families, was married yesterday to Robert Joseph Del Tufo, a former Attorney General of New Jersey.
The Rev.
Charles Kohli, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the bridegroom's home in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Del Tufo is the daughter of Edmond J. Nouri of New York and Gloria M. Nouri of Trenton.
The Foundations of the Milken Families in Santa Monica, Calif., were created by the brothers Michael and Lowell Milken to support education, medical research and community welfare.
She graduated from Thomas Edison State College and received a master's degree in Near Eastern studies from Princeton University.


Corrections
A caption on Feb. 20 with an article about wildlife in winter misidentified a bird at a feeder at the Greenburgh Nature Center.
It was a chickadee, not a tufted titmouse.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
UPON THIS ROCK: The Miracles of a Black Church By Samuel G. Freedman.
Harper Perennial, $12.
The author, a former reporter for The New York Times, captures the life of a poverty-ridden parish in Brooklyn where the Rev.
Dr.
Johnny Ray Youngblood inspires his congregation through a combination of Baptist tradition, revisionist theology and political action.
Last year our reviewer, Anthony Heilbut, called the book a "heartfelt, illuminating study."  CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS By May Sarton.
Norton, $8.95.
In this 1975 novel, a marriage disintegrates, much as the Government has, in an atmosphere of deception and disillusionment.
Poppy Whitelaw, a 50-year-old suburban housewife, superficially blames the Watergate scandal for her departure, instead of her own failure to measure up to her standards.
The author has "suggested a radical solution to the human-bondage-in-marriage status," Doris Grumbach said here.
"It is a daring leap." Norton has also reissued Ms.
Sarton's KINDS OF LOVE ($9.95), in which an elderly couple move to the New Hampshire town where they have spent their summers, finally embracing the place and its people fully.
In 1970 our reviewer, Richard Rhodes, described it as "a family novel thick with characters."


Feb. 27-March 5: Profiles in Courage?; Balanced-Budget Measure Falls Short in Senate
Maybe it was declining deficits, maybe it was inattention from radio talk show hosts, perhaps it was even a slight surge in political courage, but with three votes to spare the Senate on Tuesday squelched the proposed constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget.
The 63-to-37 vote in favor of it fell short of the two-thirds majority required for constitutional amendments.
That killed the measure for the year, but it is sure to resurface.


Bed and Bronzes
"I HAVE a great big sculpture here at 47th and Madison," said James Knowles, referring to the 136-room mass of stone called the Roger Smith, a Depression-era hotel that he and his wife, Suzanne, have transformed into one of the more eccentric hostelries in New York.
"I like to call it a hotel with an art bias."
Art is omnipresent at the Roger Smith, which recently emerged from a five-year, $8-million renovation.
Hallways are adorned with changing exhibits; walls in the bar and restaurant, Lily's, are splashed with winsome murals; Mr.
Knowles's abstract bronze panels, life-size busts and bold oil paintings fill the lobby.
An antique farm table in the dining room is designated "the artists' table," for artists' get-togethers, and even the menu features "New American Art Cuisine."


The World; Berlin's Symbol of Hope and Agony Awaits a New Ordeal: Tinsel
A MOSTLY empty building at the edge of an empty field in an empty section of Berlin has suddenly become the focus of one of the world's most ambitious art projects.
The building is the Reichstag, which has stood for a century at the heart of German politics and is to resume its traditional role as seat of Germany's parliament by the end of the decade.
The artist is Christo, famous for wrapping Florida islands in pink plastic; late last month, after a 22-year quest, he won permission to wrap the Reichstag in a million square feet of silver fiber for two weeks next year, as a symbol of the passing of one era and the beginning of another.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl and some other Germans hate the idea, but the legislators who approved it have more in mind than attracting attention (and tourists) to Berlin: They hope for a kind of exorcism of ghosts, knowing that this building, which carries the name of Germany's first national parliament, symbolizes like no other the heights and depths of Germany history.
Above the Reichstag's main portal are the chiseled words, "To the German People." The inscription is apt.
In the decades following its completion in 1894, the building was the scene of tumultuous debates that led to the birth and later the death of German democracy.
Set afire in 1933 by an arsonist or arsonists, captured in 1945 by Soviet soldiers, left eerily empty for years afterward and now being rebuilt to house another freely elected Parliament, it embodies the hopes and fears of a nation that has never fully come to terms with itself.
The debate about its immediate future is an example.
When Parliament voted in 1991 to move itself and the executive branch from Bonn, it was fulfilling a pledge that West German leaders had been repeating for decades: Once Germany was unified, Berlin would resume its historic role as the nation's capital.
But for a determined band of politicians and bureaucrats from western Germany, the idea of moving 350 miles east -- from near the Dutch border to an hour's drive from Poland -- remains unthinkable, and they have been using every available means to delay the move.
Supporters of the move admit that they want not just a geographical change, but also a political and psychological one.
The need to erect the building in the first place stemmed from just such a psychological shift, the first unification of Germany and the creation of a national parliament in 1871.
After much debate, a design by the Frankfurt architect Paul Wallot was chosen, though it was later revised.
The building became one of the most imposing in Central Europe, its main facade the length of one and a half football fields, its style Italian Renaissance sprinkled with Victorian ornamentation.
Germany's first Chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, who viewed parliaments as nuisances, generally stayed away.
But the legislators grew more assertive.
Late in 1918, as Germany faced military defeat, crowds gathered outside the Reichstag, sensing that history would soon be made.
They were rewarded on Nov. 9, when a leading Social Democrat, Philipp Scheidemann, appeared at a second-floor window and proclaimed the death of the monarchy and the birth of a republic.
A Doomed Democracy
Street fighting flared in the following months, and rather than convene in the Reichstag to write a new constitution, legislators moved temporarily to peaceful Weimar, a cradle of German culture that had nurtured Goethe, Schiller and Liszt.
During the 1920's, the political splintering that ultimately doomed the Weimar republic was clearly visible in the Reichstag.
Dozens of parties vied for power and many citizens became so fed up with the squabbling that they felt relieved when Hitler, who promised order, was named chancellor in January 1933.
The next month, on the night of Feb. 27, the Reichstag was enveloped in flames.
A Dutch Communist was executed, though suspicions that Nazis planned the fire persist to this day.
More important than the fire itself was Hitler's reaction.
He imposed repressive laws under which he arrested tens of thousands of opponents, closed anti-Nazi newspapers and banned opposition parties, thus consolidating his dictatorship.
The gutted Reichstag stayed empty, but the Fuhrer resisted a suggestion from his favorite architect, Albert Speer, to tear it down.
Soviet troops, who treated the Reichstag as the supreme symbol of German unity and power even though it had been an empty shell under Hitler, were jubilant when they finally captured it in April 1945.
A photo of the hammer-and-sickle banner flying over its battered facade was one of the most vivid images of the war.
Two years later, with Berlin under occupation, the Soviets sought to have the building demolished, but failed because it lay in what became West Berlin.
In the postwar years, the bombed-out land around the Reichstag became a center for the black market, and reconstruction did not begin until the 1960's.
By then, the building lay just a few yards west of the Berlin wall.
It was used for low-level political meetings, and since 1971 for an exhibition called "Questions of German History."
East and West Germany were finally reunited at midnight on Oct. 3, 1990, and it was natural that the center of festivities be the plaza that stretches from the Reichstag to the nearby Brandenburg Gate.
Last month, the Reichstag was again the subject of heated debate as Parliament considered Christo's proposal to wrap it.
Ultimately, it was approved over Chancellor Kohl's objections -- in the hope that when the fabric is removed, the building will re-emerge not only as the center of a modern new Government complex, but as a symbol of Germany's long-thwarted desire to build a united, peaceful and stable democracy.


Summer Day Camps Planned
REGISTRATION has begun for five county-run summer day camps for young people, and the Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation says it is none too early to sign up since programs fill up quickly.
The camps -- two for musicians, one for history buffs, one for ecologists and another for those with an interest in farming -- are offered at parks, conservancies and other locations in the county.


Rutgers Remembered
To the Editor:
While some New Jersey officials would disassociate the State University from its benefactor, Henry Rutgers (news article, Feb. 20), his name identifies a housing development, a social service agency and two streets on Manhattan's Lower East Side.
Both Henry Street and Rutgers Street, running through the site of Colonel Rutgers's colonial farm, recall this Revolutionary War hero.


Seeing a City In the Windows Of Its Shops; NEW YORK'S YOUNG, HIP DOWNTOWN
WINDOW shopping in SoHo is as satisfying as being a voyeur with an exhibitionist neighbor.
Unlike those prudish panes on Madison Avenue, revealing only a handbag or two, SoHo windows offer views of the entire, liberated lofty interiors.
Your eyes, even barricaded by glass, can scrutinize the back walls of the stores.
SoHo, like Russia, is a place where shoppers often wait in line for rations.
So sometimes window-shopping is a forced activity.
At Zona, on Greene Street, which limits visitors on busy days, the rations are mementos of the good life as it exists almost anywhere but here: bark window boxes, tulip bulbs, a sign that reads "Yard Sale." Where do you put a decorative yard sale sign in New York?
Zona hangs it in the window, a reminder of a certain suburban summer day, when we sold, on the grass, all those unnecessary things in our lives.
The neighborhood canteen, Dean &amp; DeLuca, has the same sorts of lines of customers, as if it were offering the last loaves of hazelnut bread before a hard winter.
Seen through the windows, the clients, clutching cappuccinos against their lemon tarts and babies dressed in Agnes B., become a performance art piece extolling patience.


Today, I Dance 'Firebird.' Tomorrow, Layoffs.
IN 1969, WHEN ARTHUR MITCHELL and Karel Shook formed the Dance Theater of Harlem in a church basement on West 145th Street, they envisioned a company that would open the doors to a world that was then closed to young black dancers: classical ballet.
Among the first members of the company, which will celebrate its 25th anniversary starting on Friday with a two-and-a-half-week season at the New York State Theater, was Virginia Johnson.
She joined the company at the age of 19 and is now the troupe's prima ballerina.


At Yale, 'As You Like It' and 'Romeo and Juliet'
BOTH are eternal love stories.
One ends "in true delights"; as for the other, "Never was a story of more woe." Be it comedy or tragedy, Shakespeare's the thing at Yale this month.
As a matter of form, "Shakespeare is a strong presence here anyway," the dean of the Yale School of Drama, Stan Wojewodski Jr., said.
He was alluding to an academic requirement that all second-year students must produce Shakespeare's works: four a year.


Trial Run for Traffic Reports
AS residents battled ice- and snow-covered roadways this winter, employees of two Westchester corporations and a hospital have been able to call their company's voice-mail system to get traffic information.
The details are being provided for a three-month trial by Westchester Commuter Central, a traffic-information service in Elmsford.
Employees hear recorded traffic messages dealing with conditions they face during their commutes.
Reports are updated twice an hour at peak times in the morning and evening and once an hour between 9 A.M. and 4 P.M.
Nynex, Reader's Digest and the White Plains Hospital Center are participating in the trial.


Seeing a City In the Windows Of Its Shops; HONG KONG: THE FINE AND THE FAKE
HOLLYWOOD Road may not sound like a beguiling Oriental back street, but that's what it is -- a hilly little thoroughfare, half a mile long, that is lined with tiny antique stores and charming curio shops.
Just blocks away from the glass skyscrapers of Hong Kong's central business district, it is named after the English estate of an early colonial governor and is one of the oldest streets in Hong Kong.
The shops are squeezed into aging frame and brick buildings.
Most of them deal in Asian antiquities, both the fine and the fake, and there are always unusual and beautiful pieces on display to delight the window-shopper.
At Schoeni Fine Oriental Arts, for example, you might see an 18th-century gilded Buddha's head, costing $5,000, or a 19th-century portable mah-jongg case -- a three-drawer wooden box filled with mah-jongg tiles carved from ox bone.
In the window of Chine Antiques there is a 19th-century red lacquer Chinese wedding chest.
Across the street, Honeychurch Antiques exhibits a small camphor-wood carving, painted red and gold, that was once part of the decorative window frame of a Chinese temple.


Extra! Extra!
To the Sports Editor:
1) Several weeks ago, Nancy Kerrigan was attacked by a thug, but she's fine how.


Birthday Greetings, to (and by) Merce
MERCE CUNNINGHAM TURNS 75 ON APRIL 16, as full of surprises as ever.
How about, the choreographer suggested, an interview without questions?
And so, as his birthday is highlighted during the two-week season by the Merce Cunningham Dance Company that begins on Tuesday at City Center, the master avant-gardist paused to reminisce in typically nonlinear fashion.
JENNIFER DUNNING
I don't think about birthdays very much.
I never did.
It's not that my family didn't do something about them, but there were three or four of us.
My parents didn't do that much about their own wedding.
I said to my brother once, "They must have had a 50th wedding anniversary." And he said, "Oh, I don't know."


Aiming Performances at Younger Audiences
SINCE music education has been so drastically curtailed in many school curriculums, several concerts specifically designed with young listeners in mind may help to fill the void.
One such event of promise is today's 3 o'clock exploration of "Magic, Mischief and Music" at the Danbury High School, with James Humphreville leading the Danbury Symphony in, among other favorites, Dukas's "Sorcerer's Apprentice" and Moussorgsky's "Night on Bald Mountain." Instrumental demonstrations will also be part of the free concert.


Officers Kill a Man After a Gun Threat
A man who was threatening customers in front of a restaurant in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn was shot and killed when he turned his shotgun on two police officers early Saturday morning, the police said.
Raymond Antonio Azcona, 30, of Coney Island, was taken to Woodhull Medical Center around 4:30 A.M. and died a short time later.
Two police officers responding to a 911 call arrived at the Lobster Palace, at Grand and Berry Streets, and found Mr.
Azcona armed with a shotgun outside the restaurant, the police said.
After the officers identified themselves, the police said, Mr.
Azcona pointed the shotgun at them.
A police officer then fired twice, hitting the suspect in the chest.


Sandra Mayer, James Roberts
Sandra Lynn Mayer, a producer of the "Today" show, and James Ira Roberts, a national correspondent for ESPN, the cable television sports network, were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Steven Lindemann, a brother-in-law of the bridegroom, officiated at the University Club.
Ms.
Mayer, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of William D. Mayer of New York and Nancy C. Portnoy of Harrison, N.Y.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University.
The bride has also been a producer of "Nightline" Her father is the senior partner in a New York options trading company that bears his name.


A Tradeoff: Trucks for Housing
It has taken decades -- not to mention a lot of political maneuvering and indirect, though fiscally powerful, Federal intervention -- but another piece in the Clinton urban-renewal project is about to fall into place.
Fran Reiter, Deputy Mayor for Planning and Community Relations, announced last week that the city had agreed to rehabilitate six buildings in the renewal area, from 50th to 56th Streets between 10th and 11th Avenues, and to meet several other requests made by Chelsea-Clinton leaders.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Central Intelligence Agency incorrectly described the May 1987 memorial service for James J. Angleton, a former counterintelligence chief.
The poet Reed Whittemore read from the poem "Four Quartets" by T. S. Eliot, not from Eliot's "Gerontion." Lines from "Gerontion" were recited by another participant, according to people who attended the service.


Hard Case


Mailman Hurt in Mugging
A United States Postal Service letter carrier, who was working his route in the University Heights section of the Bronx, was shot and wounded in a mugging yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The 23-year-old carrier, whose name was not being released until his family had been notified, was in stable condition at Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center with injuries described as not life-threatening.
The police said the victim was delivering mail at 1700 Harrison Avenue just after 1 P.M. when a man in his 20's demanded money.
After a struggle, the police said, the man shot the letter carrier in the right elbow and abdomen, then ran away.


'AMERICAN CLASSICAL'
Jonathan Schwartz's "Sunday Show" on WQEW-AM (1560) is an island of sophisticated civility in a medium overwhelmingly devoted to socking out sound bites.
The program, from 9 A.M. to 2 P.M., was started in 1971 on WNEW and is now in its second year on WQEW.
Switching to "The Sunday Show" from anywhere else on the dial is akin to stepping from Madison Square Garden into an intimate nightclub like the Oak Room at the Algonquin.
Playing a very eclectic mix of traditional pop, which he likes to call "American classical music," and chatting about sports, literature and almost anything else, Mr.
Schwartz invokes the mythical Manhattan ambiance of radio days.


Susan J. Kadin, Andrew Rosson
Susan Jill Kadin, an assistant vice president at Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company, the securities brokerage, and Andrew David Rosson, a principal in the Fieldstone Private Capital Group, both in New York, were married last evening.
Rabbi Meir Berger performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Rosson, a graduate of Syracuse University, is the daughter of Roberta L. Kadin of Fort Lee, N.J.
Her mother is a broker at Oppler-Ketive Realtors in Fort Lee.
She is also the daughter of Neal L. Kadin of North Miami, Fla.


Con Edison At Odds With Agency Over Power
Setting the stage for a collision between two longtime partners, executives of the Consolidated Edison Company insist they will continue to seek a new power purchase contract with Hydro-Quebec, and the head of the New York Power Authority, which transports the power, called the utility's strategy "weird."
Con Edison, which serves 8.3 million people in New York City and Westchester County, gets power every summer from Hydro-Quebec, which has a surplus then.
The two utilities have been negotiating to extend their 20-year deal beyond its current expiration date, at the end of 1998.


In England, Sweeps of Bluebells
THEIR color is almost impossible to describe -- a clear, deep azure that mysteriously seems to lighten in sun to shades of violet.
On a showery April day, English bluebells glow with vibrant color: the blue of a sky washed clean, bright water in a quiet bay, a nest of robins' eggs, the implicit promise of iris and forget-me-nots.
After a dark, cold winter, wild bluebells -- actually, wild hyacinths, officially identified either as Endymion nonscriptus, Scilla nutans or Hyacinthoidies nonscriptus -- suddenly appear in astonishing profusion for their brief blooming season, somewhere from late March to early May.
Certain woodlands, where bluebells thrive in mottled shade, often look as if their spring housekeepers had flung out new bright blue carpets.
Although many visitors to England seek out the drifts of daffodils made famous by Wordsworth, few know exactly where or how to look for bluebells (the American bluebell, Mertensia virginica, is from a completely different family).
Daffodils grow easily from bulbs planted almost anywhere.
Bluebells are shyer and more elusive, true wildflowers clustering in damp areas along woodland paths.
Those who want to find bluebells in their full glory must venture beyond London.
Although a bluebell takes seven years to flower from seed, some woods are so thick with plants they become known in season as bluebell woods.


Finding a Fancier Path to Spring
THE Tonya and Nancy show was fun for a while.
But even without its ignominious fizzle, I have to say that I am good and sick of winter games, Olympic or otherwise.
I am tired of my snow blower.
Tired of blue hands and a red nose.
Tired of stores that are out of salt for the walk.
Tired of water that drips and water that doesn't, and of the hill that slips and slides down to my cul de sac.


BEYOND FORMATS
Rock radio is the domain of formats, strategically designed and limited choices of music that insure that a station will sound more or less the same all day long.
Thus WNEW-FM (102.7) dispenses earnest, mid-tempo rock songs, WDRE-FM (92.7) plays a repetitive handful of angst-laden, synthesizer-driven alternative rockers, and WAXQ-FM (104.3 ), which replaced the classical WNCN, and WZRC-AM (1480) blare out screaming, testosterone-addled guitars.
But the disk jockeys on WFMU-FM (91.1), Upsala College's listener-supported station, play anything they please from a vast library -- a rare policy that makes WFMU one of the last free-form stations anywhere.
Some of its disk jockeys just dispense the latest collegiate rock, punctuated by self-indulgent ramblings, while others lean toward kitsch or esoterica, sometimes both at once.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT STORIES  THE DECLINE OF OUR NEIGHBORHOOD  By Robert Wexelblatt.
Rutgers University Press, cloth, $32; paper, $12.95.


Architectural Tour of Harlem


Madras Glories
To the Editor: I read with interest and a certain nostalgia the article "Hearing the Quiet of the Past" by Susan Ram (Jan. 9).
As a native who lived in Madras for over two decades I was sorry about two omissions in Ms.
Ram's interesting portrayal of a graceful and historically rich south Indian city.
No visit to Madras would be complete without a stop at the Government Museum on Pantheon Road in Egmore to view the exquisite Chola bronzes for which Tamil Nadu is justly famous.
The Chola sculptors had by the 10th century fully exploited this medium, and their expressive figures, caught at the moment between movement and tranquillity, pulsate with life.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  RUSSIAN POPULATION DECLINING  With the birth rate down and the death rate rising, Russia faces a population decline that will take a generation to reverse and that shows a society in crisis.  1  EX-SOVIET STATE SEEKS NEW TIES  The leader of Georgia will reach out to other members of the former Soviet Union and will visit the United States, seeking to strengthen his country's economy.  18


A la Carte; The Accent Is Portuguese in an Old-World Setting
THE tiny six-month-old storefront Churrasqueira Bairrada is not just another look-and-taste-alike Portuguese restaurant in the ethnic enclave of Mineola.
This Portuguese barbecue at 273A Willis Avenue (739-3856) is one of a kind.
Its juicy vibrantly seasoned meats are prepared in the traditional manner, over an open fire of wood-charcoal briquets started with a match.
Flames from a natural source flavor the chicken, pork and beef dishes in a way that no gas or electric-fueled fire could duplicate.


A Prisoner Perseveres And Wins Freedom
Vincent James Landano was driving to his mother's house on Staten Island one day in 1976 when he passed several police cars leaving her street.
In an instant, they turned and blocked his car.
Federal and local police officers, some armed with shotguns, reached in and pulled him through the car window.
They arrested Mr.
Landano for the killing of a Newark police officer during an armed robbery a few days earlier.
His lawyer told Mr.
Landano that he would have him out of jail within 24 hours.
"You don't fit the description of the killer," he said.


Business Diary: February 27 - March 4
THE ECONOMY The Nation's Unemployment Rate Falls Two More Notches  Slowly and steadily, America keeps going back to work.
The unemployment rate fell to 6.5 percent in February from 6.7 percent in January -- which was the first month of the Government's new tallying method -- and payrolls expanded by a solid 217,000.
And if a price for these gains is a brush with inflation, there are at least 217,000 people who don't mind a bit.
Things slowed down somewhat on the factory floor, though: the average workweek had hit exceptionally high levels recently, but with much of the nation battling ice and snow, it fell by 42 minutes, the biggest shrinkage in 10 years.
There was a hopeful note, too, in a 10 percent reduction -- a drop of 524,000 -- in the ranks of the "partially unemployed," those who want more work than they have.
But this may be less than it seems: the Labor Department said January's statistical gear-switching skewed this figure.


The Shorts Have It At Doral
The Blue Monster at the Doral Resort and Country Club is one of the biggest golf courses on the PGA Tour, a broad-shouldered bully that usually is subdued only by being overpowered.
But while the game's big hitters and big names have seemingly shot themselves out of the competition, two of the PGA Tour's shorter hitters have used deadly putting strokes to pull away from the field and position themselves for a two-man battle in the final round of the $1.4 million Doral-Ryder Open.


Yes, We Have No Burritos
Rick and Deann Bayless do not own your typical Mexican restaurants.
At their two Chicago eateries, there are no serapes on the wall, no burrito specials.
Instead, there is museum-quality folk art and a constantly changing array of regional dishes, thanks to the couple's five-year sojourn south of the border, their extensive travels and their collection of 2,500 antique Mexican cookbooks.
In fact, there's nothing even remotely similar to the Frontera Grill or Topolobampo anywhere else in America -- or Mexico, for that matter.
In this country, the cooking of our southern neighbor has been reduced to a cliche of combo platters and chips; in Mexico, the customer who can afford artful fare prefers it with a French or Italian accent, having internalized the bias against indigenous Mexican cooking.


PRESS IN MEXICO DOCILE ON REVOLT
It had all the makings of perfect television: hooded rebels, thin-lipped government negotiators, a brooding cathedral and a fragile chance for peace.
But when negotiators met this week to try to end the uprising in the state of Chiapas, Mexico's dominant television network was not there.
In a communique delivered as the talks were being planned, a rebel leader, Subcommander Marcos, declared that the network, Televisa, would not be allowed to attend because it "has no need to look for news since it just invents it." The rebels made a point of inviting CNN, however.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
105.51
104.80
117.60
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7186
1.7101
1.6698
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3571
1.3480
1.2466
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4901
1.4887
1.4460
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$377.00
$378.50
$329.60
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Bonner Handles Starting In Stride
Many people wondered why the Knicks signed Anthony Bonner before the season began.
They already had a group of talented forwards.
Bonner was not expected to play much, and it seemed almost absurd to imagine him as a starter.
Yet, March has arrived and Bonner is the Knicks' starting small forward.
It may not be permanent.
But Bonner plans to make the most of this opportunity, just as he has done since coming to New York.


Surf's Up in Sydney
THE American visitor flying from Hawaii or Los Angeles gets a first glimpse of Australia's Bondi Beach from the air.
The flight skirts the coast of New South Wales above Sydney, grazing the city at the northern and southern headlands where the harbor forms; directly below the extended claw of South Head a crescent is carved, a sliver of sand where city meets surf.
This is Bondi.
The plane goes on, to land farther south at Botany Bay, but one can easily return by taxi or city bus.
Some will be disappointed.
The city presses hard into Bondi (pronounced BONN-die), as it does to most of its 34 ocean beaches.
The beach is not long, just over half a mile from end to end.
Larger, less congested shores can be found up the coast in northern New South Wales or Queensland.
But Bondi is where the Australian myth of surf and sand began, its surf life-saving club Australia's oldest -- the world's oldest, it asserts -- formed in 1906.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DANCING THE BAROQUE
Some of the dances once performed in the courts of Louis XIV and Louis XV will be recreated in the more modest precincts of the United Church-on-the-Green in New Haven on Friday at 8 P.M.
In a presentation by Old Post Road Historic Concerts, Edith Lalonger, a Baroque specialist from France, is the solitary dancer, dressed in the panniered gowns and satin slippers of the period, accompanied by Suzanne Stumpf, playing the traverso; Stephen Marvin on violin; Daniel Ryan on the harpsichord, and David Sinclair on the viola da gamba.


Presenting: OLBWS
Another highly recognizable name in Washington retailing will soon be history," Kara Swisher wrote, with heavy heart, in The Washington Post, "when the owners of Peoples Drug Stores drop a name that has been around for almost 90 years."
"Peoples" is a warmly populist name, from the Latin populus.
Mao Zedong recognized this when he named his regime the People's Republic of China, differentiating it from the plain Republic of China when Kuomintang leaders were driven to Taiwan.
Lyndon Johnson once satirically spelled it out in a burst of oratory: "the people -- p-e-e-p-u-l." Abraham Lincoln drew on the phrase making of the Rev.
Theodore Parker for his "of the people, by the people, for the people" in the Gettysburg Address.
Further back, the framers of the United States Constitution led their document with "We, the people," a democratic phrase that drew a strenuous objection from Patrick Henry of Virginia, who preferred "We, the States."


Corrections
A picture caption with an article about rock music on page 36 in the Arts and Leisure section today misspells the surname of the singer and main songwriter for the pop group Soundgarden.
He is Chris Cornell.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Bedford - Stuyvesant; Parents to the Rescue at Schools
Parents of public school students in Bedford-Stuyvesant and surrounding communities are going an extra mile in trying to assure their children's safety: they are about to start patrolling school grounds as auxiliary police officers.
The program, created by School District 13 and the New York City Police Department, is the first of its kind in the school system, according to the Central Board of Education, the police and school officials say.


Juror in Bombing Trial Explains the Rapid Verdict
The day after the jury in the World Trade Center case returned guilty verdicts on every defendant and on every count, the surprising thing seemed not so much the results of the trial, but the speed with which the eight women and four men on the jury came to those results.
"That was a bit discouraging to me," said Robert E. Precht, the lawyer for Mohammed A. Salameh, the lead defendant in the trial.
"Frankly, I was surprised that they came back so quickly and so uniformly against all of the defendants."


Coming Full Circle From Faust Hall
About 30 years ago, Faust Hall was established as the first group home in Connecticut for people with developmental disabilities.
Its purpose was to get people out of institutions -- many of whom didn't belong there in the first place.
That was the beginning of the "Changing Course" described Feb. 13.
For people with developmental disabilities, the benefits of group home living have been widely documented and accepted.
Living within the cultural norm of their mainstream peers provides opportunities for growth, promotes independence and enables people to become more competent and confident.
It is appropriate that governments and their agencies support moves to small group homes.


The Executive Computer; Will Users Be the Big Losers in Software Patent Battles?
EVERYONE loves a David and Goliath story, so computer users probably enjoyed a moment of glee recently when a pipsqueak company called Stac Electronics won a $120 million jury award against Microsoft for patent infringement.
But analysts and programmers say such broad interpretations of intellectual property law do more harm than good.
And the ultimate losers may be computer users.
Blatant copying or counterfeiting is one thing, programmers say, but when software companies use patents or copyrights to block competition, they are denying users a choice and stifling innovation to preserve artificial monopolies.


Climb in Russia's Death Rate Sets Off Population Implosion
With a society so nervous about the future that it has all but stopped having children, and a death rate rising faster than that of any other country, Russia faces an unusual population crisis that even optimists say will take a generation to reverse.
Life expectancy of adult men has plummeted to 60 years, Russian and Western demographers say.
That means that men in Indonesia, the Philippines and parts of Africa live longer than the average man in Russia today.


Sex Education In the Early Grades
The article "Early-Grade Sex Course Is Debated" is most enlightening.
As a parent of five grade-school children, I strongly object to this kind of material being taught.
Young children are private and sensitive regarding their bodies and are naturally modest.
This program is an invasion of their privacy and will undoubtedly upset them.
It is unnecessary to expose them to personal matters they are not even curious about.
Sex education should be taught on a one-to-one basis between parents and child -- not in a classroom, especially at young ages.


Profile; In Quest for Electric Cars, He Adds the Power of Faith
James Worden built his first electric car in the seventh grade -- if you don't count his earlier attempts, made with Legos, an Erector set or whatever was handy.
This had a sturdy wooden frame, "something you could ride on, that wouldn't fall apart under you," he said.
By the 10th grade, Mr.
Worden had built several cars "that only went in the road for short periods, between when police cars passed by." Eventually he built one he could take on the streets legally.
It absorbed enough energy through solar cells on its roof and hood to take him to high school and back, in Arlington, Mass.


POSTINGS: $6 Million Restoration for IRT Stop; Flatbush Ave. Station Gets New Old Look
In 1920, when the Flatbush Avenue subway station opened, it was a typical architectural example of an IRT stop: ceramic ornaments, multicolored mosaic bands, terra cotta moldings, sculptures and station-name plaques were an integral part of the design.
Now, 74 years later, the station is being rehabilitated as part of the Transit Authority's plan to upgrade the entire subway system, and the idea is to provide even more of a good thing.


Corrections
An article on the front page of Styles of The Times today, about politicians who portray themselves as figures of fun, characterizes Richard M. Nixon's 1968 Presidential campaign incorrectly.
He was running for election, not re-election.
The article also misspells the surname of a former "Tonight" show host.
He is Jack Paar.


Cold War Training
It's been a great winter for cold weather training at Fort Drum, up near Watertown, N.Y., home of the Army's 10th Mountain Division.
The Army does have other facilities for cold weather -- in Alaska, for instance -- but they hardly seemed necessary this year.
Two of the best days for skiing and snowshoeing with up to 80-pound packs, as the soldiers above are doing, were Jan. 16 and 17, with lows of 32 below and 33 below (without wimpy windchill fudging), both record breakers.
The soldiers do have to make snow shelters and spend days out in the elements, and some of them came direct from 100 degrees in Somalia to below-zero temperatures at Fort Drum.
But in other ways they had it easy.


Examiners


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Morrisania; Squatters Battle Over Rights
In a battle over squatters' rights and city housing policies, a squatters group is fighting the transfer of four dilapidated city-owned buildings to a developer with a history of housing violations.
The group, Inner City Press/Community on the Move, has organized 18 "squatters co-ops" in the South Bronx and screens applicants for them.
Only those who will help work on the buildings they live in are voted in as members, said the group's director, Matthew Lee.


Art - and Plenty of It
A preview of the Art Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Feb. 23.


Anne P. Kaplan, Elon D. Spar
Anne Poringer Kaplan, an area-operations manager at Nynex, was married last evening to Elon David Spar, a vice president at CS First Boston.
Both work in New York.
The bridegroom's father, Rabbi Dr.
Elliott T. Spar, performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Sholom in Smithtown, L.I.
Mrs.
Spar, 29, graduated from Vassar College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is a daughter of Geo Carl Kaplan and Barbara G. Kaplan, both of New York.
Her father is a private market-research consultant in New York.
Her mother is a senior associate at the New York law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan.


Why Dump On Success?
To the Editor:
Why was William Harris so negative and nasty in his article on Wendy Wasserstein?  [ "Hoping to Fill a Broadway House? Call Wasserstein," Feb. 13 ] .
Why is it not possible to celebrate -- indeed, rejoice in -- the wonderful successes of a playwright who has so much humanity and talent?
Why focus on the "mixed reviews" or the fact she is "not a phenomenon" and "hardly prolific" like Neil Simon?
Why summarize "The Sisters Rosensweig" as simply "a play about three bickering middle-aged Jewish sisters"?


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 6, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
2
9
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
3
2
SAVING GRACE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) The romantic problems of a 13th-century English widow.
4
7
WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The families of law officers are besieged by violence in Los Angeles and Montana.
5
4
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A servant hopes to win an heiress's heart in Victorian-era Minnesota.
6
3
JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star Wars" saga.
7
2
THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran solve a mystery.
8
6
RUBY, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in New Orleans.
9
6
PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of murders in a small California town vexes a temporary district attorney.
10
1
WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lucas Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in Wisconsin's cold woods.
11
2
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The final volume in a series about a fantasy land.
12
10
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
13
1
TEXAS SUNRISE, by Fern Michaels. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The dying mistress of a fashion empire mitigates her family's passions.
14*
55
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
15
1
THE TEN THOUSAND, by Harold Coyle. (Pocket, $6.50.) American troops have to fight German forces after a mission in Ukraine.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
8
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
539
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
55
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir.
4
8
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
5
25
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.
6
125
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7*
40
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
8
18
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
9
5
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Vietnam.
10
14
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy.
11*
139
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) Communicating.
12*
12
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
13*
14
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) Southern murders.
14*
44
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
15*
6
A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine, $8.99.) Government waste.
16*
14
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
17*
2
BITTER BLOOD, by Jerry Bledsoe. (Onyx, $5.99.) Murders of members of two families.
18*
140
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
19*
30
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) The veterinarian's memoirs.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
155
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
162
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
11
BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises for women to achieve good health and fitness.
4
20
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 19, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Feb. 27-March 5: Revolt and Resolution; Mexico's President Gives In, Placating Rebels for Now With Pledges of Reform
The most extraordinary thing about the tentative settlement that emerged last week in the peasant rebellion in Mexico's southern state of Chiapas may have been its date.
The accords were initialed on Wednesday, March 2, just two months after a small army of Mayan Indian peasants rose up against poverty and oppression they traced to the Spanish conquest.


Young Lightens Up a Dull Day for Mets
Anthony Young's self-described redemption year began ominously today.
It wasn't exactly a case of pitch and duck for the Mets' right-hander, but it was close.
Line drive out to center field.
Base hit.
Base hit.
Then Young veered from the train-wreck pattern of last year.
He induced the Yankees' Sam Horn to hit into an easy 5-4-3 double play.


Sleight Of Eye
Mixing a 60's idea for stereoscopic pictures with computer technology is the formula for a solid best seller.
WHAT IT IS: Part picture book, part head trip.
"Magic Eye" presents 22 color images called "single-image random-dot stereograms." When looked at in a certain way, they spring mind-bending surprises on the viewer.


Sarah E. Byrne, Edward G. Miller
Sarah Elizabeth Byrne, the daughter of Sarah Ford of New York and Thomas Byrne of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Edward Garvey Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter S. Miller of East Lansing, Mich.
The Rev.
Joel Gibson, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York.
The bride, 26, will be known as Mrs.
Byrne Miller.
She and her husband, 25, graduated from Swarthmore College, where both were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a candidate for an M.B.A. at the University of Pennsylvania, at which she is a Lauder Fellow with a specialty in Chinese.
Her father retired as a shareholder relations manager at Texaco in White Plains.
Her mother is an actress.


Marketing Is Part of the Game
To the Editor:
In his essay "Appeals to the Heart, From the Unknown, Failed and Forgotten"  [ Feb. 13 ] , Bernard Holland accurately describes the sometimes undignified parade of publicity photographs and dubious blurbs in the Musical America directory.
Yet the fact is that in America classical musicians have always been marketed in superficial ways that emphasize their youth, glamour or exoticism; their music-making is an elusive commodity increasingly foreign to a public with diminishing curiosity or patience for classical concerts.


Repairing the White House Mess
Robert Fiske has stepped into the Whitewater mess with precisely the authority and integrity that the White House, particularly in the person of Bernard Nussbaum, has so conspicuously failed to exhibit over the last few months.
By serving subpoenas on 10 senior White House and Treasury Department officials, Mr.
Fiske, the special counsel appointed to look into the Whitewater case, has also served notice that he is expanding his inquiry to include the three extraordinary White House meetings at which the Resolution Trust Corporation's probe of a failed savings and loan association with close ties to the President and Mrs.
Clinton was discussed.


Jekyll Island: Welcome to The Club
IT WAS RAINING WHEN WE LEFT NEW YORK, but upon reaching our taxi to the airport I handed the umbrella to the doorman to hold for our return.
We were heading South, and in the South of my imagination, every tree is hung with moss, every voice has a pleasant drawl, and it doesn't rain.
Our destination was Jekyll Island, Ga.
In 1886, a group of Northern millionaires bought the whole island as a hunting preserve and winter retreat.
They built a 60-room clubhouse in the gangly, turreted, broad-roofed and balcony-behung American Queen Anne style, to which they added private cottages, bicycle paths, tennis courts and golf courses.
For half a century, this was the place in the sun for some of the richest and most powerful families in America, including the Astors, Cornings, Cuttings, Goodyears, Goulds, Lorillards, Macys, Morgans, Pulitzers, Rockefellers and Vanderbilts.
As a fan of grand Victorian hotels, I had wanted to see it ever since I'd heard that the clubhouse and adjacent buildings, after years of being derelict, had been restored and were operating as the Jekyll Island Club Hotel, a Radisson resort.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Ennui Goes Better With Coke
It all starts with the BMW.
Lelaina doesn't want one.
Her father insists that she take it as a graduation gift.
But in her cosmology, the best material expression of her values is not an expensive car, but rather the Big Gulp, an oversized cup of soda sold cheaply at the 7-Eleven.


Mystery on the Z Line


Natalie A. Layzell, Robert A. Anthony
Natalie Anne Layzell, the New York editor of The International Herald Tribune, was married yesterday to Robert Alan Anthony, the site manager for William Crawford Builders in the Bronx.
Robert Brownstein, a retired justice of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, performed the ceremony at the bridegroom's house in Southampton, L.I.
Ms.
Layzell is keeping her name.
She is the daughter of the late Aurelia Preston and the late Harry Layzell of Harrow-on-the-Hill, Middlesex, England.
She attended Clare College of Cambridge University.
Her mother was the chief accountant for Vanden Plas in Kingsbury, England, a maker of custom automobile bodies.


Gamecocks Stun Kentucky With :03 Left
South Carolina 75, Kentucky 74
Emmett Hall's layup with 3 seconds left gave South Carolina a 75-74 upset of No. 7 Kentucky yesterday in Columbia, S.C., preventing the Wildcats from clinching the Southeastern Conference Eastern Division title and costing them the top seeding in the upcoming S.E.C. playoffs.


EXIT THE CRITIC
I can't begin to say how many times I have seen advertisements for Broadway shows that include the phrase "the critics raved about" this or that.
Now, thanks to your depiction of Frank Rich as Sweeney Todd, I know what a raving critic really looks like!
FLOYD W. GUMBLE Carmel, N.Y.


Stefanie Morak, Bryan Kalman
Stefanie Leigh Morak, a daughter of Arnold and Janice Morak of Brooklyn, was married last evening to Bryan Rod Kalman, the son of Nancy Larkin and the stepson of Judge Peter R. Larkin of New Fairfield, Conn.
Rabbi Charles Davidson performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
The bride, 27, graduated from Cornell University and is a sales manager at the Four Seasons Hotel in New York.
Her father is the chief executive of the Master Cutting Table Company, which makes machinery for producing leather goods, in New York.
The bride's mother is the company's director of advertising and sales promotions.


Play Area Lost in Bureaucracy
Once again, spring is on its way, and once again, 550 grade-school students at P.S. 75 on West End Avenue and 96th Street will be using an empty paved lot for a playground.
Five years ago, parents began lobbying for improvements, even raising $1,000 to buy a jungle gym for the youngest children at the school.
And $272,000 was dedicated to renovating the school's two play areas; the work finally began last.


BENEFITS
For the Opera Guild  TUESDAY -- The Metropolitan Opera Guild will hold an auction at Christie's for the benefit of educational programs meant to widen the audiences for opera and other performing arts.
The evening will start at 6 with a cocktail party and buffet, which will be followed by an auction of events ranging from an African safari in Botswana to a trip on the Eastern and Orient Express from Singapore to Bangkok.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 769-7068.


Deer in the Garden? Try Changing the Menu
SOME people get so hangdog about the deer eating up their gardens they go into the J. Franklin Styer Nursery outside Philadelphia, and say, "I'm going to just hang up some hubcaps and be done with it."
Hubcaps are supposed to bang around in the wind and scare the deer.
Heh-heh.
Might as well paint them pretty colors and put up some pink flamingos.


EXIT THE CRITIC
I am one of Frank Rich's fans and always read his articles with interest.
Even if I had no intention of attending the play he was reviewing, his description and commentary never failed to interest me, provoke me, sometimes amuse me.


Rules Questioned
To the Sports Editor,
I've been wondering about the wisdom of the Olympic figure skating rules since Nancy Kerrigan lost the gold medal to Oksana Baiul.
Four judges thought Kerrigan better in the long program, four judges Baiul better and one judge gave the two skaters the same total score.
Under existing rules, this tie was broken in favor of Baiul because the judge that gave the two the same total score ranked Baiul's artistic presentation higher than Kerrigan's, with artistic presentation and technical merit being the two types of scores a skater receives.


Georgian Defends Renewed Ties to Ex-Soviet Bloc
As Eduard A. Shevardnadze prepared for his first visit to Washington as Georgia's President, he said his Government needed to re-establish ties with the other former Soviet republics so it could better respond to the effects of civil war and economic distress.
"We have managed to end our political isolation," he said in an interview, adding that 70 to 80 percent of the Georgian population favored membership in the Commonwealth of Independent States, the association that succeeded the Soviet Union.
"It is now time to end our economic isolation by renewing traditional economic ties to the other states of the former U.S.S.R."


For Rothko, It Wasn't All Black Despair
WHEN IT WAS ANNOUNCED that the Pace Gallery would be showing "The Last Paintings" of the Abstract Expressionist Mark Rothko this month, shades of black and gray sprang to mind.
The only other time I saw Rothko's last paintings was at the Marlborough Gallery in 1970, a few months after his suicide, and they made a stark impression.
In those unusually Minimalist works, the clouds of rich moody color that had characterized Rothko's mature work had been blasted away.
All that remained were barren moonscapes: in work after work, single rectangles of gray met rectangles of black to form a bleak horizon.
Instead of exhaling, and suffusing the eye with soft color, these paintings inhaled, and held their breath.
The rectangles almost seemed locked in a vise, thanks to the clean, hard lines of their edges, which, in contrast to Rothko's usual feathered borders, showed signs of taping.
An emotional scale that had ranged from brooding to exultant to lyrical was collapsed into a single note of despair.
The last Rothkos at Marlborough hinted at an artist who had reached a dead end.
They appeared to be the logical prelude to death.


Glass for Experts
Visitors to Bead Expo '94, a biennial bead bazaar and symposium held in Santa Fe, N.M., are easy to spot.
"Everyone wears beads," said Suzanne Jamison, an event organizer.
The bazaar part consists of 155 booths with artisans and vendors from China, Ghana, India, Mauritania and the Czech Republic as well as the United States. (A single inch-long glass bead can cost more than $100, Ms. Jamison said.)


Jets' Marvin Jones Is Mending Well, Thank You
Instead of spending the last two months of the season solidifying his hold on the middle linebacker position, linebacker Marvin Jones of the Jets was in bed with his leg elevated so that a chip fracture of his hip socket would mend properly.
Between the video games and the mind-numbing effects of daytime television, Jones had plenty of time to think.
Jones wondered what his rookie season might have been if he had not injured his hip and missed the last seven games of the season.
Then, he started thinking about what other people thought of him -- the first-round pick, No. 4 over all in the draft, lying in bed and collecting a hefty paycheck.
Jones signed a five-year deal valued at $5.9 million, including a $3.25 million signing bonus.


Mississippians Struggle From a Storm Long Past
Even as the Northeast clears away winter's latest unwelcome gift of snow, this region struggles, dazed and wobbly, with remnants of an ice storm last month that has left thousands of households in the dark for more than 20 days.
The Feb. 9 storm, which at one point stretched like a frigid belt from Arkansas to Maryland, has had the most lingering effect here in northern Mississippi.
Even now, the landscape is littered with snapped trees, piled limbs and splintered power poles.
But perhaps more poignant than what the storm left behind is what it took with it.


Seeking to Help Young Inmates
EVEN as the country's collective moral temperature is rising with outrage at the perception of increased crime and with the White House demanding life sentences after a felon's third conviction for a violent crime, a group that seeks to coordinate transition services for recently released inmates is arguing for greater assistance to former convicts.
"If we do not follow them into the community, then they will just be back on my doorstep," said Robert E. Davis, warden of the County Penitentiary here, "and the work we have done inside is probably going to be wasted."


Wall Street; Mom, Apple Pie and Stock Options?
TOMORROW, executives from all over America will descend upon Stamford, Conn., where, without cracking a smile, they will hoot and holler about the dangers to American capitalism, if not Western civilization, if some no-good accountants keep insisting that they come clean with shareholders about the cost of their stock options.
The occasion is the first of six public hearings, and the emotional pitch is high enough that Autozone, one Memphis company that will miss the meetings, coaxed 620 employees to sign identical protest letters.


The Great One's Greatest Goal Is Getting Close
His favorite goal always used to be the next one.
But the prospect of his 802d goal, whether it emanates from a feathery deflection or a seismic slap shot, has become his immediate, and increasingly nerve-racking, obsession.
Nobody in National Hockey League history has ever scored 802 goals.
That's why it's a natural for Wayne Gretzky, whose supernatural skills seem perpetually undaunted by the unprecedented.
The actual record-breaker is still four goals into the future, but the hockey world persists in holding its breath and applying more pressure to the slender shoulders of the unlikely superstar, a willowy wraith in macho uniform, who has broken every barrier, be it statistical, economic or esthetic, of his sport.


Owl Issue Tests Reliance on Consensus in Environmentalism
As it seeks court approval for a plan sharply curtailing logging in forests where the threatened spotted owl nests, the Clinton Administration faces the toughest test of its approach to reconciling conservation and economic development.
What started as a search for consensus could end in the traditional fashion, with deeply divided partisans seeking outright victory in court -- casting doubt on whether the Administration's consensus-building approach to managing natural resources can succeed.


New Literary Form
Influential literary journal, 30 years old, known for lengthy reviews, bitter battles in the letters column and overeducated lonely hearts, seeks to elevate the "personal" to the status it deserves.
Yes, it's The New York Review of Books "Extraordinary Erudite Personal Ad Contest" with a grand prize (to be given to two winners) worth more than most writing awards -- a two-week literary tour of England.


Taking a Cue From the Lowly Potato Chip Bag
IN 1980, TO THE DISMAY OF Egyptologists around the world, President Anwar el-Sadat closed down the Egyptian Museum's Royal Mummy Room, which housed the mummified remains of 27 kings and queens of Egypt.
A public display of the royal mummies, he said, was "against our religious concepts."
So the world's best collection of mummies, 27 in all, which had been one of the most popular tourist attractions in Egypt, languished in a storeroom while authorities debated what to do with them.
Eventually Sadat's decision was reversed, and on Tuesday 11 of these ancient rulers went on view in a gleaming new installation with state-of-the-art display cases.
Built with polished Aswan marble, the new mummy room has been designed to resemble the rock-cut tombs in Upper Egypt in which the pharaohs were originally buried.
The dramatically spotlighted cases are arranged in a rectangle around six massive pillars.


World Markets; Staying the Course in Europe
IT would be easy to conclude, based on the behavior of investors in European stocks and bonds over the past several weeks, that Europe is in for increasing inflation and higher interest rates and that the markets are headed for a downward spiral.
The markets have been extremely volatile, and on several days have endured sharp selloffs as pessimism about inflation and interest rates in the United States infected investors in Europe.
The situation was not helped by the Bundesbank's announcement last week that the German money supply, a predictor of inflation, had increased at a far higher level than expected, although the central bank explained the jump away as a result of one-time technical factors.


A Wrong Breed and a Wrong Idea
To the Editor:
For your information, the photograph of the cow with "The Perils of Messing With Milk" (Business Diary, Feb. 6) was of a Hereford -- a beef breed that shouldn't have been used to illustrate a discussion about milk.
The item also failed to mention that there is a surplus of milk in the United States.
Only the Monsanto Company, which manufactures and distributes the hormone bovine somatotropin, or BTS, will benefit from its use.
Not only will milk prices decline because use of BTS is likely to create an even greater surplus, but consumption will probably decrease because of adverse reactions to biotech milk.
ROBERT S. WARRINER  Montrose, Pa., Feb. 7  The writer owns and manages Agawam Farms.


Co-Evolution
First, fish emerged from the sea.
Then, a few hundred million years later, they made it to car bumpers, as symbols of Christian faith. (About the same time, some Christians were slamming the theory of evolution pretty heavily.) Then, a few years ago, in a step as remarkable as that first one onto land, the car-bumper fish themselves began to evolve, growing legs and a resonant name.


On the Road, and They Put Men to the Test
BACK in 1981, when Mary Corr was the lone woman administering driving tests to truckers, bus drivers and motorcyclists in Nassau County, along came a cement truck.
"I had just started the job," Mrs.
Corr recalled, "and these guys pull up in this cement truck. Now those trucks are very hard to get into. They're so high up, and some only have one seat. But I didn't want to seem a wuss. I was the only female examiner back then, and I thought, 'If the men can do it I can do it.' So the friends of the cement-truck guy lifted me into the truck.


Corrections
Articles in the Neighborhood Report on Feb. 20 and 27 misstated the duration of a dues boycott by some residents of Seagate, a private community in Brooklyn.
The boycott, which stems from a dispute over a proposed increase in dues and other actions by the community's governing body, began in July; the dispute began three years ago.


Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler
Magazine Part 2


At Least the Snow Kept the Plants Warm
THOUGH it will take some months to know what really happened to plants during the severe winter temperatures just gone by, gardeners have some solace.
The low temperatures occurred when there was snow on the ground.
Snow is nature's blanket and the plants underneath were well insulated.
The ground was frozen when all the bad weather started and it stayed frozen.
With the snow on top, there was no chance of winter thaw from warm sunny days.
For the plants, at least, this was a good thing.


At Work; On Bosses, Barriers and Beliefs
THE big boss at your company looks to other big bosses as models of success and is serious and single-minded about keeping up with corporate news and trends, right?
Rur-r-ro-o-o-n-n-g, as some peoples' favorite Washington pundit would say.
Captains and lieutenants of industry, according to a recent survey of senior executives, are no less intrigued with celebrity than the millions of Americans who plan their trips to the supermarket around the distribution schedule of the National Enquirer.
The five people cited most often as influencing business decisions in the last year: Jimmy Johnson, coach of the Dallas Cowboys; Madonna, the philosopher of the body; President Clinton, sharer of pain; Pat Riley, brilliantined motivator/coach of the New York Knicks, and Fernando Mateo, the Manhattan carpet merchant who started a program to trade guns for toys.


As Youths Battle Israeli Soldiers, an Ally of Arafat Calls for Armed Struggle
As East Jerusalem youths battled soldiers on a main business street a few blocks away, a veteran political ally of Yasir Arafat told supporters at a rally today that the time had come for Palestinians to take up arms against Israel.
"Settlers and the occupation don't know anything except the language of bullets," said Salim al-Zreii, a leader of Mr.
Arafat's Fatah faction of the Palestine Liberation Organization.


When Lamps Wear Out, It May Be Time to Start Rewiring
FLOOR and desk lamps wear out eventually, and a winter of hard use puts many to the test.
A malfunctioning lamp is a fire and shock hazard, and prompt attention is in order.
If a lamp fails to light when switched on, check to make sure that the bulb is good, that the lamp is firmly plugged in and that other lights or appliances on the circuit operate.


Developing Ourselves to Death
MORTGAGING THE EARTH The World Bank, Environmental Impoverishment, and the Crisis of Development.
By Bruce Rich. 376 pp.
Boston: Beacon Press. $29.


Blame Big Producers for Aluminum's Troubles
To the Editor:
In "Russia's Wild Capitalists Take Aluminum for a Ride" (Feb. 13), Ann Imse blames opportunist Russians for the problems in the aluminum industry.
But the industry's troubles stem from overcapacity that began long before the avalanche of Russian exports.


Drawings and Prints That Pose a Contrast
THE forward gallery at Aljira is given over to the drawings of Cicely Cottingham, the smaller space aft to prints by Wendell Brooks.
This is quite a contrast.
Ms.
Cottingham, whose reputation extends beyond New Jersey, specifically to Manhattan, first caught the reviewer's eye in the mid-1980's with black chalk nocturnes -- allusions to landscape that arouse fleeting associations with Seurat.
They were followed by small oils, also implying landscape and as turbulent as the drawings are still.


No Headline
"Don't say I said anything bad about Hillary. I'm as scared of her as everyone else." MARLIN FITZWATER, President Bush's press secretary.  [ 22:2. ]


Community Living For Retarded People
Thank you for shedding light on the current clash of opinions in the care of retarded people in Connecticut.
"How the Care of Retarded People Is Changing Course" (Feb. 13).
More than 300 people attended the Jan. 9 hearing on the Department of Mental Retardation's five-year plan.
Of the 73 who spoke, 54 opposed closure of sheltered workshops and congregate living sites.
The people opposing the plan were almost all relatives of severely or profoundly retarded clients of the department.
These clients function below the level of a 5-year-old.
Many of them have other serious problems in communicating, in behavior control, in mobility and in health.
Their families do not believe their quality of life would be improved if these clients were forced to work or live in the community because the workshops, the regional centers, or Southbury Training School were closed.


Data Bank/March 6, 1994
Data Bank/March 6, 1994
Construction Spending
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Monthly percent change
-1.2
2.4
2.1
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
2.1
1.4
1.7
Index of Leading Indicators
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.7
0.4
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.5
0.2
Employment*
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
In thousands
122,258
121,971
120,661
Unemployment/Rate*
In thousands/percent
8,518 (6.5)
8,696 (6.7)
8,237 (6.4)
Gross Domestic Product
IV Q'93
III Q'93
II Q'93
Change in percent
7.5
2.9
1.9
*Because of new methodology and the introduction of 1990 census data Dec. employment data are not directly comparable to Jan. and Feb.


In Southport, the Sonoma Valley Style
NEW restaurants usually require a period of time before getting up to speed in staff and kitchen performance.
It has not been necessary at Sonoma California Grille, which opened recently in Southport.
Perhaps because the newcomer is the offspring of Spazzi, on the Post Road in Fairfield, with that restaurant's experience to draw on, Sonoma California Grille has hit the ground running.
On recent visits, we were surprised to find both the food and cheerful, upbeat service exemplary.
There was not a glitch in sight.
But be forewarned: The vast dining space, though elaborately renovated with wide-angle views of a huge modern kitchen, can seem glum and off-putting.
Its mustard-color sponge-painted walls, dark cherrywood trim and slatted panels (to lower the ceiling), bare black wood tables and chairs with green plastic seats make it resemble a noisy cafeteria more than a quiet Sonoma Valley inn.
But the tables are well-spaced and, at almost the moment we sat down, our waiter deposited a plate of piping hot refried black beans punctuated with spicy flat bread (brushed with kosher salt and jalapeno oil), which was delicious.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on page 3 of the Travel section today, about the new Denver International Airport, misstates its opening date in some copies.
After the section went to press, the opening was rescheduled to May 15, from March 9.


Cold War Spending
When the cold war was in full swing, it made Americans spend as though there were no tomorrow -- precisely because they believed there wouldn't be one.
At least that's the theory of Joel Slemrod, an economics professor at the University of Michigan who has been following the relationship between Americans' fears of nuclear war and the saving rate.
Slemrod compared private savings to the "Doomsday Clock" in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, a measure of the editors' sense of the likelihood of nuclear war.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; The Free Theater, Memorable Touches at 940 Park
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
The Free Theater
Q.
About 60 years ago I attended several performances at the Free Theater in the East 20's, conducted by Walter Davenport.
What happened to it? . . .
Stanley Faulkner, Manhattan.


Outside Looking In
I have several close friends who are severely addicted to alcohol, and over the years I have thought about trying to persuade each of them to check into a hospital and get sober.
Have I ever done it?
No.
I let my friends be.
Is it cowardice?
Partly.
There's no contest between an interfering presence and the solace of a drink.
If, miraculously, one of my friends listened to my advice and went for treatment, then possibly the relationship would survive, although I think people are never quite comfortable with their savior.
More likely, the alcoholic's life would go on as before, and I would be viewed with suspicion forever.


Corrections
A report about an office lease in the Postings column on the first page of the Real Estate section today includes an incomplete reference to a related article.
That article, about the Rudin Management company, is on page 15 of the section.


Technology; Of Willful Wipers And Talking Cars
THERE was much that was worthy at the annual automobile engineering conference here last week: self-sealing fuel line connectors, for example, and low pressure molding compounds.
But this is not a story about those things.
This is a story about the really cool stuff: The windshield wipers that wipe of their own free will.
The sensitive, 90's cars, which not only talk but also listen.
The side-impact air bags -- which, come to think of it, seem worthy as well as cool.


East German Files Aided U.S. in Spy Case
Information from the files of a former East German intelligence service aided an American inquiry that led to Aldrich H. Ames, the Central Intelligence Agency official arrested on spy charges, Government officials said tonight.
It was not clear what the precise nature of the information was or the extent to which it helped the inquiry, but the officials said it helped narrow their search for a mole at the C.I.A.


Voices in Favor Of the D.M.R. Plan
As parents of children who are mentally retarded, we take umbrage at the unbalanced and biased article, "How the Care of Retarded People Is Changing Course."
The article is skewed because it only quoted a vocal minority of parents who are fearful of the change that the Department of Mental Retardation's five-year plan represents.
At a previous hearing held in East Hartford, the writer would have heard positive testimonies representing thousands of constituents in favor of the department's plan.


The Executive Life; How Hollywood Dines Behind Closed Doors
IN Hollywood, where image is everything and perception is more powerful than reality, it is imperative to be seen about town as fit and trim -- and diet-wise about staying that way.
At power breakfasts, business lunches and client dinners, the right-minded executive never ingests butter, cream, alcohol or red meat.
Macrobiotic veggies and Chinese herb diets are in; anything but light cuisine is out.
But while many entertainment executives geniunely believe in living healthy, a residual taste for the good life is feeding a rebel underground of eaters who crave the flavor of fat.
Behind closed doors, in the privacy of their own homes, they indulge in comfort foods and serve their friends high-calorie feasts.


Ernest Benecke's Lost Treasure
"IN 30 YEARS OF collecting I have never seen anything like it," says Werner Bokelberg.
To the respected German photography collector, "it" means the 143 prints by the notoriously obscure Ernest Benecke that lately came into his hands.
Dated 1852 and consisting in part of portraits taken in Egypt and Nubia, they are among the earliest surviving photographs of non-Western civilization.
What's more, the impartial, at-ease manner of the pictures now qualifies Benecke as perhaps the first ethnographic photographer.
"He was different from other traveling photographers of that time," says Bokelberg.
"With the others you see monuments of ancient Egypt, views of Syria, Nubia, the Holy Land. But never people. Never, ever. And the style is very modern. These photographs look as if they could be done for Benetton today."


Salvador's Ex-Rebels Trail in Polls but Look Ahead
After more than a decade of a civil war in which they fought the American-backed Government to a standstill, El Salvador's former rebels are facing the prospect of a rout in the first national elections since the fighting ended.
Independent polls and a majority of political analysts here suggest that the country's leftist alliance has little chance of capturing the presidency in the March 20 elections and could even fail to prevent the governing rightist party, Arena, from dominating the new National Assembly.


National Gypsum Bankruptcy Is Defended
To the Editor:
Your recent Wall Street column unfairly and inappropriately attacked senior managers of National Gypsum as well as a courageous bankruptcy judge in Dallas, Steven A. Felsenthal, who steered a complex, mass tort bankruptcy proceeding through the courts in near record time, thereby saving many millions of dollars in professional fees.


TRANSACTIONS
Hockey National Hockey League


Venezuela
To the Editor: Scott Norvell's article "Sharing a Caribbean Sea Wall" (Jan. 16) brought back fond memories of my stay in the fall of 1992 at the charming Club Cotoperix in the tiny fishing village of Puerto Colombia, Venezuela.
Those who seek to experience South American village life and the beauty of velvety green mountains plunging to the azure sea below can do so marvelously at the club, which seemed more like a rustic bed and breakfast-lunch-dinner than a true club.


Lillehammer
To the Editor: Your article about Lillehammer (Jan. 16) was inviting, but failed to mention its claim to fame as the home of a Nobel laureate.
Sigrid Undset, who won the prize for literature in 1928, was honored with a statue in Lillehammer, her home for many years.


New York Exports Its Talent As Demographic Tide Turns
New York City has never been a stronger magnet for immigrants from abroad, but the city's pull on other Americans diminished markedly in the late 1980's.
Between 1985 and 1990, nearly twice as many people left the city for other places in the United States as flocked to New York from distant towns, farms and college campuses.


Suffolk Focuses on Its High Rate of Black Infant Mortality; County Has Outgrown System, Commissioner Says
IN 1991, 152 infants born in Suffolk County died before their 1st birthdays.
Although that figure mirrors state and national mortality rates, it masks a significant problem in the county, persistent high rates of black infant mortality and a wide disparity between the number of deaths of black and white infants.
Historically black babies under 1 die at more than twice the rate of white babies.
But in 1991, in the most recent statistics available, the rate of black infant mortality in Suffolk was 21.9 per 1,000 live births, contrasted with a white rate of 5.8.


Inquiry Briefing May Have Violated 2 Rules on Ethics
The meeting between top Treasury Department officials and White House officials, including the White House counsel, Bernard W. Nussbaum, could have violated two ethical regulations that apply to Federal officials.
But even lacking legal violations, experts in ethics say the meetings appear to clash with the goal of carrying out investigations impartially and without special treatment for people in power.


The Humbling of the Harvard Man
WHEN Erich Segal wrote "The Class," a 1983 novel based on the lives of his Harvard classmates from their school days until their 25th reunion, the people he portrayed had experienced many of the problems common to his generation.
They had endured divorces, loneliness, alienated children, thwarted ambition.
Several had committed suicide.
But nowhere in the 592 pages of "The Class" is anyone out of work, or pressed for cash.
A Harvard degree seemed an immunization against unemployment.
Mr.
Segal saw the 25th reunion of the class of 1958 as a gathering of the privileged.
"It was not merely that you were going to make your way, but as a Harvard man the way was prepared for you," Mr.
Segal said last week.
"This is not arrogance. Unemployment was not part of our emotional baggage, not part of the range of things that we thought we would ever have to face."
How times have changed.
In the nearly 11 years since that reunion in June 1983, at least 10 percent of the 1,040 surviving members of the all-male class, and perhaps as many as 20 percent, have lost jobs, according to those in the class who organize the reunions and track their mates.


2 Records, and Joyner-Kersee, Fall
Gwen Torrence and Jackie Joyner-Kersee shattered their American records today in the USA/Mobil national indoor track and field championships.
Torrence won two titles in 77 minutes, and her usually dour manner dissolved in smiles.
But Joyner-Kersee, two and a half hours after she won the long jump, hit the last two hurdles in the 60-meter hurdles and crashed, hurting her left foot and her pride.


'Cocaine True Cocaine Blue'
To the Editor:
Brent Staples's review of "Cocaine True Cocaine Blue" (Feb. 6), my book on hard-core drug addiction, is a continuation of the ancient tradition of trying to kill the bearer of bad news.
Mr.
Staples's weapon of choice here is the charge of bias.
Whatever his personal or professional reasons for doing so, Mr.
Staples has leveled this most serious charge not against American society, as he most justly could have, for largely turning its back on the crime, ill education and poverty in our drug-plagued inner cities; not against the Government for its failed drug policies; but against this journalist.


Linda Rudberg, Steven Thibodeau
Steven Thibodeau and Linda Rudberg met four years ago at the Lintas advertising agency in New York, where he was the account executive and she was an art director, both on the Diet Coke account.
In the advertising world, romance rarely flourishes between the creative and business sides.
"In creative, they call the account people 'suits,' " Ms.
Rudberg said.
"My boss at the time banned account people from coming onto the creative floor. Once, as a practical joke, somebody outlined a dead body in chalk on the floor and wrote, 'Account guy.' "
Mr.
Thibodeau, 28, is now working on commercials for Brute cologne at Lintas.
Like an actor getting into character, he always wears Brute.
Ms.
Rudberg, 31, now works at the Lotas Minard Patton McIver agency, where she's known for wearing hats made of everything from fake leopard skin to fake green grass and for being the pickiest perfectionist in the office.
Judy Lotas, a partner in the agency, recently saw the movie "Blink" with the bride.
"The other people in the theater were screaming because it was sort of scary, but the only time Linda shrieked was when the female lead's lipstick had disappeared and she just had her naked lip liner on," Ms.
Lotas said.
"Linda gets esthetically horrified."
The couple, who compared planning their wedding with working on a commercial together, spent a year organizing the event, which turned out to be stylishly homemade and personal, down to the tiniest detail.
For instance, a shower for the bride at her Upper West Side apartment was actually a poetry reading.
She asked about 20 friends, all women, to bring poems, instead of kitchen utensils or lingerie, and read them aloud.
For the wedding invitations, the couple bought handmade paper that looked like granite -- blue with white and gray specks -- from an art supply store in the East Village; they had them printed by hand at SoHo Service.
Even the vases for the wedding had the bride's colorful, quirky imprint on them.
Ms.
Rudberg, a potter, had made dozens of vases -- pink polka-dotted, striped and otherwise Dr.
Seuss-inspired, each filled with a one-of-a-kind floral arrangement.
For the wedding, the couple scouted locations on the East Coast and eventually chose the Canfield Casino, an ornate, turn-of-the-century building in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
Now city-owned, the casino has a carved oak bar, a gentleman's gambling room and a ballroom with a barrel ceiling decorated with stained-glass medallions the size of manhole covers.
At an interfaith ceremony on Feb. 19 -- she is Jewish, and he is Protestant -- the couple looked their account-creative parts.
Mr.
Thibodeau wore a dark conservative suit, while the bride appeared in an enormous tulle hat and a white cotton dress as simple as a monk's cassock.
Guests compared the hat to everything from a cumulus cloud to a souffle to a geyser of Saratoga Springs sparkling water.
Dinner was served in the ballroom, where the ceiling medallions depict the 12 signs of the zodiac.
Even they held a personal meaning for the bride and bridegroom: she is a Capricorn, and he is a Virgo, two very compatible signs.
As the bride recalled: "After we met, my mother didn't ask, 'Is he Jewish?' She asked, 'What sign is he?' "


When Lamps Wear Out, It May Be Time to Start Rewiring
FLOOR and desk lamps wear out eventually, and a winter of hard use puts many to the test.
A malfunctioning lamp is a fire and shock hazard, and prompt attention is in order.
If a lamp fails to light when switched on, check to make sure that the bulb is good, that the lamp is firmly plugged in and that other lights or appliances on the circuit operate.


So You Think Your Telecommunications Privacy Is Protected?
To the Editor:
The cruel reality of telecommunications privacy is that it doesn't exist, for a subscriber worth listening to or for anyone else in or out of government.
As a litmus test, complain to your phone company about a suspected wiretap, and you will be referred to the Federal Communications Commission.
The F.C.C., disclaiming "jurisdiction over wiretapping matters," will refer you to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SATIRE  THE BEGGAR'S CUP  By Eric Blau. Knopf, $23.


A MICHIGAN PANEL BACKS SUICIDE AID
Michigan's Commission on Death and Dying was supposed to decide today whether to move toward formally recommending that some form of doctor-assisted suicide be legalized in the state.
What happened instead reflected how deeply the commission itself -- and, by extension, the rest of society -- is divided over an issue that Dr.
Jack Kevorkian has forced into the spotlight.
The 22-member commission did take a vote, although it came after five hours of testimony from experts and the public and two recesses when protesters refused to let the hearings continue.


Altar Egos


Edward J. Donovan Jr.; Public Relations Agent, 65
Edward J. Donovan Jr., a publisher and public relations agent in New York for more than 25 years, died on Friday at a friend's apartment in Manhattan.
He was 65.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Edward J. Donovan 3d.


The New Look on the J and Z
Riders on the J and Z subway lines have been trying to get used to a new look at the Cypress Hills, 75th Street, Woodhaven Boulevard, 102-104 Street and 111th Street stations.
At those stations, six-foot-high faces made of steel and copper wire mesh have been gazing out since last fall from the middle of blank corrugated metal walls.


Judy Hanauer, David B. Spring
Judy Hanauer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lonnie Hanauer of West Orange, N.J., was married last evening to David B. Spring, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Spring of Camden, N.C.
Judge Robert Feldman of the New Jersey Superior Court performed the ceremony at the Mountain Ridge Country Club in West Caldwell, N.J.


20 Years After Ossining's Riots, Mood of Racial Harmony Prevails
NEXT Sunday promises to be a special kind of 20th anniversary for Ossining -- a peace anniversary.
Between 1968 and 1974, Ossining was wracked by six years of racial disturbances that erupted in its high school and spilled into its streets.
There were four major disturbances: the first, following the assassination of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. in April 1968, the second in February 1969 and the third in 1971.


Seeing a City In the Windows Of Its Shops; NEW ORLEANS: A LITTLE WEIRDNESS
IF THE BOOZY bacchanal of Bourbon Street is the vision many outsiders have of New Orleans, the shop windows on Royal Street, one block over, reflect many old-line residents' view of their city -- a place full of infinite wonders and curiosities, a bit stuck in the past and quite happy to stay there.
Royal Street is best known for antiques.
The windows at Dixon &amp; Dixon make you feel that you are peeking into a Garden District mansion full of 17th-, 18th- and 19th-century English, French and Dutch furnishings.
Nearby, Rothschild's Antiques presents an elegant array of treasures -- silver goblets, napkin rings and wine coolers, and diamond-and-emerald drop earrings sparkling under crystal chandeliers.


Links Not Clear
To the Sports Editor:
I read with interest the report of the autopsy findings on Reggie Lewis ("Virus Damaged Lewis's Heart, Autopsy Finds," The Times, Feb. 20).
Although I have not had a chance to read the report myself, I question Dr.
Kessler's conclusion, as quoted in your report, that Lewis's prolapse of the mitral valve did not contribute to his death.


The French Stage a Battle Of the Bands in New York
NAME THE GREAT orchestras of the world, and French contenders will not be on anyone's short list.
Yet the best of them have at least brought something special to French music.
New Yorkers can test those propositions this week and next, when the two top-ranked full-size symphony orchestras of France all but collide in separate North American tours.
Both appear in the city for the first time with their current music directors: the Orchestre de Paris with Semyon Bychkov, the Orchestre National de France with Charles Dutoit.
The Orchestre de Paris plays this afternoon at Tilles Center in Brookville, L.I., and on Tuesday and Thursday at Carnegie Hall.
The Orchestre National performs on Saturday at Tilles Center, and next Sunday and on March 18 at Avery Fisher Hall.


Secret Sublets In Co-ops
To the Editor:
I certainly agree with the general proposition in your "Secret Sublets in Co-ops" on Jan. 16 that unauthorized subletting remains a source of continuing debate among New York City co-op boards and their tenant/shareholders.
However, a co-op board must be careful that it does not act outside the mandates of the co-op's proprietary lease and other corporate documents when attempting to effectuate a policy with regard to fees and unauthorized sublets.


On Sunday; For One Man, No Surrender To Vengeance
TERRORISM is too neat and kind a word for all the self-imagined tough men who keep killing the young, the good and the unwary, as woefully in this city some days as in wilder parts of the earth.
But meekness is description enough for people like Essa Abed, who plod away in nondescript social-work storefronts at life's boring detail of trying to get along without benefit of vengeance or vendetta.
"People often take fixed positions and I was fixed in mine for many years: Israel was the enemy and would have to yield, as would the United States. But there wasn't anything we had to yield," says Mr.
Abed, a Palestinian-born Arab-American who runs the Graham-Windham Family Service Center in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.


Sarah Convissor, Jeffrey Greenberg
Sarah Ann Convissor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Convissor of South Orange, N.J., was married last evening to Jeffrey Howard Greenberg, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Heywood Greenberg of Arrington, Va.
Cantor Perry Fine officiated at Congregation Beth El in South Orange.
The bride, 24, graduated from the University of Maryland.
She is a production assistant at "NBC Nightly News With Tom Brokaw" in Washington, and an assistant segment coordinator for Willard Scott, the weatherman on the "Today" show.
Her father is the president of the Partnership Against Illiteracy in Newark.
Her mother, Carole Convissor, is the director of special projects at the Juilliard School in New York.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Morrisania; Smoothing the Scars On the Old Boston Road
For centuries, travelers of every stripe have trekked the Boston Road -- from breathless horsemen bearing the news of invading British warships to frustrated motorists negotiating the daily cavalcade of rush-hour traffic.
Their legacy has been a roadscape of potholes and deep scars.
Next month, after years of complaints from merchants, residents and elected officials, the city will begin overhauling a 30-mile stretch of the road -- from Morrisania to Parkside near the Westchester border.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Trade War Isn't So Swell Either
THE only people ever killed in a trade war were the ones who died of boredom.
But you would never know it from the language Japanese and American officials use today.
The entire lexicon of the trade conflict between Washington and Tokyo comes straight out of the Marine Corps field handbook.
It is a crazy mix of Clausewitz and the current account; Adam Smith does arms control.
One almost expects United States trade negotiators and their Japanese counterparts to show up at the table in camouflage fatigues and shout: "Ready! Aim! Sanction!"
I thought my days covering wars ended when I stopped reporting from Beirut.
But then I became a trade reporter.
These bureaucrats are dangerous.
Sure, being a trade war correspondent is a lot less lethal than the military version.
But if words could kill, the battlefields between Japan and the United States would be littered with negotiators in pinstripe uniforms, bludgeoned to death by briefcases.
Just pick out any of the business headlines from the last few weeks: There is talk of "fortress Japan," "tactical retreats," and the Japanese bureaucrats as "the real enemy." One top American trade negotiator, Charlene Barshefsky, is actually known to colleagues as "Stonewall Barshefsky," for her ability to say no to her Japanese interlocutors.


Missing: One Dog. Broken: One Boy's Heart
BUSTER is missing. For two weeks now, Ischa Rosado has tried to be positive.
"I want to think whoever took him is an animal lover," she says.
"But then I think, wouldn't a true animal lover know how bad we feel?"


Remembering Kahane, and the Woman on the Bridge
EACH time the evil that Rabbi Meir Kahane left behind surfaces, as it has with the killings in Hebron by one of his disciples, I think back to the winter 23 years ago when I profiled him, when he begged me not to write about Estelle Donna Evans, the woman who had jumped to her death from the Queensboro Bridge because of him.
It was 1971 and for the first time Rabbi Kahane was gaining notoriety.
The Jewish Defense League he had founded was holding protests at Soviet diplomatic sites.
Its adolescent members shouted "Never Again" as they demanded emigration for Russian Jews and threw bags of excrement at the Soviet offices.
In what seemed a parody of black militant groups of the time, J.D.L. members posed in front of Temple Emanu-el with tire chains, offering protection that no one at the Fifth Avenue synagogue asked for or needed.


No Strings, No Second Fiddle
THE Hudson Valley Wind Symphony, a six-year-old organization that specializes in the concert band repertory, doesn't depend on strings to create a full sound.
That is why, said Arnold M. Huberman, the group's president, so many players are willing to forgo musicians' fees to play with the all-voluntary ensemble.
Mr.
Huberman, a timpanist who in the 1960's played with the Boston Symphony Orchestra, said a concert band -- which, like this one, consists of percussion, brass and winds -- is good for a musician's ego.
"In a symphony orchestra, the weight falls on the strings," he said.
"In a wind symphony, all the people who have had to play 'second fiddle' get a chance to play."


West Bank Jews Have Shown Restraint
To the Editor:
I read "Disarm the West Bank Settlers" (Op-Ed, Feb. 26) by Michael Lerner, editor of Tikkun magazine, with surprise.
I, too, am horrified at the slaughter perpetrated Feb. 25 by Dr.
Baruch Goldstein.


Seeing a City In the Windows Of Its Shops; DISCOVERIES IN PRAGUE'S OLD TOWN
IDEALLY, KARLOVA Street, the skinny cobblestone street that snakes its way to the Charles Bridge through the heart of Prague's Old Town, should be a dream for window-shopping.
In the early morning, when the mist still clings to the pastel-colored town houses, a stroll along Karlova, to the echoes of your footsteps, can be enchanting.
But in the last year, the storefronts have become so filled with glassware and wooden toys for tourists that it is necessary to make detours.
Recently I joined forces with an American resident of Prague with sophisticated Manhattan tastes who guided me through the maze of archways, tunnels, courtyards, stairways and dead ends that thread behind Karlova.
We found wonderful new surprises as well as some of my companion's old favorites.
It is almost impossible to retrace the same route without a detailed map in hand.


Youths Down Under
For teens bored with traditional camp activities, a new summer camp is offering sheepshearing and boomerang-throwing.
The hitch?
It's in Australia and New Zealand.
Teen Camp Down-Under, open to boys and girls aged 13 to 19, offers campers a 25-day tour of the two countries.
Besides Sydney and Auckland, stops include a stay in an Australian rain forest and several days at the Great Barrier Reef.
"They can go horseback riding in the Outback or ski in New Zealand," said the tour organizer, Nicola Douglas.


The Age of High School and Motherhood
LIKE high school students everywhere, 17-year-old Danielle Schuler of New Britain tumbles out of bed each weekday at dawn and rushes to get ready for class.
But these days she adds an extra ritual: rousing her 7-week-old son, Kreyshon, who will join her at school.


Commercial Property/The Rudin Magic; Doing Big Business With a 'Mom-and-Pop' Warmth
DAN GRONICH had long known that his Irish Government clients planned to consolidate, and he looked forward to finding them the space they needed.
Still, he hadn't guessed how restricted the space search would be.
"The Consul General of Ireland insisted on being in a Rudin building," said Mr.
Gronich, the new head of Grubb &amp; Ellis New York.
He put the agencies into Rudin Management's 345 Park Avenue, at 52d Street.


Urban Innovators
Mega-Cities awards dinner, the United Nations, Feb. 24.


Kitty Litter
I find there's something immutably beguiling about the Broadway musical.
In fact . . . wait -- wait!
Keep reading!
I won't write a single word about my favorite maiden aunt taking me to see "Bye Bye Birdie" when I was 5 and transforming my life, I promise.
In fact, my favorite aunt is married.
And as for me, I am beguiled by entertainments featuring chorus boys only to the degree that I am also beguiled by entertainments featuring a two-drink minimum and someone from my office revealing his or her ability to sing Cole Porter in key.
Still, I am drawn to the fact that of all musicals ever written, it is "Cats" (wait -- come back . . . ) that has become the highest-grossing of all time, having taken in more than $2 billion worldwide -- more, by the way, than "E. T." and "Jurassic Park" combined.
Why "Cats" and not "Oklahoma!" or "My Fair Lady" -- or even "Carrie"?
After all, both "Cats" and "Carrie" featured barn-size pieces of scenery flying about in an ostensibly audience-rousing manner; both told stories no one could possibly follow; both climaxed with Betty Buckley dying amid aphasia-inducing lighting effects.
And yet it is "Carrie" that has become the ur-flop of the late-20th century and "Cats" that can be sat through in New York City, London, Tokyo, Hamburg, Budapest, Seoul and, this weekend only, at the United States Military Academy.
Maybe this is because Johnny Mathis has recorded "Memory" but never "Out for Blood."


Corrections
A picture caption with an article in some copies last Sunday about moderately priced houses being built in the Hamptons incorrectly described the house shown.
The house is on Cedar Street in East Hampton.
It is not a part of the Mountain Laurels at North View Hills subdivision in Noyack.


THE WHITEWATER INQUIRY: White House Memo; Inquiry Is Putting First Lady At Center of Ethics Questions
Subpoenas and suspicions are flying.
Everybody in Washington and Arkansas suddenly seems to be investigating and blaming everybody else.
The President is having troubles, again, and the First Lady is not just a supportive spouse, standing by her man with a glazed smile.
Hillary Rodham Clinton, herself, is smack at the heart of the matter.
Bernard W. Nussbaum, the First Lady's old friend and mentor, was pushed off the sled of state today, following President Clinton's admission that the White House counsel had made improper contacts to review the status of a confidential Federal investigation into an Arkansas savings and loan related to the Whitewater affair.


Michelangelo Room In Uffizi Reopens
Art lovers can once again admire the works on display in the Michelangelo Room in the west wing of the Uffizi art gallery in Florence, one of the rooms badly damaged by a powerful car bomb that killed five people in May 1993.
A highlight of the 400-year-old gallery, the room reopened two weeks ago.
It contains paintings by Raphael and Fra Bartolomeo as well as Michelangelo's masterpiece the "Tondo Doni" medallion.
Fra Bartolomeo's painting "Porzia," also damaged in the bombing and previously situated elsewhere in the museum, will be placed alongside its contemporaries once restoration work has been completed, before the end of this year, according to museum officials.
The Veronese Room, which includes paintings by such noted 16th-century artists as Giovanni Battista Moroni, Giulio Campi, Gerolamo Savoldo and Tintoretto in addition to Veronese, should also open by April.


Cutting Down Fat in the Diet
THE concern about the amount of fat in the diet has led people who care deeply about good food to make certain sacrifices.
Like me, many of my colleagues have reduced the amount of butter and cheese they eat.
Indulging in scrambled eggs or an omelet has also become an infrequent pleasure.
We do not substitute for butter, products bearing names like "It May Smell Buttery but You Can't Fool Us!" Nor do we eat fat-free cheeses that bear a closer resemblance to linoleum than food.
And we have not yet found a compelling need to buy egg substitutes.


POSTINGS: Topps Turns to Whitehall Street; Cementing a Deal For Space Downtown
Lots of landlords and brokers think that putting money into a downtown building in these days of high vacancy rates is like tossing gold into a swamp.
But a landlord with a contrary view was rewarded last week with a formidable lease.
Rudin Management pumped a lot of cash into refurbishing One Whitehall Street, its 21-story building between Stone and Bridge Streets.
And last week it snagged a prize: The Topps Company, those makers of baseball trading cards, Bazooka bubble gum and other children's entertainment products, signed a 15-year lease for 60,000 square feet, bringing the building's occupancy to 64 percent -- good progress for downtown, where nearly a quarter of available space lies vacant.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 6 about Invap S.E. incorrectly described the company's relationship with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Invap is not building a satellite for NASA; it is building one with the help of NASA engineers for the Argentine Government.
The article also mistakenly included Iran among countries for which Invap has built experimental nuclear reactors; it has built no such reactor for Iran.
The article also described incorrectly the type of purification plant Invap built for Iran; the plant purifies uranium, not enriched uranium.


Two Republican Contenders Square Off for a Vacancy at City Hall
It would not be high on anyone's list of powerhouse positions.
Still, the minority leader of the New York City Council does get an office in City Hall, an extra $20,000 a year and the solace, this year, of working with a Republican Mayor.
And so a vacancy in the office provoked a bitter fight among the six Republicans in the 51-seat City Council.
Now, nearly a month after Councilman Alfred C. Cerullo 3d stepped down from the minority leader's post to become the new Commissioner of Consumer Affairs, the struggle has ended with a new leader: Councilman Michael J. Abel.


The Nation; How Does the World Look Through the Eyes Of Aspiring Terrorists?
IN preparation for the first anniversary of the World Trade Center bombing late last month, the New York Police Department sent bomb-sniffing dogs to survey landmarks like the Empire State Building, the Statue of Liberty and other likely targets of terrorism.
The dogs hunted inside but made a special survey of the perimeters, partly as a show, said John F. Timoney, the chief of police.
"It was to let them know, whoever 'they' are, that we haven't forgotten," he said.
Although the World Trade Center explosion has not been followed by similar acts of terror -- the police broke up a cell that was planning additional bombings around the 4th of July, at the Hudson River tunnels, the Federal Building in lower Manhattan, and other targets -- Chief Timoney said that he suspected the terrorists might still "be looking to make their mark."


Q and A
Beyond the Chunnel
Q.
We are planning a trip to London and the Continent in May and would like to know what choices we have for crossing the English Channel. -- Phebe Wehr, New Haven


The Nation; Zeus He Was Not: Mitchell Bows Out
TIME was when majority leaders of the United States Senate were powerful.
Joseph Robinson of Arkansas, leader in the mid-1930's, so united Democrats that historians hand him much credit for enacting the New Deal.
Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas wielded leadership like Zeus did lightning bolts.
Then there is George J. Mitchell, Democrat of Maine, who announced his retirement from the Senate on Friday.
Mr.
Mitchell, 60, is neither bullying nor inspiring.
In fact, you could call him bland.
He runs the Senate not like a boss, but like a professor -- issuing slightly pedantic pronouncements and praying that his arguments took when time comes for a vote.
A legislative giant he is not.


Can a Trial Be Too Hot For TV?
ARE THERE ARE SOME SUBJECTS THAT OUGHT to be kept off television screens or delivered only in small doses because they might "bring about a rise in the national temperature"?
The phrase comes from an article by the novelist and essayist Elizabeth Hardwick in the Feb. 17 New York Review of Books, where she is an advisory editor.
In an aside to her report on the trial of Lyle and Erik Menendez (which she watched on Court TV), Ms.
Hardwick noted approvingly that television cameras were not allowed at the trial of the men accused of conspiracy in the World Trade Center bombing.
"A wise decision," she wrote, adding dryly: "The cast of characters in the bombing might have cosmetic and linguistic attributes not entirely acceptable to public taste. While we must believe these matters do not inform the verdicts, they could, if shown for months on television, bring about a rise in the national temperature."


Feijoada Anytime
CABANA CARIOCA + (212) 581-8088; 123 West 45th Street; $; all major credit cards
This lively Brazilian spot keeps patrons coming back for more heaping portions of lusty fare at bargain prices.
Begin with the restorative caldo verde, a garlic and kale soup, followed by the Brazilian-style cod with garlic and potatoes, or the oxtail stew with polenta.
Every day, Cabana Carioca features the renowned feijoada, the Brazilian national dish combining black beans, ham hocks, smoked sausage and shoulder of beef, but on Wednesday and Saturday it is discounted from $14.95 to $11.95. (Article: 10/19/90; revisited: 2/25/94)


Danielle M. La Sance, John M. Lee 3d
Danielle Marie La Sance, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. La Sance of Dallas, was married yesterday to John Marshall Lee 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Lee of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard D. Thompson, a United Methodist minister and a cousin of the bridegroom, officiated at the Perkins Chapel of Southern Methodist University in Dallas.
The Rev.
Michael G. Duca, a Roman Catholic priest, also took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 28, is a media buyer at Spotplus in Dallas, a division of DDB Needham, the advertising agency.
She graduated from the University of North Texas.
Her father, who is retired, was an executive vice president in the Dallas branch of Nationsbank, the national commercial and retail banking company.


When Politicians Get Silly
The Vice President is expected to say many things during his public life.
"Buttafuoco" is not one of them.
Yet, there was Al Gore, uttering this word on national television as if on a schoolyard dare.
Wearing safety goggles, Mr.
Gore smashed a Government ashtray to smithereens with a large mallet.
Then he ticked off a top 10 list of reasons why being Vice President was so fabulous.
No. 1: "Secret Service code name, Buttafuoco."


Move Intended to Quiet Questions on Clinton's Land Deal Seems to Backfire
There were many in the White House, including President Clinton, who hoped that the appointment in January of Robert B. Fiske Jr. as a special counsel would ease political pressure stemming from Mr.
Clinton's Arkansas business dealings.
For a few weeks, it looked like a savvy move.
Stories about an investment by Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, in real estate in the Ozark Mountains largely disappeared from front pages and television programs as Mr.
Fiske hired a staff and set up shop.


LEADER ON SENATE: NOT A LIFETIME JOB
If official Washington is stunned at the decision by George J. Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, not to seek re-election to his safe seat, it might be downright flummoxed at the explanation he offered today to the people of Maine: occupying public office should not be a lifetime job.
"The position should not be regarded as permanent to the person," a relaxed Mr.
Mitchell said this morning at a news conference in his hometown of Portland.
"Public service is not the private domain or the private possession of any one person. It is a temporary opportunity for an individual to act for the larger and common good."


Second Gun Traced in Shooting of 4 on Bridge
Struggling to answer questions surrounding the attack on a van of Hasidic students on the Brooklyn Bridge -- issues as basic as the motive and the full scope of who was involved -- law-enforcement officials have achieved some modest successes.
Yesterday, one day after the police said they had turned up evidence establishing the suspected gunman, Rashid Baz, as a minor figure in the city's drug underworld, officials said they had deciphered some details of the guns belonging to the 28-year-old livery driver.


The Immigrant Experience in the 90's
WITH "Beyond the Borders," the Bronx Museum of the Arts must hope to eat its diversity cake and have it too.
Why else would the guest curator, Betti-Sue Hertz, go to all the trouble of locating 30 immigrant artists from 27 countries only to mount a show that in the end celebrates individualism?
Still, with the ebb and flow of peoples now a worldwide manifestation -- and one that has done little to promote international understanding -- the production deserves attention.


Stacey N. Marx, Roy Sauberman
Stacey Noreen Marx, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel S. Marx of Millburn, N.J., is to be married today to Dr.
Roy Burton Sauberman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Sauberman of Fairfax, Va.
Rabbi Steven Bayer will perform the ceremony at the Chanticler, a banquet hall in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Sauberman, 30, is the human resources manager at Bloomberg L.P., a financial and news services information company in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is the president of Custom Packaging Service in Milburn.
Her mother, Sheila E. Marx, is the deputy municipal clerk of Irvington, N.J.


Two-Game Slide Puts Nets Dangerously Close to .500
In the same way that they had tormented the Knicks by taking the first three games of the season series from them, the Nets have been tormented by the Indiana Pacers.
It happened again Friday night when the Pacers, surging under Coach Larry Brown, scored more points on New Jersey than anybody has this season, coming away from Market Square Arena with a 126-110 victory and going three up on the Nets for the season.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Consumer credit, Jan., change, billions
$7.3
$6.5
Tuesday
Nonfarm productivity, 4th qtr., pct. change
4.2
4.2
Wednesday
Wholesale trade, January, pct. change
-0.6
0.2
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
318
350
Friday
Retail sales, February, pct. change
-0.5
0.6
This Week's Development
Tuesday
Japanese Cabinet meets to discuss opening markets
Wednesday
Federal Reserve to release beige book
Secretary of State Christopher visits Japan


Update
A.&amp; P. Factory Near Ithaca Is Sold to Group of Investors
After lying dormant for 12 years, a giant food-processing plant 30 miles southwest of Ithaca, N.Y., may soon be filled with workers again after its recent sale to a group of New York City investors.
The plant -- a three-story building that covers 1.5 million square feet, roughly the same size as the Pentagon -- was sold by the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company on Feb. 25 to Megacenter Partners, a limited partnership formed to buy the building.
Although officials involved in the sale would not comment on the terms of the agreement, G. Thomas Tranter Jr., the Chemung County Executive, said the price was around $8.5 million.


Baseball Vacancy Interests Mitchell
George J. Mitchell, the Senate Majority Leader, instantly became a leading candidate for the job of baseball commissioner when he announced Friday that he would not seek re-election this fall.
But Mitchell might also be a candidate for a position on the United States Supreme Court.
The baseball job will probably pay a $1 million salary.
A Supreme Court justice earns $164,100 annually.


Wiley Coyotes?
It would seem that the coyotes lived up to their reputation.
After 200 hunters spent 48 hours hunting coyotes and red foxes in Campbell County, Wyo., to win prizes of up to $500, the toll was 24 coyotes and 12 red foxes.


Steel, Brick, City Dwellers
IN the decades around the turn of the century, growth both invigorated New York and threatened to strangle it.
In a dizzying sprint, New York built upward and outward -- so quickly that its people were left thrilled, dazed and sometimes maddened by their new surroundings.
The sense of wonder is long gone.
But the freshness of the reaction can be found in the literature of the building of New York.
The Bridge
. . .
There was nothing in the average person's experience to compare to this spacious, beckoning, empty thoroughfare.
It climbed up and out of the city like something seen in dreams.
It was a highway people just naturally wanted to travel, even if they had no interest in the smaller, more sedate city they knew to be at the other end.
To the New Yorker who lived within its shadow, it was not just a bridge to Brooklyn -- few New Yorkers had any special desire to go to Brooklyn -- it was a highway into the open air.
When the day came when everyone could go out on it, when people by the tens of thousands could go up that road and through those colossal arches, they would go, they knew, not to Brooklyn, but to a place where sailing ships would glide like toys beneath their feet, where they could look down on the tallest buildings and their own mean, narrow streets and the people in them, where they could gaze out over land and water and everything man-made.
"What a relief it will be from the ill-smelling streets and stuffy shops," one man wrote.
"What a happy escape from those dreadful cabins on the ferryboats!"


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TRUE CRIME  ABOVE SUSPICION  By Joe Sharkey. Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.


See It, Feel It


Summer Glories Passed Quickly, But Oh, the Fall
TO HEAR HER IS TO LOVE her: if anyone feels otherwise about Victoria de los Angeles, I don't want to know.
It has to be counted among life's startling and unexpected consolations that each of the last 20 or so years, which might have done so, has not brought the retirement of this most inexhaustibly illustrative of singers.
Now she is back again to celebrate her 70th birthday (it took place on Nov. 1) and the 50th anniversary of her professional debut.
Neither is a milestone customarily celebrated in public by vocalists, least of all sopranos.
The debut was in Barcelona as Mozart's Countess.
At the end of the 1940's, the operatic world -- discovering in two or three seasons a decade's worth of great singers queued up during the war years -- responded rapidly to this generous voice of cream and port, and Miss de los Angeles had debuts in rapid succession at the Metropolitan, Covent Garden, La Scala, Rome, Vienna.
Even then she had the confidence to insist that she first be presented in recital in each city; this guaranteed a friendly core audience in the opera house, because the recitals were at such a level of expertise, novelty, spontaneous communication and indefinable stylistic savoir-faire that the singer could initiate a houseful of devoted admirers at each one.


Denver's New Airport: A Boon or a Bane?
WHATEVER else can be said of the behind-schedule, over-budget, far-flung new Denver International Airport, it will surely make life easier for some travelers: those coming to Colorado to inspect cattle on the scrubgrass Plains, for example.
For travelers headed west to the ski slopes, on the other hand, the $3.2 billion airport will not be so convenient.
DIA, the first major airport to be built from scratch in the United States since Dallas-Fort Worth 20 years ago, is set to open May 15, eight months late and more than $1 billion over initial cost estimates.
The new facility is situated 23 miles northeast of downtown Denver, about 20 miles farther northeast of the city than Stapleton Airport.
It will mean perhaps an extra 30 to 40 minutes for the drive to Vail and Aspen.
The cab fare to downtown Denver will more than double, to at least $30.


Izzy's Own Story
AMNESIA By Douglas Cooper. 227 pp. New York: Hyperion. $19.95.


Russia's Far East: Rainbown and Bears
WE NEVER DID SEE A bear in the wilds of central Kamchatka, although Zhenya Vlasov did his best to find us one.
During a bright spell in the brief, sub-Arctic fall on Russia's easternmost peninsula, as the birch trees were turning yellow and the blueberry bushes a burnished red, Zhenya, a small, bowlegged hunter and guide at our wilderness hunting camp, took us down to the river where bears come in the evenings to fish for salmon and showed us where they had trampled the brush underfoot.
The weather was mild and sunny, not unusual for September, which is considered Kamchatka's best month since the air is free of the summer's mosquitoes and the winter's frosts.
Taking the lead with a walking stick that was almost as big as he was, Zhenya marched us briskly -- as briskly as thigh-high rubber boots would allow -- through a field of man-sized grasses, poking at bear footprints and droppings, and pointing out their paw marks on several giant anthills.


The Nation; Gauging Workfare's Employability
THE verdict is in: welfare doesn't work.
Officials from President Clinton on down are vowing to create programs that require welfare recipients to work.
In the argot of the movement, "only work works."
But moving from work promises to work programs is harder than it sounds.
A record 15 million people now receive Aid to Families with Dependent Children, the main Federal program.
Ten million are children.
Of the five million adults, 95 percent are single women.
Few have the kind of skills or experience attractive to private employers.
President Clinton has vowed to send Congress his work bill this spring.
He has said it will expand training programs for welfare recipients and require those unemployed after two years to join a work program.
But what kind of work?
How long will the jobs last?
What will happen, at the program's end, to those that have found no private jobs?
What, without welfare, will sustain them?


Homeless Program Suspended
In a move that has strained its relationship with the neighborhood, the Grand Central Partnership has suspended an outreach program that in nine months has cleared homeless people from the esplanade between 38th and 40th Streets and along the East River between 23d and 42d Streets.
The partnership, a business improvement district, says it made the move because the New York Community Trust has been able to raise only half the $81,000 it sought for the program.
Under the project, which also involved Bryant Park, the partnership dispatched formerly homeless people to steer homeless people to social service programs, jobs and housing.
Once they were gone, the city came in and removed their encampments.
Now, it is feared, they will return.


Bomb Verdict Could Cast Shadow on Impending Trial
With the convictions of all four defendants in the World Trade Center bombing, law-enforcement officials are now preparing for a related and far more tangled case: the prosecution of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and at least 13 other defendants charged with plotting to blow up city landmarks and assassinate political leaders.
While celebrating the verdict, Federal antiterrorist agents said they were continuing to investigate a number of other suspects linked through surveillances and wiretaps to figures in both cases.


LISTEN UP!
THERE was a time in New York when radio stations played a kind of music called rock-and-roll.
It was the height of the reign of the WMCA Good Guys and Cousin Brucie at WABC, when Alison Steele was the Night Bird of WNEW-FM, when the image of a station was determined as much by the D.J.'s who picked the music as by the music itself.
But that was long ago, before the Age of Narrowcasting, when market research and changing economics split the pop-music dial into a veritable asteroid belt of specialized rock formats: hard rock, soft rock, classic rock, modern rock, pure rock, adult rock, album rock and on and on.


HEART OF THE COUNTRY
New York isn't a prime area for country music.
Even though WYNY-FM (103.5) is one of the biggest country stations in America, it is pretty much the only game in town, and its playlist is limited to a narrow range of new-fangled contemporary stars.
For a hard-core country fix, listeners should turn to Laura Cantrell's "Radio Thrift Shop" on WFMU from 1 P.M. to 3 P.M. on Saturdays.
Ms.
Cantrell moves deep into the heart of honky-tonk, western swing, barn waltzes and rodeo songs.
She concentrates on the classic period from the 40's to the 60's, when kings and queens like Hank Williams, Patsy Cline, Bob Wills and George Jones ruled the Grand Ole Opry and continuously redefined the style for a changing rural America.
Like the best disk jockeys, Ms.
Cantrell is part historian, part fan, part philosopher.
While she has an active weakness for big names like Williams and Jones, she also has the breadth of knowledge to unearth plenty of forgotten gems.
She is at her most revealing when she emphasizes the women of country: sassy mamas like Kitty Wells and Tammy Wynette, hot rockers like Wanda Jackson, unsung heroes like Molly O'Day and Dale Evans.
Country music is a stereotypical bastion of conservatism, but Ms.
Cantrell shows that these women were feisty long before feistiness was fashionable.
"The Radio Thrift Shop" presents country music as a living oral tradition.
Ms.
Cantrell is happy to throw in the occasional tidbit of juicy gossip: "Hubert Davis was a drunk old banjo player around Nashville for a long, long time," she said after playing his ineffable ode to illicit romance, "I Know You're Married but I Love You Still." And her taste extends beyond country into folk, blues, gospel and swing.
When she juxtaposes a big band tune like Lee Wiley's "I've Got a Right to Sing the Blues" with Bob Wills's "San Antonio Rose," she not only provides appropriate context, but brings unseen connections to light.
At its best, country music can be as mean as the blues, as raucous as rock-and-roll, as romantic as the sweetest pop standard.
Ms.
Cantrell knows this, and she wants to share it.
KAREN SCHOEMER SOUNDS OF YESTERDAY
In the wee hours of the morning, when WQEW, "the home of American popular standards," ventures a little too far into Barry Manilow and Billy Joel territory, turn your AM dial a few notches to the left to WEVD (1050) and "The Danny Stiles Nostalgia Extravaganza." Seven nights a week, from about 11 P.M. to 5:30 A.M., WEVD stands for "wonderful, entertaining vintage disks," as Mr.
Stiles digs up some of the coolest, strangest, funniest and most obscure recordings of the pre-rock era.
He also broadcasts on Saturdays from 2 P.M. to 5 P.M. on WNYC-AM (820).
Mr.
Stiles -- who refers to himself variously as the "vicar of vintage," "the raja of rare records" and "the doctor of archeological discology" -- has a fascination for the forgotten: his area of expertise spans more than 100,000 albums, singles, 78's and old-time radio broadcasts from the late teens through the 50's.
Mr.
Stiles, who has been a D.J. for 47 years, owns several different versions of Cab Calloway's "Minnie the Moocher," and he remembers when Frank Sinatra was known as "The Voice" and "Swoonatra." He holds names like Connee Boswell near to his heart, and reveres Al Jolson as the king he once was.
Sometimes, just for a kick, Mr.
Stiles will throw in an old country tune like Ray Price's "Crazy Arms," because his program has no boundaries, playlists or limitations; his only guideline is his own idiosyncratic passion for a moment in pop history that is little more than a shadow.
Mr.
Stiles's show harkens back to a time when radio was the mouthpiece for a national subconscious.
He reads his own commercials for restaurants, pastry shops and plumbing supply stores, and he broadcasts from a make-believe art-deco studio on lower Broadway.
Coming through the hazy AM band in the middle of the night, the needle of his turntable scratching through the grooves of ancient vinyl artifacts, he really does seem like the ghost of a lost but grander time.
There is a song that plays at the end of the film "The Shining," a wierd, otherworldly tune called "Midnight" by the Ray Noble Orchestra.
Like Jack Nicholson's character in the film, Mr.
Stiles sees himself in the past.
When he plays "Midnight, the Stars and You" on his radio show, he brings something long dead back to life.
K.
S.


Details
Have you ever doubted that tha whole may be greater that the sum of its parts?
Then take a look at these 15 parts, all details of well known world monuments, and see how mant wholes you can identify.
No prizes, and only one hint: One of them is in London.
Answers appear on Page 42.
ANSWERS TO THE QUIZ ON PAGE 92 1.
Court of the Lions, The Alhambra, Granada, Spain. 2.
Golden Gate Bridge, San Francisco. 3.
Great Wall, China. 4.
Clockface, Big Ben, London. 5.
Leaning Tower of Pisa, Italy. 6.
Jesse Tree window, Chartres Cathedral, France. 7.
Chrysler Building, New York. 8.
Great Buddha of Nara, Japan. 9.
Basilica of San Vitale, Ravenna, Italy. 10.
Temple of Borobudur, Java, Indonesia. 11.
Parthenon, Athens. 12.
El Castillo, Chichen Itza, Mexico. 13.
Temple of Ramses II, Abu Simbel, Egypt. 14.
Taj Mahal, Agra, India. 15.
Moai statue, Easter Island.


West Bank Jews Have Shown Restraint; Look Into Your Heart
To the Editor:
I am a member of the Orthodox Jewish community of Brooklyn, a contemporary of Dr.
Baruch Goldstein, who committed the brutal massacre in a mosque in Hebron.
About 18 years ago, he sat in my living room and I interviewed him for a research project on Orthodox Jews excelling in extracurricular activities.
I saw a promising young man, a gentle, compassionate and happy human being at peace with himself and the world.


Shaping a West Side 'Urban Entertainment Center'
IN a city where large-scale commercial development has all but come to a halt, the node of growth under way in the West 60's is remarkable enough merely for the fact that it is happening.
Using strictly as-of-right zoning with no delays of the kind that make advance commitments from tenants all but impossible to come by, the developers are introducing to the city what they describe as an "urban entertainment center."
What is an urban entertainment center?
Dean Schwanke, director of information services for the Urban Land Institute in Washington, which is alert to changing nuances in commercial development nationwide, said that the concept was meaningful.
But he struggled to define it.


Struggle for a Medical Center Pact
AS New York Medical College and the County Executive attempt to hammer out a long overdue affiliation agreement for running the Westchester County Medical Center here, new questions about accreditation for two residency programs at the college and debate over the County Board of Legislators' role in shaping public-health policy have added to a broad mix of variables in an already complex equation.
And while the issues surrounding the affiliation dispute apply mainly to Westchester, they are being observed by health-care experts in the context of a larger picture, which includes public-health-policy discussions taking place nationwide.


The View From: Union; A School District That Has to Work at Spending Money
WITH fewer than 65 children enrolled in nine grades, the Union Elementary School lavishes plenty of individual attention on its students.
The school is nestled in a wooded area off a dead-end road in the rural northern Connecticut community.
There are no houses or businesses nearby, and almost no traffic.
Graduating students test well and integrate smoothly at Stafford High School.
"The kids are sheltered from a lot of what goes on in society today," said Cathryn A. Escalona, the teacher of the fifth and sixth grade at Union Elementary.
"There's no violence here, no gangs here. The only thing you have to do here is teach."


Alliances for Progress
The obituaries are already being prepared for the regional purchasing alliances that are central to President Clinton's plan for health reform and Representative Jim Cooper's alternative.
But before the final verdict, the public has a right to know whether the critics have any real answers to the problems the alliances would address.


New Gig for the Old Gate?
For most of its 36 years, the Village Gate was a jazz landmark.
Hundreds of musicians headlined there, from Duke Ellington, Aretha Franklin and Dizzy Gillespie to Stan Kenton, B. B. King and Sarah Vaughan.
Last month, when the Gate closed amid bankruptcy and eviction proceedings, its founder was already deep into a new dream: trying to find his musicians a permanent gig at their old stand.


INTO THE WHITE IVORY TOWER
I have had the privilege of knowing Dr.
Erika Fromm, professor emeritus at the University of Chicago, for the past 35 years.
She is known throughout the mental health field as kind, gentle, gracious and wise ("Into the White Ivory Tower," by Brent Staples, Feb. 6).
Thus, I can well imagine her saying to an incoming graduate student, one who may not have had the opportunity to have had his undergraduate education at one of the major research universities, public or private, that she would extend herself to considerable length to assist him in coping with the demands of a very difficult graduate program.
It is unfortunate that Brent Staples misinterpreted an offer of help and commitment as an act of depreciation.
SIDNEY J. BLATT Professor of Psychiatry and Psychology Yale University New Haven


Jodie H. Stein, Samuel Milkman
Jodie Helene Stein, the director of public relations and special events for Penn's Landing, the waterfront park in Philadelphia, was married last evening to Samuel Capin Milkman, the director of creative services and research at WHTZ-FM radio in New York.
Rabbi Helaine Ettinger performed the ceremony at the Green Valley Country Club in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Milkman is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard A. Stein of Dresher, Pa.
She graduated magna cum laude from Boston University.
Her mother, Lea Stein, is an administrative consultant at Prudential Insurance in Horsham, Pa.
Her father is a vice president of JCI Data Processing in Delran, N.J.


What the Frogs Are Telling Us
A familiar harbinger of spring in much of North America is a tiny frog known to scientists as Hyla crucifer and to ordinary householders as the spring peeper.
Beginning in March, male peepers in search of mates form a clamorous and joyful chorus, trilling around ponds and swimming pools.
But the chorus has muted in recent years, in line with a mysterious worldwide decline in frogs, toads and other amphibians.
Now there is evidence that what is silencing the peeper may be ultraviolet radiation resulting from a thinner ozone layer.
This hypothesis does not explain all disappearances: loss of habitat, pollution, acid rain are among other credible culprits.
But scientists at Oregon State University have found that ultraviolet rays do deadly damage to the eggs of frogs and toads that have been vanishing from the Cascade Mountains of Oregon.
This has to be of some interest to another bare-skinned species.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the American economy incorrectly characterized the popularity of Bruce Springsteen.
Mr.
Springsteen has had several successful recordings in recent years, including his current song "Streets of Philadelphia."


ABOUT BOOKS
Memoir by a Scribner
MENTION the name of Scribner, a New Jersey family, and the golden age of publishing comes to mind, especially as conducted by the house of Charles Scribner's Sons, begun in 1846.
Now, almost 150 years later, Charles Scribner Jr., a grandson of the founder and a resident of Bedminster, reflects on the vanishing traditions of the firm he headed from 1952 to 1986 in his latest book.
The book is "In the Web of Ideas: The Education of a Publisher," a companion memoir to his earlier "In the Company of Writers: A Life in Publishing."


China Dissident Reports Release
Associates of Wei Jingsheng, the prominent Chinese dissident who was arrested this week in a roundup of at least a dozen dissidents, were awaiting his return to Beijing tonight after receiving a call in which he said he was free.
There was speculation that Mr.
Wei had gone into hiding.
A close associate of Mr.
Wei, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the dissident had told him that he was returning to Beijing from rural Changping County about 20 miles north of Beijing, where the Public Security Bureau maintains a "guest house" for interrogations.
At Least a Dozen Seized
Mr.
Wei said he was going to have lunch with some "old friends" before he returned to the city, the associate said.
Tonight associates were still awaiting word of his return.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ENVIRONMENT  THE GREEN FUSE  An Ecological Odyssey.
By John Harte.
University of California, $15.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 13 about Graham Leader, a film producer, and his efforts to distribute a movie misstated the name of a film series at the Museum of Modern Art and the number of movies it involves.
The series has about 20 movies and is called New Films/New Directors.


Where Wildflowers Are Tamed; A Meadow in San Francisco's Heart
FOR San Franciscans, spring starts in February, when magnolias and plum trees burst into bloom.
By mid-March, it is time to head for the brilliant green hillsides along the coast, to see the meadows spangled with wildflowers, clumps of wild iris rising above swaths of baby blue eyes, yellow meadowfoam and orange poppies.
The splendor is short-lived.
Within a few weeks of the last rains in April, the fields dry to a golden color that will last until the next rains in November, and the wildflowers go dormant.


Cabaret for Cures
New York Hospital benefit, Waldorf-Astoria, Feb. 24.


Walton Offers Opinion In the Blink of a Swish
The feet that betrayed Bill Walton's basketball career are propped on a coffee table in the NBC green room as he watches a recent Bulls-Knicks game.
Walton, one of the "insiders" on NBC's "N.B.A. Showtime" pregame program, comments constantly while watching with Julius Erving, the program's studio analyst.
"Sorry to hit you in the hands," Walton says, with a smirk, as Knicks forward Charles Oakley drops a pass.
"Where you want it next time?"


Dehere Passes Hurdle, But 2 Others Lie Ahead
In the dark hours before dawn, the champion race horse Dehere rolled over in his stall and did something that his trainer regarded as an achievement: He struggled to his feet and stood up.
It was one day after Dehere came back from a workout limping, one day after X-rays disclosed a fractured bone above his right hind ankle, one day after he was suddenly removed from the Florida Derby and the Kentucky Derby and perhaps the races beyond.
But when he managed to stand in his stall this morning at the Palm Beach Downs training center 30 miles north of here, the trainer Reynaldo Nobles thought that his star colt had passed a milestone.


Traveling With A Computer's Help
Frequent fliers with personal computers can make their own travel arrangements with the O.A.G.
Flightdisk Starter Kit and a year's subscription to a monthly series of disks containing North American flight information.
Users enter the itinerary -- departure and destination cities and dates -- into a form on the screen and are presented with a list of flight options: frequency, departure and arrival times and airports, airline codes and flight numbers, class of service and types of aircraft.


Cutting Down Fat in the Diet
THE concern about the amount of fat in the diet has led people who care deeply about good food to make certain sacrifices.
Like me, many of my colleagues have reduced the amount of butter and cheese they eat.
Indulging in scrambled eggs or an omelet has also become an infrequent pleasure.
We do not substitute for butter, products bearing names like "It May Smell Buttery but You Can't Fool Us!" Nor do we eat fat-free cheeses that bear a closer resemblance to linoleum than food.
And we have not yet found a compelling need to buy egg substitutes.


Boundary Breaker (And Accomplice)
To the Editor:
In her essay "An Artist's Chronicle of a Death Foretold"  [ Jan. 30 ] , Roberta Smith notes that Hannah Wilke "when she was just 14 had her picture taken wearing nothing but her mother's mink stole." I took that picture of my sister Hannah, then Arlene, when I was just 15, and she took one of me with a toy stuffed poodle, wearing nothing but a bra and panties.
Neither of us were "vamping coyly" but were two sisters enjoying our new camera and our newly pubescent bodies, innocently and with great glee breaking into young womanhood as we broke the boundaries of 1950's modesty.
MARSIE SCHARLATT  Los Angeles


John W. Bristol; Investment Counselor to Colleges, 81
John W. Bristol, an investment counselor to schools and colleges, died on Thursday at the Woods Edge Care Center in Bridgewater, N.J.
Mr.
Bristol, who lived in Peapack, N.J., was 81.
The cause was complications of Parkinson's disease, said his daughter, Barbara Bristol.


What's It Like To Be 101?


U.S. COURT FAULTS A NEW YORK LIST ON CHILD ABUSERS
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan has ruled that the standard of evidence used by New York State to place a suspect's name on its central child-abuse register poses an "unacceptably high risk of error," and that many people are placed on the list who do not belong there.
"Although we recognize the grave seriousness of the problems of child abuse and neglect, and the need for the state to maintain a central register for insuring that those with abusive backgrounds not be inadvertently given access to children, we find the current system unacceptable," a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in Manhattan, concluded on Friday.


UConn Finishes Perfect At Home
Connecticut ended its first season, the regular season, with a flourish today at the expense of St.
John's.
The Huskies trounced the Redmen, 95-80, and set some records, but none that will do them any good when their second season, the tournament season, begins Friday at Madison Square Garden.


Selling Is Hard When There Are No Buyers
THE world's economies are hardly in synch, and government economic policies vary widely.
But you wouldn't know that from looking at the markets around the world.
They have been sinking in remarkable unison for a month.
The slide has caused more pain in bonds than in stocks, and has been worst in the so-called emerging markets -- already being dubbed "submerging markets" by Wall Street wags.
It has been deeper in Europe than in America, so you might say that this nation has been the winner.
You would have lost less with your money here than almost anywhere except Japan.
There, now, don't you feel better already?


Elaine Clayman, R. L. Tepperman
Elaine Clayman, a prinicpal in a New York real estate company, was married last evening to Ronald Lee Tepperman, an insurance broker in Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi Dennis N. Math officiated at the Sumptuary, a restaurant in New York.
Ms.
Clayman-Tepperman, 45, is a principal in the Clayman/Itzkowitz Realty Group.
She graduated from City College and received a master's degree in English literature from Lehman College.
She is a daughter of Sara Clayman of the Bronx and the late Leon Clayman.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


F.Y.I.
Big Yellow Letters
Q.
What are those codes, in big yellow letters and numbers, that are stenciled on many city streets?
The one I see most often is E-1.


Health Care for All, if Congress Doesn't Weaken; Medicare Victim
To the Editor:
I am a physician, recently retired after 37 years of private practice of obstetrics and gynecology in Englewood, N.J.


Outside Looking In
I have several close friends who are severely addicted to alcohol, and over the years I have thought about trying to persuade each of them to check into a hospital and get sober.
Have I ever done it?
No.
I let my friends be.
Is it cowardice?
Partly.
There's no contest between an interfering presence and the solace of a drink.
If, miraculously, one of my friends listened to my advice and went for treatment, then possibly the relationship would survive, although I think people are never quite comfortable with their savior.
More likely, the alcoholic's life would go on as before, and I would be viewed with suspicion forever.


Where Herring is Art
EVERY GOOD GRAIL requires a journey.
Perhaps this explains why the sour Dane and I are on this small ferry -- bobbing in a bright sea, surrounded by a gabbling crowd of puberty-ridden northern Europeans.
Half an hour ago, the ferry left the small Danish island of Bornholm and still lurches gamely toward a distant dot, the tiny island of Christianso.
One teen-ager, a loud boy, wears a black baseball cap displaying the silver word "SEX"; a skinny 10-year-old girl, in a T-shirt that reads "Rough Wear for Those Who Dare," devours one hard candy after another.
I sit patiently beside Tine, the sour Dane, because I may be nearing my goal.
I'm on my way to Christianso to find the perfect herring.
It's a breezy May day.
The ruffled sea is lovely; the Dane is lovely.
"Look at the sun on those whitecaps," I suggest.


The World; Clinton Tries to Make Major Feel Special
ADMITTEDLY, the Group of Seven summit meeting in Tokyo wasn't the most propitious venue to initiate a search for one's roots.
The idea apparently was born during one of those moments when bonding leaders scratch around for small talk.
Prime Minister John Major, chatting with President Clinton and into his second whisky, ventured the recollection that his grandfather had worked the steel mills in Pittsburgh and that his father had in fact been conceived there.
He was fuzzy on the details.
So on a wintry night last Monday the leader of the United States took the leader of the United Kingdom on a tour of downtown Pittsburgh, where not a trace of the steel mills remains.
Instead of braving the blast furnace, they strolled through the renovated Station Square shopping mall past blue jeans and chocolate chip cookie counters.
In a Pro Sports shop Mr.
Major bought a "Mighty Ducks" hockey shirt for his son for $69.
Not quite a pilgrimage to the old homestead, but Mr.
Clinton had made his point: when it comes to Mr.
Major, he'll go to great lengths to show him a good time.


Jewish Community Center Finds a Home
The Jewish Community Center, which has been scattering its activities among 15 buildings, has made a down payment on its first permanent home: the site of an abandoned gas station at 76th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
The four-year-old community organization, which has 900 members, paid $100,000 to the Exxon Corporation on Feb. 14 to secure the site; it does not expect to close the deal, however, until next year.


Some of the Real Costs Of Education
Bravo to George Rand for his trenchant observations in his letter "Outrageous Salaries in Schools"  [ Feb. 13 ] .
His name is now added to a growing groundswell of Long Island taxpayers who are coming to grips with this problem.
In November of last year Tom Gulotta defeated Ben Zwirn in the contest for Nassau County Executive.
The central issue in their bruising campaign was the onerous burden of taxes that the electorate now bears.
Both candidates pledged to at least stop raising them.
But Islandwide only 40 percent of the property taxes paid by this electorate goes to support governmental services.
Sixty percent goes to fund the public schools on Long Island.
Yet this huge 60 percent school-tax bill generates only a small fraction of attention from our state legislators and media that the 40 percent generates for governmental services.
This must change.
In Rockville Centre, 78 percent of our $37 million budget goes toward school-district employees' salaries and fringes.
The salary range of teachers goes from a starting salary of $35,000 a year to a high of $83,000 a year, and those figures do not include fringes or overtime.
The average salary for all R.V.C. teachers is $59,419.
But if you want a classic example of what 40 years of lobbying our school boards and state legislators by the teachers union, has accomplished it is the fact that in R.V.C. there are 363 salary classifications used to pay the 259 teachers in our system.
Isn't that bizarre?
Most of the other school districts have similar pay scales.


Two on the Aisle, Yes, but Which Aisle?
THE PLACE: THE MAJESTIC Theater.
The time: a recent Saturday night a few minutes before the start of the performance of "The Phantom of the Opera." A grim-faced middle-aged man, trailed by a worried woman I took to be his wife, went past me up the stairs at my elbow.
He carried his coat, his wife's coat and their ticket stubs, which he read with a squint.
"One more row," he said to no one in particular, "and we'd be outside." They moved on.
I was cheered: they had even worse seats than the one I was in.
It was a time of stress for us all.
After paying $65, which is also the cost of a seat in the orchestra, you have reason to be shocked when you find yourself high above the Majestic's equivalent of a timberline.
That is, you're in row D of what's termed the rear mezzanine, eight rows (E through L) from the back of the theater, sitting on a level with the unadorned plaster above the proscenium.
The stage is far below.


A Little Girl's War
ZLATA'S DIARY A Child's Life in Sarajevo.
By Zlata Filipovic.
Translated, with notes, by Christina Pribichevich-Zoric.
Illustrated. 200 pp.
New York: Viking. $16.95.


A Playwright Who Likes to Bang Words Together
SOMETIME AFTER LINCOLN'S DEATH AND BEFORE 1900, a black gravedigger ("from a family of diggers"), who believes he resembles the late President, digs a huge hole out West ("an exact replica of the Great Hole of History") and opens a sideshow in it.
For a penny, customers can shoot him with blanks as he sits in a rocking chair in a simulated theater box.
Between visitors, the Lesser Known, as he calls himself, is garrulous.
He talks of his wife, Lucy, back East, a confidante to the dying who hears their last words, and of his young son, Brazil, whom he expects will be a professional mourner one day.
Tinny vaudeville tunes trickle in, as a bust of Lincoln -- a hole in its head for the pennies -- is illuminated by a white, ghostly light.
This is Suzan-Lori Parks country, a pun-filled allegorical and dreamlike world, where words, says the 30-year-old playwright, "bang up against each other and do things." Her latest work, "The America Play," opens Thursday at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, directed by Liz Diamond and designed by Riccardo Hernandez.
A co-production of the Public and Yale Repertory Theater in association with Theater for a New Audience, which commissioned it, the play is the author's 11th.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Bedford - Stuyvesant; Officials Say Health Center Is on Verge Of Insolvency
Ten years of financial problems at Bedford-Stuyvesant's largest mental health center have forced the center to the brink of insolvency, according to city and state mental health officials.
The officials say that the services provided by the 20-year-old agency, the Bedford-Stuyvesant Mental Health Center, at 1406 Fulton Street, are essential to a community plagued by poverty and violence.


At the Polls, Ace Tops Schindler
UP ON THE high ground, there are would-be moviegoers wondering whether they'll get around to seeing "Schindler's List" or "The Piano" or "Philadelphia" before Oscar night.
Down in the trenches, it's another story.
The films that aim low and arrive without fanfare don't even register with serious audiences most of the time.
But that doesn't mean they don't warrant serious attention.
These bottom-feeding films often have real impact, no matter how imbecilic they seem from afar.
After all, when films are geared to appeal to impulse viewing -- does anyone make advance plans to see "Blank Check?" -- they say something about what our impulses really mean.
Who can be sure that "Ace Ventura, Pet Detective," the low-ball hit that has been thoroughly enjoyed by at least one United States Senator, doesn't tell us something about the state of the nation?
What did we find out when Christmas audiences, confronted with the biggest array of high-minded Hollywood films in recent memory, stole away in droves to see the no-brainer comedies "Mrs. Doubtfire" and "Grumpy Old Men?"


CRIME
Is this writing, or is it painting?
The question comes to mind a lot in SCAVENGER REEF (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21), Laurence Shames's second gaudy caper (after "Florida Straits") set in Key West, a town that flaunts its eccentricity with the exuberant pride of a drag queen.
In this outpost of bohemian excess, a modest artist named Augie Silver is something of an anomaly until his apparent death in a boating accident drives up the value of his work and makes him a posthumous celebrity.
Their hearts tinged with the greenish glow of envy and greed, Augie's avaricious New York agent and the local wharf rats he called his friends scramble to make a killing by auctioning their prized personal collections of Augie's paintings.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FLUSHING A Play That Celebrates Little-Known Heroines
A decade ago, when Kathleen Gaffney traveled the country presenting monologues, she struck a bargain with her audiences.
After she made them laugh, she would call upon them to tell her about local heroines.
Out of that research, Ms.
Gaffney has written a play called "Challenge Her," which is being performed for the first time by Artsgenesis, Ms.
Gaffney's troupe (pictured above), at the Queens Theater in the Park.
The play includes portraits of 11 women Ms.
Gaffney discovered in her travels.
Tye Leung was a Chinese woman who helped other Chinese who had been sold into slavery and prostitution at the turn of the century in San Francisco.
Loretta Janetta Velasquez was a Cuban woman who led her husband's Confederate troops after he was killed.


At Least the Snow Kept the Plants Warm
THOUGH it will take some months to know what really happened to plants during the severe winter temperatures just gone by, gardeners have some solace.
The low temperatures occurred when there was snow on the ground.
Snow is nature's blanket and the plants underneath were well insulated.
The ground was frozen when all the bad weather started and it stayed frozen.
With the snow on top, there was no chance of winter thaw from warm sunny days.
For the plants, at least, this was a good thing.


Seeing a City In the Windows Of Its Shops; IN VIETNAM, ZIPPOS AND CABIAR
BEHIND THE SUN-dappled shop windows along Dong Khoi Street in Ho Chi Minh City, there is ample evidence of the tortured modern history of the Vietnamese city still better known to the world as Saigon -- but there is also proof of its glittering rebirth.
A stroll is best begun in the graceful decay of the lobby of the Majestic, once the city's most elegant hotel.
A sharp turn out the lobby door leads you onto Dong Khoi Street, the leafy colonial-era thoroughfare that runs from the banks of the Saigon River into the heart of the city.


He'd Rather Satirize A Star Than Be One
FOR A PERSON WHO SPENDS much of his time coolly skewering this country's political and pop cultural establishments, the writer and performer Harry Shearer tends to pop up frequently, Waldo-like, in the mainstream.
On the flip side of this apparent contradiction: For a person who makes a good living in Hollywood (primarily as the voice of most of the supporting characters on "The Simpsons"), Mr.
Shearer spends a lot of time on the margins.
There he is, for instance, in a split-second cameo in the recent movie "I'll Do Anything." There he is in a guest shot as a security consultant on "L.A. Law"; as an Italian tailor in the 1991 Sylvester Stallone mega-bomb "Oscar"; as Derek Smalls, the bass player in the seminal rock mockumentary "This Is Spinal Tap"; as a "male synchronized swimmer" in one of the most frequently rerun segments of "Saturday Night Live."


Helping Women to Get in the Political Running
With rising numbers of women choosing politics as a career, a school to teach them the special skills needed in running for public office will open in June at Yale University.
The Women's Campaign School, sponsored by the Women's Studies program at Yale, was started by a group of women who wanted to help other women enter politics and who approached Yale with the idea.
The school is intended to differ from programs offered by political parties and special interest groups because it is non-partisan and does not focus on issues.
It is designed to offer the novice candidate a practical guide on running for office and to help women already in office make the leap to higher office.


So Far From the Brooklyn Bridge; Yeshiva Spurns the Secular World
The word yeshiva means "a place of sitting," yet few people who visit Oholei Torah, the yeshiva attended by the four Hasidic students who were shot on the Brooklyn Bridge last week, would find it a restful spot.
There is, to be sure, a lot of sitting on worn benches in front of battered volumes of Talmud.
But the air in the yeshiva's rundown study hall is clamorous with students explicating ambiguities and enigmas and arguing over super-fine distinctions.
Inevitably, more than a few break into metronomic swaying as if the passion of their movement could clarify a passage's complexity.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 6 about living in Hightstown, N.J., misidentified the borough's middle school.
It is the Melvin H. Kreps Middle School, not the Rogers Middle School.


Sex Education In the Early Grades
It is rare that I read an article and find myself angry, appalled, shocked and disgusted all at the same time.
Such was the case with "Early-Grade Sex Course Is Debated" (Jan. 30).
Where do these sex education "experts" get their expertise, and why has sex education become such an important topic in our schools?
Not surprisingly, as our children are encouraged to focus more on their sex organs and less on the three R's, there has been a decline in the levels of performance and civil discourse in our schools.


Text of Resignation Letter and Clinton Reply
Following is the text of the letter of resignation sent to President Clinton today by Bernard W. Nussbaum, the White House counsel, and excerpts from the President's letter in response: Dear Mr.
President:
It has been a great honor and privilege to serve you as Counsel to the President.
I am proud of the accomplishments of this Administration and those that I know will be achieved in the months and years to come.
I am also proud of the many contributions my office has made to the wide array of policy initiatives of your Administration.


2 Bodies Found in Trunk
The bodies of two women were discovered yesterday stuffed inside the trunk of a car that was abandoned near the waterfront in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn, the police said.
It was not clear how long the unidentified women had been dead or how they died.
Both were fully clothed and had no bruises or other marks, the police said.
The bodies were found about 1:30 P.M. by officers investigating the abandoned car, a 1988 Pontiac, at Shore Parkway and 69th Street, the police said.
"Apparently the car must have been sitting there for a couple of days," said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.


Zoning Out Sex-Oriented Businesses
SUSAN HERMAN doesn't mind the one or two sexually oriented video stores that have long operated in her neighborhood, the Chelsea section of Manhattan.
What troubles her are the nine shops that have opened in the last 18 months in the largely residential community.
"One is an eyesore, but nine is an invasion," said Ms.
Herman, a lawyer and the founder of the Chelsea Action Coalition, a group of about 200 local residents who oppose the recent proliferation of such businesses.


THEIR CRIMES DON'T MAKE THEM ADULTS
Alex Kotlowitz's sympathies seemed misguided in "Their Crimes Don't Make Them Adults" (Feb. 13).
No mention is made of the victims of the wanton aggression by youths who show a total disregard for human life.
What do you tell the family of the youngster slain because he didn't turn over his jacket quickly enough to an envious teen-ager?
GIL VALDALISO New York, N.Y.


Crestfallen
The last two crested ibises (or toki) live on Sado Island off Japan, where they await their death.
The Japanese, notoriously resistant to environmentalism but nonetheless devoted to nature, have taken this rare pair to heart.
The Government has decided to save the ibises, in a manner of speaking.
When the birds die, the Government will freeze some of their organs, in hopes of recreating the species some day by cloning, as the dinosaurs were recreated in "Jurassic Park."


There's Plenty of Time For Kids and Fly-Tying
If you live in the Northeast and tie your own flies, March is a good month to get ready for the pleasures ahead.
You can wait until the last minute, furiously cranking out flies after trout season is under way in April or after the arrival of striped bass from the Chesapeake Bay or the Hudson River a few weeks later.


Tokyo's Rich Array Of Regional Dining
TWO regions lay claim to superiority when it comes to dining in Japan: Kanto (the eastern part that includes Tokyo) and Kansai (the western part that includes both refined Kyoto and mercantile Osaka).
One advantage of being in Tokyo is that regional specialties from all parts of Japan can be savored there, including Kyoto's fabulous lacquer-boxed banquets known as kyobento.
So you can decide the rivalry for yourself.
Although by American standards restaurants in Japan are expensive -- sometimes breathtakingly so -- prices are considerably lower at lunch; the four restaurants that follow are suggested for lunch.
There is generally no tipping in Japan, but a tax of from 3 to 6 percent will be added to your final bill.
Remember, too, that credit cards are not accepted in many restaurants in Japan, except in hotel restaurants.
All prices are per person and calculated at 110 yen to the dollar.
Konomi
A small restaurant nestled into the bustling Asakusa district near Kappabashi, Konomi offers exceptionally tasty kyobento that, at lunchtime, are remarkably reasonable in price.
The top-of-the-line option between noon and 3 P.M. is the Kyobento Course, which for about $40 begins with an elegant arrangement of hors d'oeuvres and goes on to include a savory steamed custard, delicately herbed rice, miso soup and silky, jade-colored tea sorbet.
The main attraction, however, is the kyobento itself.
This stunning two-tiered, black and gold lacquered box is a treasure chest filled with nearly two dozen tasty, seasonally appropriate, tidbits.


Does 'Germinal' Speak Across a Century?
IT WAS A MEASURE OF EMILE Zola's political influence that coal miners from northern France joined his funeral procession in Paris on Oct. 5, 1902, shouting "Germinal! Germinal!" in tribute to his support for their fight against exploitation.
They didn't seem to mind that in his novel "Germinal" the miners went down to defeat when their strike was crushed by gendarmes.
What mattered was that Zola sympathized with their struggle.
For the France of the day, that alone was an act of subversion.
Almost a century later, the director Claude Berri has brought his movie version of Zola's classic to a very different France.
All but a handful of coal mines are now closed, factories are automated, a welfare state is in place and the labor movement, having come full circle, is again weak.
In fact, when the movie was released in France last fall, the cries of "Germinal! Germinal!" came from businessmen in Lille, complaining that Mr.
Berri had muddied the image of the "new" high-tech northern France of today.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 20 about two television movies drawn from the Menendez murder case misattributed some of Ronald L. Soble's coverage of the case.
Mr.
Soble covered the case in its early stages as a reporter for The Los Angeles Times.
But he left the newspaper before the trial, which he covered as co-author of a book, "Blood Brothers," on which one movie is based.


Erika S. Shapiro, Warren D. Kremin
Erika Stone Shapiro, a daughter of Susan Stone of New York and Myron Shapiro of Miami, was married last evening to Warren Douglas Kremin, the son of Roslyn Kremin of New City, N.Y., and the late Matthew Kremin.
Rabbi David Chanofsky performed the ceremony at Bridgewaters in New York.
The bride and bridegroom, both 23, graduated from George Washington University.
The bride is an assistant media buyer at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Advertising in New York.
Her father is the managing partner in the Miami office of Herzfeld &amp; Rubin, a New York law firm.
Her mother is a media consultant in New York.


Short Films Have Their (Brief) Moment in the Sun
THOSE WHO participate in office Oscar pools will find themselves stumped once again when it comes to the short categories.
Let's see, for best short feature will it be "Black Rider," about an elderly Jewish woman and a young black man on a bus in Berlin?
Or maybe "Down on the Waterfront," a send-up of "On the Waterfront," with Ed Asner.
And for best short documentary, how about "Chicks in White Satin," about a lesbian wedding?
Or maybe "Defending Our Lives," about battered women who kill their attackers.
But for the first time this year, Oscar kibitzers will have a chance to improve their odds by actually seeing some of the short films.
A two-week series called "Oscar Shorts 1993," which includes most of this year's nominees for short live-action movies and documentary films, opened on Friday at Cinema Village.
Short films can range in length from 3 to 30 minutes and cost as little as $1,500 to make.


The Truth of the Battlefield
To the Editor:
May I add a footnote to the review by David Haward Bain of John Douglas Marshall's "Reconciliation Road" (Jan. 2), a book that deals with certain doubts that have been raised about whether or not the military historian S. L. A. Marshall actually conducted "postcombat mass interviews" with infantrymen during World War II?


Word for Word/Political Journals; When in the Course of Events It Is Time to Pillory Someone
THOMAS PAINE exhorted American revolutionaries with his little pamphlets.
Thomas Nast skewered politicians with his caricatures.
Now there is a computer-age hybrid of these distinct traditions of American free speech, thanks in many cases to the economies of desktop publishing.
A flock of small, colorful new political journals -- some often strident or tasteless but others frequently funny, thoughtful or probing -- have taken their place outside the big-media mainstream, and on both sides of the political spectrum.
Following the model of the now-defunct Quayle Quarterly, many focus on political personalities.
They include the image-deflating Perot Periodical, based in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, the sympathetic but frequently whimsical Hillary Clinton Quarterly of Concord, N.H., The Flush Rush Quarterly of San Diego and the scabrous lampoon Slick Times of Valley Center, Calif.


Nicole D. Bowen, Scott Prentzas
Nicole Denise Bowen, the daughter of Priscilla and Merrill Bowen of Buffalo, is to be married today to Gregory Scott Prentzas, the son of Marilyn and John Prentzas of Greensboro, N.C.
Judge Constance Pazin, a town justice in Athens, N.Y., performed the ceremony at the Stewart House, a hotel in Athens.
The bride, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a nonfiction book editor in the publishing division of Facts on File Inc., the news and information service in New York.
She graduated from the University of Chicago.


Feb. 27-March 5: Someone to Look Down On; Minority Groups Feel Thwarted by Each Other
To be sure, more and more Americans say they support a racially and ethnically integrated society.
And many Americans in minority groups still feel left out, or at least left behind.
What's more, many black Americans, Asian Americans and Hispanic Americans feel that they are being held back not just by bigoted whites but by each other.
A survey conducted by the National Conference of Christians and Jews and released last week found that 46 percent of Hispanic Americans and 42 percent of blacks felt that Asians were "unscrupulous, crafty and devious in business," and that 68 percent of Asians and 49 percent of blacks believed Hispanic Americans "tend to have bigger families than they are able to support." In addition, 31 percent of Asian Americans and 26 percent of Hispanic Americans said blacks "want to live on welfare."


Brutality Set to Strings
To the Editor:
To Kenneth M. Chanko's list of films using gentle music as an accompaniment -- or counterpoint -- to violent action  [ "It's Got a Nice Beat, You Can Torture to It," Feb. 20 ]  I can add another, particularly vivid example: Oliver Stone's "Platoon." We saw bloodshed and brutal scenes of war, but we heard Samuel Barber's poignant "Adagio for Strings." The music heightened our sense of the tragedy and gave the film a philosophic dimension it never would have had without that eloquent music.
MURIEL NUSSBAUM  Norwalk, Conn.


Melissa Sloan, Ronald Miller
Melissa Page Sloan, a daughter of Marlo Phillips and Norton Sloan, both of New York, is to be married today to Ronald Norman Miller, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Miller of Hartsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Murray Grauer will perform the ceremony at the Carlyle Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Miller, 27, is a merchandiser and account executive in Hoboken, N.J., for Inner Secrets Inc., a lingerie manufacturing and importing company of which her father is the chairman.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her mother owns Marlo Flowers Ltd., a custom flower design shop in New York.


Lageman Requires Surgery on Shoulder
Jets defensive end Jeff Lageman will have arthroscopic surgery on his left shoulder, which he separated last season, on Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
The rehabilitation is expected to take four to six weeks and Lageman expects to be ready for training camp.
"I tried to let it rest, but it just didn't get any better," Lageman said.
"They're just going to go in there and clean it out. I don't think it's a major deal."


Miami Biltmore
To the Editor: Oct. 5, 1943.
I wrote home that I had been swimming in the pool at the Miami Biltmore Hotel, then a military hospital.
I was Navy.
That pool was all you say in "Biltmore Bounces Back," plus a 35- or 40-foot-high Moorish-style diving tower.
Once, going off the tower I had angled my head slightly, so on entry my neck was strained.
I had pulled myself out and was resting when a young woman, girl I would have said, wearing a military-style tunic without insignia, knelt beside me.
Very solicitously she asked if I hurt my neck.
With red hair, smooth freckled skin, eyes of the purest blue, or green, she was dazzingly beautiful.
"Why do you think that?" I blurted out.
"I saw your head turn," she answered.
"No!" I lied.
"My neck doesn't hurt, sharp eyes or not. Who are you?"


It's All Downhill as Mullen Scores World Cup Victory
There's something about skiing on this side of the Atlantic that agrees with Cary Mullen of Canada.
The skier from Banff, Alberta, won the World Cup downhill here today with the same aplomb that got him the United States national championship at Winter Park, Colo., last year.
Is it the snow, the sunshine or the people?


Weather Spurs Rise in Travel
A MIXED blessing.
That's how Westchester travel agents feel about the snow's effect on business.
On the positive side, the weather has accounted for an upsurge in reservations by people seeking relief from the cold.
On the negative side, there are rebookings caused by weather-related cancellations and changes in school vacations.


County Should Keep Supporting Jobs Center
I read with some dismay the article "Jobs Center Faces Uncertain Future" (Feb. 6).
The Jobs Center should be allowed to continue to provide its vital services in aiding its clients to gain work.
As a Jobs Center volunteer and a career development specialist, I feel the center should be a single facet of a coordinated county re-employment effort.
This should include community employment workshops, partnership programs and job development, all of which could be achieved at minimal cost.
Contrary to what the chairman of the County Board of Legislators, Stephen P. Tenore, said, the Jobs Center is not "a duplication of existing services." Nowhere else can job seekers, especially white-collar workers, receive from experienced business professionals the level of personalized career-development assistance in such a variety of job-search and business-development areas.


Getting A New Agent
STATISTICS increasingly confirm the notion that homes are once again selling well in many neighborhoods.
But that's little comfort to the seller who's locked into a 90- or 180-day listing agreement with a real estate agent who appears to be doing little, if anything, to promote the home.
Changing agents in midstream is never easy.
But under certain circumstances it may be necessary, and even wise.
"It happens all the time," said Harriet Haffner, president of Haffner Realty of Norwalk, Conn.


The Tall Tales Come Later


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
FLATIRON DISTRICT  $525,000
12 West 17th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,300-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, 11-ft. ceilings, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,100, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $595,000, 15 weeks on market (Broker: Bascom &amp; Sears)


A CLASSICAL DUET
By and large, American classical music radio is a dispiriting wasteland.
In recent years, most classical stations have followed a destructive philosophy of programming innocuous background music for a projected upper-class listenership.
Snippets of Vivaldi or Johann Strauss mingle with luxury-life-style commercials and brainless chatter.
Longer symphonic works are increasingly rare, vocal or chamber music nearly nonexistent; the 20th century slips in only by accident.
The possibilities of the medium -- to explore wider repertory, to propagate new music, and to draw highlights from the limitless archives of recordings -- go largely unrealized.
With three classical stations, New York was once a haven for radio listeners.
WNYC-FM, the public radio station, offered some remarkably adventurous new-music programming in the early 1980's, anchored by Tim Page's popular "New, Old and Unexpected." WQXR-FM (96.3) and, to a lesser extent, WNCN still allowed music of substance into their commercial formats.
But WNCN abandoned itself to the "classical life style" approach, then gave way to a rock format late last year, and playlists on the other stations have grown more and more timid.


GERMANS CAMPAIGN IN PRESIDENT RACE
Johannes Rau ran against Chancellor Helmut Kohl in the 1987 elections and lost.
Now he is hoping to win the largely ceremonial job of the German presidency this spring, and if he does it will bode no good for Mr.
Kohl in the October national elections.
That, Mr.
Rau fears, could be his own biggest handicap.
"The main thing that will be decided in May is who will be President for the next five years, not whether the Government will change in October," the 53-year-old Social Democratic governor of North Rhine-Westphalia said here recently.


Church's Neighbors Become Unwilling Parishioners
Evelyn Orkaby of Sheepshead Bay says she has celebrated more weddings, mourned more deaths and sat through more Sunday services than she cares to recall.
And she and about a dozen of her neighbors have had enough.
They say they have been forced to partake of these events because the church on their block, the Three Hierarchs Greek Orthodox Church at 1724 Avenue P, broadcasts them over a loudspeaker mounted over the main entrance to the church.


Endangered Species: Original Golden Arches
Just about every town has a McDonald's.
But Downey has the oldest, original still-standing McDonald's, built way back in 1953, the year Southern California gave birth to the fast-food chain that conquered the globe.
It is one totally awesome relic.
There isn't a faux mansard roof shingle or earth-tone brick in sight.
This is the eye-popping original, with the bright yellow parabolic arches piercing a raked roof, a gleaming facade of red and white tile, flashing neon trim, walk-up windows, lots of chrome, no inside seating.


Iditarod's Icy Odyssey Is Butcher's Highway
To be an adventurer implies a willingness to embrace the wild.
In that spirit, Susan Butcher, four-time winner of the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race, has readied herself for another go at the Alaskan tundra.
She either jogs, hikes, swims, skis or rides a bicycle every day year-round to get ready for the Iditarod, a race in which she has placed among the top four every year but one in the last decade.
As the longest dogsled race in North America, the Iditarod slices northward through Alaska, 1,160 miles from Anchorage to Nome.


Why Birth Certificates Now Cost $15
AS a public issue, the cost of a copy of a birth certificate in Connecticut will never have the impact in the General Assembly as, say, legalized gambling or crime in the streets.
But on the grass roots level, in towns around the state, a law tripling the charge for such copies -- to $15 from $5 -- has been an explosive issue, resulting in cries of rage and anguish both from people who need the copies and from town clerks who must issue them.
The clerks, generally considered quiet and unspectacular public servants, have departed from that image in expressing distaste for the $15 copies.
They use words like "ridiculous" and "stupid" in describing the fee scale and say they are tired of taking the heat for it.


Shot in Van, Youth, 16, Dies
Aaron Halberstam, 16, a victim of the shooting on the Brooklyn Bridge, died last night after being kept on life-support systems for two days, said a spokeswoman for St.
Vincent's Hospital.
Mr. Halberstam was pronounced dead at 9:40 P.M., said Dina Gabriel, the spokeswoman.


Tumultuous Times in 'Tale of Two Cities'
AT the end of "A Tale of Two Cities," Sydney Carton, once dissolute, sacrifices his life to honor a promise.
But Madame Defarge, consumed by her revolutionary fanaticism, personifies the corruption of a cause.
His is a redemptive death; hers, an ignoble one.
At last, Charles Dickens's perception of the best and the worst in human nature -- and its reversals -- reverberates through the Paper Mill Playhouse, triumphing over the irrelevance of Robert Johanson's adaptation.


Addiction by Design?
Last week the Food and Drug Administration made an extraordinarily serious charge about the tobacco industry.
Simply put, the agency asserted that the reason many cigarette smokers find it close to impossible to break the habit is because the industry makes it close to impossible -- by deliberately adding nicotine, a potent addicting agent, during the cigarette production process.
This revelation, if it holds up, will come as a shock to the vast majority of Americans who no doubt assumed that whatever nicotine is found in cigarettes is simply the residue of the nicotine that occurs naturally in tobacco.
Few consumers had the slightest inkling that nicotine might actually be sprayed on the tobacco as it is processed.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate 1.Balanced Budget Amendment: Vote on a less stringent version of the balanced budget constitutional amendment.
Rejected 78 to 22, March 1. 2.Balanced Budget Amendment: Vote on a constitutional amendment to required a balanced Federal budget.
Failed, with 63 in favor and 37 opposed (four votes short of the two-thirds majority required), March 1.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Nay
Nay
Lieberman (D)
Nay
Nay
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Nay
Nay
Lautenberg (D)
Nay
Nay
New York
D'Amato (R)
Nay
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Nay
Nay
House 1.
House Post Office: Vote on a Democratic leadership resolution that allows the House Ethics Committee to decide whether to initiate an investigation into alleged misconduct at the House Post Office.
Approved 241 to 184, March 2. 2.
House Post Office: Vote to kill a Republican-sponsored resolution that would require the House Ethics Committee to investigate the alleged misconduct of the House Post Office.
Approved 238 to 186, March 2.
1
2
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Yea
Yea
2. Gejdenson (D)
Yea
Yea
3. DeLauro (D)
Yea
Yea
4. Shays (R)
Nay
Nay
5. Franks (R)
Nay
Nay
6. Johnson (R)
Nay
Nay
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Yea
Yea
2. Hughes (D)
Yea
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Nay
Nay
4. Smith (R)
Nay
Nay
5. Roukema (R)
Nay
Nay
6. Pallone (D)
Yea
Yea
7. Franks (R)
Nay
Nay
8. Klein (D)
Yea
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Yea
Yea
10. Payne (D)
Yea
Yea
11. Gallo (R)
A A
12. Zimmer (R)
Nay
Nay
13. Menendez (D)
Yea
Yea
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Nay
Nay
3. King (R)
Nay
Yea
4. Levy (R)
Nay
Nay
5. Ackerman (D)
Yea
Yea
6. Flake (D)
Yea
Yea
7. Manton (D)
Yea
Yea
8. Nadler (D)
Yea
Yea
9. Schumer (D)
Yea
Yea
10. Towns (D)
Yea
Yea
11. Owens (D)
Yea
Yea
12. Velazquez (D)
Yea
Yea
13. Molinari (R)
Nay
Nay
14. Maloney (D)
Yea
Yea
15. Rangel (D)
Yea
Yea
16. Serrano (D)
Yea
Yea
17. Engel (D)
Yea
Yea
18. Lowey (D)
Yea
Yea
19. Fish (R)
Nay
Nay
20. Gilman (R)
Nay
Nay
21. McNulty (D)
Yea
Yea
22. Solomon (R)
Nay
Nay
23. Boehlert (R)
Nay
Nay
24. McHugh (R)
Nay
Nay
25. Walsh (R)
Nay
Nay
26. Hinchey (D)
Yea
Yea
27. Paxon (R)
Nay
Nay
28. Slaughter (D)
Yea
Yea
29. LaFalce (D)
Yea
Yea
30. Quinn (R)
Nay
Nay
31. Houghton (R)
Nay
Yea


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Bedford - Stuyvesant; Expanding Its Reach


Worth's Tomb
On the 200th anniversary of his birth, Maj.
Gen.
William Jenkins Worth was honored last week with the announcement that the Paul and Klara Porzelt Foundation had donated $85,000 to restore the deteriorating 51-foot-high granite obelisk over his grave, at the traffic island at Broadway and 25th Street.
An engraving of the obelisk, above, was featured in Harper's Weekly on Dec. 5, 1857, just after the monument was dedicated.
Its designer, James Goodwin Batterson, chose the location for its proximity to his favorite hotel, the old Fifth Avenue.
Born in Hudson, N.Y., Worth distinguished himself in the War of 1812 and the Mexican War.


Lambs to Virtual Reality


Down Home in Acadiana
AT IS 9:45 ON SATURDAY MORNING IN Mamou, a threadbare, sun-singed farming town in south-central Louisiana that is known locally for two things: soybeans and Fred's Lounge.
It is not soybeans that bring me to Mamou this morning.
To aficionados of Cajun music, Fred's is one of a holy trinity of clubs that vividly define the local culture -- along with Mulate's in Breaux Bridge and Randol's in Lafayette.
But Fred's is the place where the band cranks up at a time most citizens are having their second cup of coffee.


THEIR CRIMES DON'T MAKE THEM ADULTS
Kotlowitz's article is another example of pointless theoretical liberalism.
Should we let these children kill and sell drugs while we wait for morality to instill itself in urban America?
Perhaps we could wait for some more Government programs, hoping that they are as successful as welfare has been in inspiring urban reform.
PAUL R. CIANCIO Troy, N.Y.


EXIT THE CRITIC
Frank Rich may be politically correct, but he is not factually correct in "Exit the Critic" (Feb. 13).
There is not a syllable of truth in his characterization of my theater or my views.
Because we don't often agree on the same plays, Rich charges that I am "uncomfortable with minority playwrights" and that gay writers are "another sore spot," adding that a "dwindled" number of contemporary dramatists work at the American Repertory Theatre.
Well, in the last two seasons alone, this "dwindled" number has included David Rabe, David Mamet, Han Ong, Ronald Ribman, Paula Vogel, Steve Martin, Suzan-Lori Parks, Eric Bogosian, Evan Handler, Peter Feibleman, Philip Glass and Stuart Greenman, many of them gay and minority artists.
Next year, we plan a revised version of Derek Walcott's "Steel" (which was first produced three years ago) as well as a piece commissioned from Anna Deavere Smith in her second A.R.T. visit.
I resent even having to answer such a charge.
It is well known that A.R.T. is a wholly integrated company of actors devoted to plays of quality regardless (rather than because) of race, sex or national origin.
Indeed, our unwavering commitment to nontraditional casting was one of the reasons Samuel Beckett once threatened us with a law suit.


Highly Absorbent
It looks like a cross between a man-made chamois and a slightly stiff baby blanket.
But Packtowl is a 100 percent viscose traveler's towel, designed up sop up nine times its weight in water -- and release much of its absorbed liquid when wrung.
During a recent home test, Packtowl got good marks for water absorption and slightly lower grades for drying time, though it beat a terrycloth competitor.
The 14.5-inch by 34.5-inch machine-washable towel also folds compactly.
Available in blue or green, Packtowl costs $12.
Contact TravelSmith (800) 950-1600.


Air-Rifle Sniper Sought Along Southern Highway
Investigators are searching for an elusive gunman who has left more than 30 vehicles pockmarked with BB's in the last 12 days.
The sniper typically fires from the cover of piney thickets along a six-mile stretch of one of the Southeast's busiest interstate highways.
Lieut.
Sam Simmons, the spokesman for the Greenville County Sheriff's Office, said there had been about 32 reports of vehicles being hit.
"I've lost count," he said.


Hit the Ground Dancing
DARKTOWN STRUTTERS By Wesley Brown. 224 pp. New York: Cane Hill Press. Paper, $11.95.


National Gypsum Bankruptcy Is Defended
To the Editor:
After reading Alison Leigh Cowan's column, "Beware Management Talking Poor" (Wall Street, Feb. 13), I felt compelled to express my concern and disagreement.


Health Care for All, if Congress Doesn't Weaken; Like 1932 Again
To the Editor:
As a former member of New York's Blue Cross and Blue Shield board and former chairman of its health maintenance organization committee, I know about fighting for universal health-care coverage.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Try small talk; look away.
Employing a strategy of indirection, a team of Brooklyn detectives is piercing the wall of fear shielding Asian gangs.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  What do you do when you inherit a tired old Manhattan hotel?
You find it a niche.


Nussbaum Out as White House Counsel
Bernard W. Nussbaum, the White House counsel, reluctantly submitted his resignation today in an effort to set aside mounting questions over his repeated contacts with Federal officials who are investigating President and Mrs.
Clinton's ties to a failed Arkansas savings and loan.
The move came a day after 10 White House and Treasury Department officials were subpoenaed by the grand jury that is investigating whether there was any improper financial relationship between the failed thrift, Madison Guaranty, and the Whitewater Development Company, a real estate venture in Arkansas in which the Clintons were partners.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Leonard S. Coleman Jr.; A New Leader in Baseball's Hierarchy
THERE'S nothing that Leonard S. Coleman Jr. likes better after a long business trip than to return to his rambling, well-appointed and, for visitors, hard-to-find hilltop home here.
From the large sloping lawn, there are views of the Sandy Hook peninsula, the Atlantic Ocean and the World Trade Center, miles in the distance.
After travels all over the world, he still finds that "few places I have seen can equal what we have here in Middletown and in Monmouth County."


Cutting Down Fat in the Diet
THE concern about the amount of fat in the diet has led people who care deeply about good food to make certain sacrifices.
Like me, many of my colleagues have reduced the amount of butter and cheese they eat.
Indulging in scrambled eggs or an omelet has also become an infrequent pleasure.
We do not substitute for butter, products bearing names like "It May Smell Buttery but You Can't Fool Us!" Nor do we eat fat-free cheeses that bear a closer resemblance to linoleum than food.
And we have not yet found a compelling need to buy egg substitutes.


Executive Profile
Jon S. Fossel  Job: Chairman and chief executive of Oppenheimer Management, New York (assets, $28 billion).


When Lamps Wear Out, It May Be Time to Start Rewiring
FLOOR and desk lamps wear out eventually, and a winter of hard use puts many to the test.
A malfunctioning lamp is a fire and shock hazard, and prompt attention is in order.
If a lamp fails to light when switched on, check to make sure that the bulb is good, that the lamp is firmly plugged in and that other lights or appliances on the circuit operate.


Miami Biltmore
To the Editor: The article on the Miami Biltmore (Jan. 23) precipitated a real "nostalgia trip" for me; I was born and raised in Coral Gables in the 30's and 40's.
In my youth, the Biltmore was (and probably still is) the Coral Gables landmark.
Its Giralda tower (I've seen the real one in Seville) could be seen from virtually all points.
Tourists driving through our street would interrupt our ballgames to ask where the Biltmore was.
We'd just point, and say, "Follow that tower till you get there."


Grand Jetes for the Young
A Ballet program performed for and by children will make its debut an Saturday when the New Ballet School, which trains public school children fro professional dancing careers, offers "Kids Dance" at the Joyce Theater.
Eliot Feld, the choreographer, conceived the event as a way to heighten the young peoples appreciation of Ballet.
Thirty-seven children at the school will perform.


H.I.V. Negatives; AIDS Still Immune To the Onslaught Of Medical Science
IN the agonizing 13 years since the new scourge of AIDS appeared, a vast research effort has had some high points: quick discovery of the causative virus, H.I.V., development of AZT and other drugs to fight it and major progress against AIDS-related pneumonias and other secondary afflictions.
Not so long ago, while none dared to predict a cure, hopeful doctors spoke of transforming AIDS from a relentless killer into a chronic, controlled disease, more like diabetes.
But the last year or so has been a rough one for AIDS researchers, with unexpected setbacks in both of the major lines of attack -- the search for antiviral treatments and the search for a vaccine to prevent the spread of AIDS.
The best recent news -- a report last month that AZT deterred transmission of H.I.V. from mothers to newborns -- only highlighted the plight of the hundreds of thousands of Americans who are already living with the virus, for whom a reprieve seems farther away than ever.
Researchers, who tend to have a congenital optimism that keeps them going, now speak more cautiously, and doctors who treat AIDS patients admit to a deepening weariness.


Stockard Channing Goes West
ON BROADWAY, STOCKARD Channing has been called a brilliant actress with the sexiest theater voice since Tallulah.
Her theatrical performances have won her a slew of awards and garnered reviews that practically glow in the dark.
But in Hollywood, she is barely a blip on the studios' radar.
Her name is rarely bandied about by kingpins who green-light major movies and, if she walked into the high-powered Morton's, her arrival would generate no buzz.
If Tinseltown thinks of her at all, it is probably as Rizzo, the wise-cracking, gum-snapping gang leader in "Grease," her only box-office hit.
That was in 1978.


Please Touch the Paintings
MICROSOFT ART GALLERY The Collection of the National Gallery, London.
CD-ROM.
Redmond, Wash.: Microsoft Corporation. $79.95.


Some of the Real Costs of Eduction
Mr.
Rand neglected to mention special education.
In Suffolk County during the 1991-92 school year 12.6 percent of all students were registered in special-education programs.
The estimated cost for a full-time student was $22,181.
An average regular student was funded for about $9,623.
In the Northport-East Northport School District during the 1991-92 school year 47 students attended Boces programs for $1,615,280, approximately $33,784 per student.
This was for a six-hour school day, 10-month school year, and this sum paid only for tuition and related services.
Transportation and summer-school expenses were not included.


Feb. 27-March 5; The Brady Law in Action


Think Again
To the Editor:
As president and executive director of North Carolina Dance Theater, I read with interest James R. Oestreich's article about Peter Martins choreographing a work to Rachmaninoff's Symphonic Dances for New York City Ballet  [ "Is There a Ballet in Rachmaninoff's Symphonic Dances?" Jan. 30 ] .
I was particularly struck by one sentence: "The only wonder in this case is that no one thought to use the Symphonic Dances sooner."


Community Board Meetings in Brooklyn
DISTRICT 1: Greenpoint, Williamsburg; 2d Tuesday of month; next March 8, 7 P.M., 211 Ainslie Street; (718) 388-4440.
DISTRICT 2: Fort Greene, Brooklyn Heights; 2d Wednesday of month; next March 9, 6 P.M., Borough Hall Community Room, Joralemon and Court Streets; (718) 596-5410.


Albany Poised To Advance 1996 Primary
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal to move New York's 1996 Presidential primary from early April to early March is receiving uncommon bipartisan support in Albany, with both Democrats and Republicans believing the state needs a dramatic gesture to regain political influence in Washington.
The bill seems greased for passage in the Legislature, having inspired barely a ripple of dissent since Mr.
Cuomo proposed it in January.
But in the Washington offices of party leaders, political consultants and potential challengers to President Clinton, the bill is viewed as a major vault in a high-stakes game of electoral leapfrog.


Princeton Leads by a Point
Princeton led in the team competition after the first day of the 73d IC4A indoor track and field championships at Jadwin Gym today.
The Tigers did not win any of the day's four events, but took second in two of them and went into Sunday's 16-event finals with 23 points.
The defending champion, Georgetown, was a point behind at 22, largely on the strength of a 1-3 finish in the 35-pound weight throw.
Peter Cyr won the event with a throw of 69 feet 5 1/4 inches and Jesse Saglio took third at 67-5 1/2.
The two fifth-year Hoya seniors, who shaved their heads Thursday to psych themselves for the meet, are coached by Harold Connolly, the 1956 Olympic hammer throw gold medalist.


Danger Makes Algerians Turn to Soothsayers
Her eyes closed, the fortune teller's customer circled her index finger over a brown piece of paper while Abed Schikouri, barely audible above the tap of the heavy rain on the tin roof, mumbled Koranic verses.
"Now," the 91-year-old clairvoyant said, and his customer, Ilhem Zid, stopped her movement.


Van Breda Kolff Recalls the Magic
Butch van Breda Kolff sits hunched over, relentlessly chomping on a piece of gum, arms folded, watching intently from the sideline as his Hofstra team -- his last team -- warms up for perhaps his last time as a coach.
The 71-year-old iconoclast, the oldest coach in N.C.A.A.
Division I basketball, walks more unsteadily these days, his 6-foot 3-inch frame stooping a little over the paunch in his midsection.
Behind van Breda Kolff, the 9,000-seat Alumni Arena at the University of Buffalo -- site of the East Coast Conference tournament -- has fewer than 100 people in it, a ghost town by basketball standards.
During introductions, van Breda Kolff's name is mispronounced.
And forget television.
They take radio timeouts here.


Revivals Stir a Former Trouper's Memory
FAME comes and goes in a minute, Betty Comden and Adolph Green wrote.
Andy Warhol gave it 15 minutes.
On Broadway in the 1940's, Gloria Wills foresaw the ephemera of it all and opted for more lasting things: marriage (to Jack Landes, an antiques dealer), motherhood and a career as a transmitter -- her word -- of theater to young people.
Yet, how can Mrs.
Landes help wondering about the road not taken?
Or reliving her fleeting time in the spotlight when, as Gloria Wills, she was a member of the original casts of "Carousel" and "Allegro"?


Q and A
The 'Law' On Carpets And Noise Q I keep hearing of a law that exists somewhere for renters that requires 70 percent of your living space to be carpeted or covered for the benefit of those that live below you.
I live beneath a lead-footed gymnast/bowler/ furniture dragger who has a linoleum-covered cement floor that echoes the evidence of a weak grasp.
Is there such a law? . . .
S.
Dehner, Manhattan


Municipal Radio and TV Stations: On the Air and on the Block?
As WNYC-AM nears its 70th anniversary and WNYC-FM its 50th, a new mayoral administration has reopened the debate on why New York City is in the broadcasting business, the only major American city to operate noncommercial stations.
In addition to radio, New York City operates WNYC-TV, and a transition panel formed by Rudolph W. Giuliani in the days between his election and his inauguration recommended that the stations be sold.
The panel said that the city might realize $50 million from the sale and that it had no business being involved in broadcasting with so many other stations on the air.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FOCUS ON WOMEN  Iona College in New Rochelle is celebrating Women's History Month with several events, including an exhibition of photographs titled "Barbara Morgan 1935-1945: Dialogues With Dance," to remain on view through March 31 in the college's Ryan Library.


Uncle Tom Was No Uncle Tom
To the Editor:
Isn't it about time that people writing about "Uncle Tom's Cabin" noticed that Uncle Tom is not an Uncle Tom?
In his review of Joan D. Hedrick's biography "Harriet Beecher Stowe" (Feb. 13), E. L. Doctorow offers no criticism of the cliche about "Uncle Tom's passive submission to his fate." Uncle Tom is beaten to death in two stages, first by fellow slaves at the order of Simon Legree, then by Legree himself, because of Tom's Christ-centered refusal to be dominated by Legree and to obey his orders.
Legree in buying Tom saw him as a possible overseer.
Legree is driven mad with exasperation and comes to hate Tom more and more, because Tom, far from being hardened by all the blows he has to endure, befriends first a fellow slave in the field who is not up to the punishing work and then Legree's quadroon ex-mistress, Cassy.


Rangers' Late Goal Sinks Isles and an Island Jinx
Tonight's game began with blood streaming down the face of Adam Graves and with 16,297 Nassau Coliseum fans screaming support for either the Islanders or the Rangers in another chapter of the local hockey feud.
It ended with Graves setting up the game-winning goal by Sergei Zubov, on the power play, with 63 seconds remaining to give the Rangers a 5-4 victory at the Coliseum, their first regular-season victory on Long Island since 1940.


A Stitch in Time: Renewing a Swatch Of Urban Fabric
GEORGE RANALLI COMPLETED a project a few months ago that glows with the keen sensitivity to form, materials and detail that has made this New York "architect's architect" an esteemed figure in his profession.
It's a modest work: a remodeled entrance and lobby in an old garment district loft building, along with a redesigned hallway on one of the upper floors.
It is also modest in spirit.
Mr.
Ranalli, an architect known for spare geometric designs, has departed from his customary vocabulary and steeped himself in the style of an earlier day.
He hasn't renounced his own esthetic.
Rather, he's woven it into a vintage swatch of urban fabric.
Synthetic blends may not be fashion's raiment of choice, but Mr.
Ranalli's stylistic synthesis is a beauty.
Located at 575 Seventh Avenue (at 38th Street), the Fashion Center Building is hardly a traffic-stopping landmark.
But the 24-story block of showrooms and offices is a rich part of the garment district's distinctive urban tissue.
And while the building's architect, Henry Ives Cobb, is an obscure figure today, he was highly regarded at the turn of the century, chiefly on account of his master plan for the University of Chicago.


Mexico City's Chapultepec Zoo Coming Back
The Chapultepec Park Zoo in Mexico City, is scheduled to reopen in May after nearly two years of renovations.
More than $30 million of private and public funds have been spent on the project, which has enlarged the living space for most animals and made the zoo easier to walk through for visitors.
The cramped steel cages and cement floors of the old zoo have been replaced, mostly by landscaped areas designed to approximate the animals' native habitat.
One section of the zoo is modeled after the lush jungles of the southern state of Chiapas; another is designed to match the dry, rugged plateaus of northern Mexico.


By Grand Central, Our Sidewalks Of Discontent
Construction at two busy intersections near Grand Central Terminal has been a headache for pedestrians, who for months have had to negotiate wooden barriers, plywood ramps and deep puddles in holes in the sidewalk.
As part of a $30 million improvement project around the terminal, sidewalks and street-light stanchions are being replaced on 43d Street at the corners of Madison and Fifth Avenues.
But the project has become yet another casualty of the harsh winter: as on many such sites, the cold has prevented concrete workers from doing their jobs.
Now the project, which was to be completed in mid-March, is at least six weeks behind schedule, say officials at the Grand Central Partnership, the business improvement district financing the improvements.


A Love Song That Some Love to Hate
Whitney Houston's soaring romantic ballad "I Will Always Love You" cleaned up at last week's Grammy Awards, dominated the 1993 pop music charts and helped turn the soundtrack of "The Bodyguard" into the most popular album of the year.
Why, then, would repeated playings of "I Will Always Love You" provoke 31-year-old Joan Hall, a mother of two, to storm up to her neighbors' apartment in Kennington, England, last fall and fling the stereo and speakers out the window and onto the street below?


The World; Palestinians See a People's Hatred in a Killer's Deed
IF Yitzhak Rabin and other Israeli leaders have been hoping that their denunciations of the massacre of Muslims in Hebron will persuade Palestinians that this was the work of an isolated and deranged zealot whom Israelis want to spit out of their society, they can expect to be disappointed.
The rage being expressed by Palestinians is not just at Baruch Goldstein, or at the settlers' movement alone.
In it is woven a conviction most Israelis would reject: that Israel -- all of it -- was responsible for the acts of Dr.
Goldstein when he opened fire in an ancient mosque on Feb. 26, killing dozens of Arabs at prayer.
Israelis, these Palestinians feel, have routinely shown or tolerated bigoted attitudes toward Arabs, and have let cruelty go unpunished.
And the talks between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization have done little to dispel the sense of grievance and of powerlessness before Israel's strength.


Exit a Master, Leaving Behind Great Moments in Sound
WHEN BEETHOVEN died, the citizens of Vienna thronged the streets in mourning.
Verdi's passing sent the nation of Italy into shock.
The final illness of Gustav Mahler preoccupied European newspapers during the spring of 1911; daily bulletins reported his decline.
Even Alban Berg, fully a member of the 20th-century world that paid composers little heed, made news with his untimely death in 1935.
"You can see to what extent the public sympathizes," Arnold Schoenberg wrote proudly to Berg's wife Helene, "from the fact that a radio program broadcast all over America brought a dramatized scene from his life, in which he himself, the conductor Richard Lert and I were cast as characters."
The giants of our day -- and yes, there are still giants -- have been slipping away with rather less elaborate fanfare.
The death of the Polish composer Witold Lutoslawski on Feb. 7, at the age of 81, inspired no radio dramatizations that I was aware of.
Although classical music did make an anomalous cameo appearance on the national media stage that week, the occasion was a diva-driven ruckus at the Metropolitan Opera that held little intrinsic musical significance.
Could major figures in contemporary music at least be granted some marginally detectable blip on the cultural seismograph when they vanish, even if they remain invisible in life?


A Tale of the Grotesque
To the Editor:
In his review of "Haunted: Tales of the Grotesque" (Feb. 13), Michael Upchurch remarks that one of the tales merely "makes explicit everything that is ambiguous" in Henry James's great novella "The Turn of the Screw."


Lisa A. Renaud, John N. Rosenthal
Lisa Anne Renaud, a senior editor at Prentice Hall General Reference and Travel, and John Nicholas Rosenthal, the senior editor of The Universal Almanac, were married last evening.
Fred Doubleday, a justice of the peace, officiated at the South Woodstock (Vt.) Community Church.
Ms.
Renaud, 27, is keeping her name.
She and her husband work in New York.
She is a daughter of Katherine Renaud of Charlotte, N.C., and the late Albert A. Renaud.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father was an insurance auditor for the Iowa National Mutual Insurance Company in Cedar Rapids.
Her mother, who is retired, was a secretary for the Charlotte-Mecklenburg County school system.


Saluting A Maestro Of Film
The American Museum of the Moving Image honors Steven Spielberg, Feb. 24.


AIDS Turns Mere Fancies Into Facts
BY ALL APPEARANCES, THE METROPOLITAN Opera's recent production of "Death in Venice" came at the right moment: a timely bit of musical theater set within the larger drama that is AIDS.
Britten's last opera is, after all, about a man who falls in love with a boy.
It is about surreptitious passion for physical beauty, and it is about disease and death.
So in pictures and sound, "Death in Venice" is art imitating life, though not necessarily the life Thomas Mann saw when he wrote his novella in 1913 or Britten when he made his operatic treatment in 1973.
The story of the opera comes as no surprise in 1994, but for Mann's readers, and even Britten's much later listeners, homosexual passion did not pop up in books and operas every day.
Indeed, the very exoticism of the subject for earlier audiences should tell us that "Death in Venice" cannot be taken as simple realism.


Where Wildflowers Are Tamed; A Secret Garden in a Boston Suburb
MAYBE it's because I'm a city kid.
But I've never forgotten those vivid red wands waving at me -- or so it seemed -- from across the lily pond.
They were cardinal flowers, in full bloom, swaying gently in the breeze.
At the time, I'd never seen this plant outside a picture book.
But then, finding treasures is what wandering the Garden in the Woods is all about.
This is a true secret garden: 45 exquisitely managed acres of naturalistic landscape, surrounded by the unprepossessing suburban plots of Framingham, Mass., a half hour from Boston.
Endangered white trillium and rare yellow lady's-slipper grow within meandering distance of magenta shooting star and pink-shell azalea.
Some 10,000 years ago, glaciers carved the kettleholes, ridges and wetlands that provide a comfortable home for some 1,600 kinds of wildflowers, trees, shrubs and grasses, most native Americans.


Habitats/A 1670 Saltbox in Guilford; Back to the Beginning
TOM GREENE not only grew up in the early saltbox house in Guilford, Conn., he even was born in the bigger of its two upstairs bedrooms.
"The way my mother told the story," Mr.
Greene said, "she delivered me all by herself because the doctor, the nurse -- his wife -- and my father were having cocktails downstairs and they were all pretty soused by the time I arrived."


A Very Rich Food
During the telecast of the Winter Olympics, Kellogg advertised Corn Flakes on the basis of price -- a mere 25 cents a bowl.
That seems reasonable enough until you look into the strange world of cereal economics.
Then you start to wonder: Is Kellogg as shameless as Tonya Harding or are cereal buyers unconscious?.
Kellogg, the cereal maker with the largest market share, recently raised prices on some of its 38 varieties twice in six months. (There are close to 200 varieties.) Not all the other makers are following suit this time, although they usually do.
In the cereal business, makers have price "increase" wars.
But the posted prices aren't even real.
Discount coupons are used in almost half of sales.


U.S. Proceeding on Very Busy Path to World Cup Finals
With the World Cup about three months away, the United States is faced with more personnel questions than perhaps any of the 23 other countries in the finals.
Without the highly competitive environment of a professional league at home, the United States has played more international games than any other country in the last 14 months in preparation for the World Cup.


Another View From the Driver's Seat
As operators of a 120-unit fleet based in Bridgeport and regularly traveling Interstate 95, we read your article, "When Troopers and Truckers Aren't Good Buddies" (Feb. 6), with great interest.
Your depiction of the challenging job of state police truck squads was a very accurate description of a vital function to public safety.
We do, however, respectfully submit that your aritcle was significantly deficient in not giving equal attention to the views of this topic by drivers and fleet operators.
Driver files, Department of Transportation physical, random drug tests, daily vehicle inspections, certified driving records, Federal training, testing and licencing of all driv ers. . . all these items are only the beginning of the concerns that surround the daily lives of fleet operators.


Abortion Case Verdict
After two hours and 40 minutes of deliberating, a Florida jury found Michael F. Griffin guilty of first-degree murder in the shooting of Dr.
David Gunn, an abortion doctor, outside a clinic in Pensacola last March.
Mr.
Griffin, a 32-year-old former chemical plant worker, was sentenced to life in prison with parole possible after 25 years.
Article, page 20.


Fear Is a Frequent Passenger on Bus 160
The No. 160 bus nudged out of Jerusalem at 11:32 this morning on its daily voyage to this Jewish settlement, which was home to Baruch Goldstein, the settler who massacred Palestinians in a mosque in Hebron a week ago.
For the Jewish settlers on board, the view of Palestinian villages and refugee camps, olive groves and terraced fields was the blight on the dream of a Greater Israel.
For the Palestinians looking in, the red-and-white bus bristling with guns was an emblem of the most despised aspect of occupation -- the presence of about 130,000 Jewish settlers in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Long Tumble Puts A's In Unfamiliar Position
For Terry Steinbach, it was disappointing.
Ron Darling used the word embarrassing.
Dennis Eckersley said it was miserable.
For Tony La Russa, it was upsetting.
Brent Gates was shocked.
"Yeah, I was shocked," said Gates, the Oakland Athletics' rookie second baseman last year, "because all you hear about the Oakland A's is the tradition and the success of the organization."


Chinese Take Journalists on Guided Tour of Prison
As China comes under growing pressure over its treatment of prisoners, five American journalists were taken on a tour of a nearly deserted penal colony in a Government attempt to demonstrate greater openness about human rights at such places.
The focus of the visit on Friday, to the Lingyuan No. 2 labor reform camp in the mountains 200 miles northeast of Beijing, was Liu Gang, a 33-year-old democracy campaigner who helped organize the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 and who has accused the prison authorities of torture.


Ms. Obrentz, Mr. Cunningham
Margery Ellen Obrentz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Obrentz of White Plains and Lake Worth, Fla., was married on Thursday evening to Nelson Ward Cunningham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Cunningham of Hilton Head Island, S.C.
The Rev.
James A. Harnish performed the nondenominational service at Mohonk Mountain House in New Paltz, N.Y.
The bride, 34, is a senior vice president at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in management from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


Dana Lynne Lee, William H. Evans
Dana Lynne Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles R. Lee of Greenwich, Conn., is to be married today to William Howard Evans, the son of the Rev. and Mrs.
James H. Evans of Meridian, Miss.
The Rev.
Ronald F. Allison is to perform the Congregational ceremony at the St.
Regis in New York.
The bride, 29, is an associate in corporate finance in the commercial banking division of Citibank in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the GTE Corporation, the telecommunications company based in Stamford, Conn.


Feb. 27-March 5: Combat and Diplomacy; 4 Jets Shot From the Sky; Movement on the Ground
Early Monday morning, American fighter pilots who are part of a NATO mission enforcing the no-fly zone over Bosnia and Herzegovina sighted six Bosnian Serb planes bombing a Muslim munitions factory.
When the planes refused to identify themselves, the American pilots opened fire, downing four of them.


Breathing Easier
THOUGH the tickets cost $1,000 and the invitation read "black tie," many men at the awards dinner of the Council of Fashion Designers of America at Lincoln Center last month interpreted the dress code liberally, not literally.
Tommy Hilfiger wore a cashmere turtleneck under his tuxedo; James Truman, the editor in chief of Details, wore an iridescent shirt without a tie; Stephan Weiss wore a band-collared shirt by his wife, Donna Karan; Andre Balazs, the hotelier, wore a mandarin-collared jacket buttoned up to the neck.
James Simpson, the theater director and husband of the actress Sigourney Weaver, wore a vest and open-collared shirt with his dinner jacket.
Calvin Klein didn't wear a tie -- or a shirt.
He wore an insouciant white silk scarf under his tuxedo, showing off a lot of skin.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
JOURNALISM  THE MAN IN THE WATER  Essays and Stories.
By Roger Rosenblatt.
Random House, $25.


Special Effects Cast a Shadow
To the Editor:
In discussing attempts to update film noir  [ "In Film Noir, the Past Is Present and Perfect," Feb. 6 ]  it's too bad James Greenberg didn't mention the more successful uses of stock noir features in techno-fantasy films of the 1980's.
The ultimate example, of course, is "Blade Runner," with its bitter ex-cop hero (with voice-over), rainy, dark streets, bluesy soundtrack, hard-bitten android dames and plenty of bodies in congealing blood.


Courses for Blacks An Issue at College
WHEN Tamicka Mason and Karl Allen huddle over the computer these days, they are as likely to be working on The Black Voice, a newsletter for students at Westchester Community College here, as they are to be doing schoolwork.
Ms.
Mason and Mr.
Allen and other members of the college's African Culture Club began the newsletter in January for a specific purpose: to plead the case for the formation of a black studies department at the school.
While their counterparts in the 1960's staged sit-ins and riots to achieve their goals, members of the African Culture Club are working with scholarly determination to make their point: that it is time for the college to broaden its curriculum, hire more full-time black professors and pay more academic attention to its growing enrollment of minority students.


Howard Schwartzberg; Federal Bankruptcy Judge, 63
Judge Howard Schwartzberg, who presided over the Texaco bankruptcy case at Federal District Court in White Plains, died on Friday at the Dana Farber Cancer Center in Boston.
Judge Schwartzberg, who lived in Larchmont, was 63.
The cause was cancer, said his son Robert Schwartzberg.


Lightening Up On the Gloom In Grunge
WHAT MADE SEATTLE rock conquer the world?
The first answer is guitars: loud, aggressive, pitiless guitars, shamelessly recycling 1970's heavy metal via tastes honed by punk rock.
The ascendance of Pearl Jam, Alice in Chains, Soundgarden and Nirvana confirmed that the Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath fan clubs have never adjourned.
Since the end of the 60's, the sound of suburban teen-agers coming of age has been the sound of grinding, stomping guitars and howling voices, holding the promise that turbulence can be converted to triumph.
Yet Seattle rock also twisted its 70's roots.
Black Sabbath had sung about Satanism and apocalypse; Led Zepplin wailed mystical ruminations and testosterone blues.
Seattle bands broke the link between power chords and extroversion; they turned inward and brooded, exploring endless variations on self-laceration and hopelessness.
Songs were about the smoldering rage that goes with powerlessness, about the downward spiral of drug addiction, about cynicism so deep it couldn't even imagine humor.
In the teen-age (and twentysomething) wasteland of the 90's, when neither jobs nor purpose are within easy grasp, guitar riffs weren't all that carried the music up the charts; the pervasive despair also hit home.


Feb. 27-March 5; 'Where Was Everybody Else?'
"Schindler's List" opened across Germany last Thursday, after a gala premiere in Frankfurt attended by Steven Spielberg and President Richard von Weizsacker, who said its lesson for his compatriots was the need for vigilance and open-mindedness as the best defense against intolerance.
Mr.
Spielberg, who had received an anonymous death threat during the Vienna premiere last month, was given tight security, though a bomb threat forced one theater in Karlsruhe to delay the opening half an hour.
Forty-eight theaters began showing the film Thursday, most to sellout crowds, according to the producers.


In the Glass House
ON Feb. 1, the police evicted a community of 35 young squatters, along with an equal number of their pets, from an abandoned glass factory, known as the Glass House, on the corner of Avenue D and 10th Street in Manhattan.
Most of the squatters ranged in age from 17 to 21 and had moved from the Midwest, only to find themselves jobless and homeless in New York.
Several had spent their childhoods in communes, and they gravitated to the street life of the Lower East Side and eventually to the Glass House.
Over a period of four months before their eviction, I spent many days in the Glass House, photographing and interviewing the squatters.
I found that, contrary to what I might have expected, they had created a supportive, responsible community.


Cutting Down Fat in the Diet
THE concern about the amount of fat in the diet has led people who care deeply about good food to make certain sacrifices.
Like me, many of my colleagues have reduced the amount of butter and cheese they eat.
Indulging in scrambled eggs or an omelet has also become an infrequent pleasure.
We do not substitute for butter, products bearing names like "It May Smell Buttery but You Can't Fool Us!" Nor do we eat fat-free cheeses that bear a closer resemblance to linoleum than food.
And we have not yet found a compelling need to buy egg substitutes.


Sports of The Times; Coleman: 'I Was Mets' Scapegoat'
AS soon as the Royals' new left fielder and leadoff hitter emerged from the batting cages, he heard voices.
"Vince Coleman," a mother and her little daughter each called as they stood behind a chain-link fence.
"Vince Coleman."


When Lamps Wear Out, It May Be Time to Start Rewiring
FLOOR and desk lamps wear out eventually, and a winter of hard use puts many to the test.
A malfunctioning lamp is a fire and shock hazard, and prompt attention is in order.
If a lamp fails to light when switched on, check to make sure that the bulb is good, that the lamp is firmly plugged in and that other lights or appliances on the circuit operate.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
FLORAL BENEFIT
Ron Morgan, a floral designer from California with widespread credentials as a lecturer, will be the speaker at the fourth annual floral benefit for the Summit Speech School on Wednesday and Thursday at the Morris County Golf Club in Convent Station.
A designer for luxury stores throughout the United States as well social and business events, Mr.
Morgan has made frequent television appearances and has lectured across the country and in Europe and Australia.
He is known for his arrangements using native flowers, fruits and foliage in extraordinary containers and for his professional attitude that "flower arranging is supposed to be fun."
Mr.
Morgan will display his artistry with flowers and words at 10 A.M. and 6 P.M.
Wednesday and at 10 A.M.
Thursday.
At each session, food will be served, and elegant table settings will be exhibited.
Tickets are $45 for the event, which will also include the sale of antique floral prints, a raffle and an auction that will have Mr.
Morgan's creations and two round-trip tickets to London among its wares.
The country club is on Punch Bowl Road in Convent Station.
The Summit Speech School, which serves about 80 students from throughout the state, is one of 25 schools in North America that teach deaf babies and preschoolers to speak without using sign language.
Its new home is at 705 Central Avenue in New Providence.
Information: (908) 277-3353.  CELEBRATING WOMEN
In observance of Women's History Month, a series of varied programs, "In Celebration of New Jersey Women," will begin this afternoon at Macculloch Hall Historical Museum in Morristown with a concert by the Heritage Strings.
The members of the ensemble are Marnie Kaller, cellist; Priscilla Hallberg, violinist, and Margaret Zufall Roberts, violist.
They will perform works by Mozart, Haydn and Beethoven.
Next Sunday, three artists whose paintings are in the "Flora '94 Exhibition" at the museum through May 15 will engage the audience in a discussion of the question "Is floral painting a woman's art?" The artists are Dolores Ziegler, Christina Debarry and Charles Robinson.
"The Women of Macculloch Hall" will be the final program in the series, a lecture on March 20 by Jane Odenweller, who is the archivist at the historical mansion.
Today's concert costs $5 and includes admission to the museum.
The other programs are free with the museum admission fee, which is $3, or $2 for students and the elderly and free for children under 12.
All programs will begin at 4 P.M.
Macculloch Hall is at 45 Macculloch Avenue and is open from 1 to 4 P.M. on Sunday and Thursday.
Information: (201) 538-2404.  'ELECTRIC SERVANTS'
Labor-saving devices for the home have played an important role in women's history, so this month the Edison National Historic Site in West Orange will feature "Electric Servants."
The kitchen and other work areas usually closed to the public will be open during tours of Glenmont, the home of Thomas Edison and his family, for the exhibition of early electrical household appliances.
Siphonators, which were combination coffee makers and hot water dispensers for making tea, were among the Edicraft products marketed in the late 1920's by Edison.
Examples of the Edicraft products, also including toasters, waffle irons and sandwich grills, will be on display.
The "Electric Servant" program will be offered from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Wednesday through Sunday until April 3.
Tickets are available on a first-come, first-served basis for this tour.
Visitor passes for Glenmont and the laboratory complex are $2 at the Edison Laboratory Visitors Center, Main Street and Lakeside Avenue.
Admission is free for those under 17.
The center is open from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily, and laboratory tours are conducted from 10:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
Information: (201) 736-0550. ON COLLEGE SPEAKERS
Bernard Weinstein, a professor of English at Kean College in Union, where a recent speech by Khalid Abdul Muhammad stirred racial and religious controversy, will speak next Sunday in Bergenfield on the topic "The College Campus: A New Source of Anti-Semitism?"
Dr.
Weinstein is an active participant in the Holocaust studies program at Kean.
He will speak at a breakfast-lecture at 10 A.M. at the Bergenfield-Dumont Jewish Center, 169 North Washington Avenue.
Admission is free.
Rabbi Jerome H. Blass, spiritual leader of the center, said, "Dr. Weinstein's talk will deal with the tendency of college students to invite to their campuses speakers who preach hatred and divisiveness toward Jews and other groups or who insist that the Holocaust never happened."
When Mr.
Muhammad spoke at Kean College in November, he was the senior spokesman for Louis Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam.
The subsequent publication of Mr.
Muhammad's remarks against Jews, Catholics and homosexuals resulted in national attention and Mr.
Muhammad's demotion.
Information: (201) 384-3911. MAGIC SHOW
A magician, Ron Owens, will apply his characteristic humor to a show on "Magic and the Environment" on Saturday at the Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission Environment Center in Lyndhurst.
People of all ages may enjoy a laugh while learning about good environmental habits, but children 4 to 8 years old are expected to find the show particularly entertaining.
Mr.
Owens is a familiar figure on New Jersey stages and has also appeared in Vienna and on Japanese educational television.
Preregistration is required for attending the show, which is open to both organized groups and individuals.
Admission is $4.
The show will be from 11 A.M. to noon at the Environment Center, 1 DeKorte Park Plaza.
It is accessible from Route 3 or Route 17.
Information: (201) 460-8300. MARY L. EMBLEN STAGE SOLOS
Of the numerous solo performers whose virtuosity has commanded a mostly bare stage in New York this season, Irene Worth and Spalding Gray are among the best known.
The McCarter Theater in Princeton will be presenting each, if only for a single performance.
In the midst of what appears to be an Edith Wharton renaissance, Ms.
Worth, who last year celebrated the 50th anniversary of her stage debut, is offering a reading -- her word is recital -- from the author's novels, including "Ethan Frome" and the 1933 autobiography, "A Backward Glance."
Ms.
Worth's "Portrait of Edith Wharton," which she has described as "an old-fashioned Victorian evening," is on tap tomorrow night at 8.
It includes observations on New York's frivolous society, conversations with Henry James, memories of a first prepubescent kiss and sexual fulfillment at 45, but mostly, it is about the joy of writing.
Today from 5 to 7 P.M., Ms.
Worth is also to discuss, with Arif Mardin, a composer, their new recording, "Her Infinite Variety -- Irene Worth as the Women of Shakespeare," with a question and answer period afterward.
The appearance, which is free, will be at the Betts Auditorium at Princeton University's School of Architecture at the corner of Prospect Avenue and Washington Road.
Audiences will have to wait until June 9 to hear Mr.
Gray, in "Gray's Anatomy," tell of his quest for a risk-free cure for an eye ailment: a "macular pucker." Among the alternative medical practitioners he visited, he says, are a witch doctor in Borneo, a Filipino psychic surgeon and a quack in New Jersey.
The monologuist's Princeton appearance is to take place during the first week of his return engagement at the Mitzi E. Newhouse in Lincoln Center, where "Gray's Anatomy" played two performances a week for seven weeks earlier this season.
Tickets cost $17 to $22 for Mr.
Gray and $18 to $22 for Ms.
Worth, or, only for the Worth performance, $10 for students with ID.
Reservations: (609) 683-8000.
No tickets are required for Ms.
Worth's appearance today.
ALVIN KLEIN


Seeing a City In the Windows Of Its Shops; ON LONDON'S LUXURY ROW
LONDON'S BOND Street is just over a half mile long, but for the window-shopper, it can consume half a day.
The southernmost blocks, just off Piccadilly, are called Old Bond Street, because they were laid out in the late 1600's; the rest of the narrow street, running north to Oxford, didn't come along until after 1700 and thus is called New Bond Street -- this was one of Queen Victoria's favorite shopping districts, and some of the best storefronts date from her era.
There is Charbonnel et Walker, the chocolatier, just inside the Royal Arcade, and Asprey, the purveyor of furniture, silverware and leather goods, its display windows filled with everything from jade dinosaurs and solid silver teddy bears to a 1931 Meissen otter (price tag, $9,000).


In the Region/Connecticut; The Case That Led to the Innocent Landowner Act
LAST June Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. signed into law the Innocent Landowner Act designed to protect property owners from the overwhelming costs of cleaning up pollution they did not cause.
So far, however, it has failed to protect the property owner whose plight prompted the legislation.
Revisions are now under consideration.
In 1990 the property owner, Susan Starr, widow of an Enfield developer, was ordered by the state's Department of Environmental Protection to clean up a five-acre parcel of vacant, polluted land on Simon Road in Enfield.


Health Care for All, if Congress Doesn't Weaken
To the Editor:
Organized labor backs real health care reform.


Feb. 27-March 5; The Man Who Wouldn't Be Absent
Representative William H. Natcher of Kentucky missed a roll-call vote on Thursday.
Since the 84-year-old Democrat is suffering from heart and intestinal ailments, his absence from the Capitol might not seem surprising.
But Mr.
Natcher's grudging concession to age and illness ended a remarkable streak: Over 40 years in Congress, he had not missed a single vote.
For 18,401 roll calls, Mr.
Natcher was there to be counted, even if he had to be counted on a hospital stretcher, as he was for a vote Wednesday.


Seeing a City In the Windows Of Its Shops; BEYOND THE BASTILLE, PARIS OF OLD
THE GLITTER of Paris, its polished styles and postures, never extended east of the Place de la Bastille.
No great monuments arose here, and until the new opera house opened in 1989, elegant Parisians and tourists rarely came this way.
Few do even today.
And so it is that streets, facades and shop windows here still have an old-Paris feeling, as do the charming passages and courtyards.
The cabinet makers who have long worked this quarter remain in place, and so do many of the settlers from Brittany and Auvergne who came with their shops and bistros.
Sprinkled among them are the colors of new, low-budget art galleries, thrift shops and rock cafes.


Three Decades In Free Fall: The Sad Saga Of 140th Street
Ray Wilkerson has been running his shop on West 140th Street since 1948, and feels a quiet pride in becoming, he thinks, Harlem's longest-serving dry cleaner.
His walls are decorated with photos of generations of smiling children from the street, dressed in graduation caps and gowns.
But the pride goes only so far.
Mr.
Wilkerson has been trying to sell his business, but there have been no takers.
This block, between Adam Clayton Powell Jr. and Frederick Douglass Boulevards, has sunk, then sunk some more.


Restoring an Old Friend
When Sandy Koufax wasn't working on his fastball he was at the J, learning to control his jumpshot.
When Larry King wasn't announcing the makes of cars that passed in front of his family's stoop in Bensonhurst, he was at the J, meeting friends and playing basketball.


A Way for Car Dealers to Squeeze Out the Lemons
LIME-GREEN seats, tan carpeting and a mustard-yellow exterior: every automobile dealer has stories about cars like that -- "anniversary cars," some call them, because they sit on the lot for more than a year, until the price drops far enough or the right vulgarian wanders into the showroom.
Cars like that are telling evidence of the woeful inefficiency of automobile dealing, according to J. D. Power 3d, president of the automotive consulting firm based here, J. D. Power &amp; Associates.


BILL T. JONES
Never missing an opportunity is not the same as always rising to the occasion.
Bill T. Jones, H.I.V.-positive son of migrant fieldworkers, has been required to do both.
Lately, performing his solo "Last Night on Earth," he asks his audience, "What time is it?" Onstage and off, it is the question that torments him.
Jones's medical status is, in certain circles, a well-known fact.
It is not a fact that shows.
At 42, eight years after his diagnosis, the choreographer and dancer has lost none of the emphatic presence that allows him to dominate any room he enters.
Whether boarding a plane wearing a black sweatsuit or attending a fund-raiser in evening clothes, he is that rare performer who is as compelling standing still as he is dancing.


Rachel Weinberger, Edward McGann
Rachel Miriam Weinberger, a daughter of Dr.
Ruth Zuckerman of Teaneck, N.J., and the late Dr.
Harold Weinberger, was married yesterday to Edward Gerard McGann, a son of Joan and Edward McGann of South River, N.J.
Judge James F. Hyland, a municipal court judge in East Brunswick, N.J., performed the ceremony at Bernards Inn in Bernardsville, N.J.
Ms.
Weinberger, 35, is keeping her name.
She is a vice president for business development in the asset management division of the U. S. Trust Company of New York, a financial services company.
She graduated from Swarthmore College and both she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from New York University.


Corrections
A picture on Feb. 20 with an article about Cuba's sugar business carried an incorrect caption.
The photograph showed a farm worker in a sugar cane field, not a mechanical harvester.


Wilderness Reserve In Papua New Guinea
Travelers seeking new destinations who are willing to go to some trouble to reach them may want to consider Crater Mountain, a 1,060-square-mile area in Papua New Guinea that was recently declared a wildlife management area.
One of the wettest places in the world, with an annual rainfall of about 18 feet, it is noted for its many species of birds, particularly birds of paradise.
The area also has impressive waterfalls, rushing streams with hazardous rapids and caves inhabited by bats.
Seldon James, project coordinator for Crater Mountain, said that although no guided tours are yet being offered, those willing to "do some major trekking" can get to Crater Mountain.
Visitors should have flexible schedules, since weather may cause delays, and be "socially aware," he says, since residents have not seen many outsiders.


EXIT THE CRITIC
Frank Rich's derogatory reference to me as president of the Dramatists Guild was mean and ignorant.
Mean because he could not resist making not one but two references to my advanced (63) years: an "old-line" Broadway librettist, out of touch with the prominent new dramatists who are "half his age." He might well have added that being white, I'm out of touch with the minority theater; or straight, with the gay theater; or Jewish, with the gentile theater; or male, with the feminist theater; or tall, with the vertically challenged theater.
He mentions the slighting of Off Broadway by the Tony Awards, a sad state of affairs that he partly blames on the the Dramatists Guild, the playwrights' organization that is, according to Rich, under my thumb.
But for the past eight years I have been the only member of the Tony Administration Committee who, to the continued annoyance of everyone else, has been proposing Off Broadway's inclusion in their awards.


Andrea C. Steiner, David F. Good
Andrea Carol Steiner, the daughter of Iris Fein of Long Island City, Queens, and the late Leonard Steiner, is to be married today to David Fredric Good, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard L. Good of Westfield, N.J.
Rabbi Arnold S. Gluck and Rabbi Jay Chaim Shoulson will perform the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.


Shelter to Take Fewer Mentally Ill Clients
A social-service agency that operates several residences for homeless people on the Upper West Side has agreed to reduce the number of mentally ill clients at a center opening in mid-April.
The decision by the group, Volunteers of America, was announced after a community meeting in late February at Public School 75 that drew hundreds of angry residents who said their neighborhood was becoming a dumping ground for programs for the homeless.


THEIR CRIMES DON'T MAKE THEM ADULTS
We are indeed blaming our youth for our failed social services and juvenile-justice policies.
The truth is that many of us are frightened of our youth, particularly our African-American and Hispanic youth, who in many jurisdictions comprise a majority of juveniles "transferred" to adult courts and adult jails and prisons.
They make easy targets for politicians who continue to trumpet a get-tough philosophy.
PAUL DEMURO Montclair, N.J.


In America; Avoiding the Obvious on Tobacco
"Do you believe there's ever been a case in which lung cancer was caused by cigarette smoking?"
The gentleman on the other end of the phone was Thomas Lauria, a spokesman for the Tobacco Institute.
He gets paid for attempting to do the impossible -- that is, spruce up the image of the cigarette companies.
It's like handling public relations for the Nazis or the Ku Klux Klan.


At Tolstoy's Retreat, Bones of Contention
At Tolstoy's vast country estate, Yasnaya Polyana, everything is just as it was when the great writer died.
His pen lies on his writing table.
The simple peasant blouse he always wore hangs from a peg in his bedroom.
His beloved birch-lined drive still thrives.
And so does the bitter fighting that divided Tolstoy's household during his last, famously unhappy years.


Changes by Bozell In Detroit Operation
Bozell Worldwide, in steps to consolidate its two offices in the Detroit area, has named a top executive from one office to head both, and formed an executive oversight committee.
Michael J. Vogel, 47, chief executive of Bozell North, formerly the Southfield, Mich., office of Campbell Mithun Esty, was named to the new position of chief executive of Bozell Detroit, and will head both offices.


Review/Dance; Life of a Dancer Who Mixes And Then Goes His Way
The dancers were attractive and Francis Patrelle's choreography flowed confidently along in the program that his troupe, Dances . . .
Patrelle, presented Saturday night at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College.
Unfortunately, Mr.
Patrelle tended to put his performers into fuzzy dramatic situations.
This defect was especially apparent in his new "Anyone Can . . .!" Set to an attractive selection of songs by Stephen Sondheim, played on the piano by Warren Helms and sung by Frank Logan, Amy Goldstein, Jennifer Arnold, James Dilda and Susan Derry, this ambitious piece concerned the life of a dancer, played by Alan Hineline.


Ex-Mayor's Son Wins a Run-Off In New Orleans
Voters here elected State Senator Marc Morial to be their mayor in a run-off election on Saturday, apparently punishing his opponent for what they considered dirty campaigning.
But polls suggested that they also had doubts that their new leader would be able to slow the city's economic slide, reduce crime or improve education.
The vote also broke along racial lines, in a city that is 61 percent black and 39 percent white.
Mr.
Morial, the 36-year-old son of the city's first black Mayor, won 85 percent of the black vote.
His opponent, Donald Mintz, a 51-year-old white businessman and lawyer who ran unsuccessfully for mayor four years ago, won 91 percent of the white vote.


BASEBALL: Sports of The Times; Brien Taylor Goes From Being Yanks' Future to Invisible Phenom
BEYOND the long, low beige stucco building marked "New York Yankees," four baseball diamonds glowed green in the sun, only a fungo away from Tampa Stadium, where the Giants won Super Bowl XXV when Scott Norwood's field-goal attempt sailed wide right.
Between two of the diamonds here in the Yankees' minor league complex, eight farmhand pitchers were throwing simultaneously off baseball's widest mound, four one way, four the other, the baseballs cracking into catchers' mitts like so many rifle shots.


Review/Music; Vienna Philharmonic Under Riccardo Muti Singing Its Own Song
In the third of three Carnegie Hall concerts, the Vienna Philharmonic under Riccardo Muti played Mozart and Bruckner on Friday night.
How does one conduct such an orchestra?
For musicians such as these, Mozart and Bruckner seem not objects of interpretation but more like neighbors, familiar faces from around the corner whose habits, observed at first hand over a century or two, are as well known as the players' own.
In the case of Mozart's "Linz" Symphony, Mr.
Muti showed leadership by conducting as little as possible.
Questions of authentic style and conductorial predilection are largely moot when the Vienna Philharmonic plays Mozart.
In place of dense articulation and feverish movement, this orchestra sings its own song, one born on the most heavenly legato imaginable.


World Economies


For Rivals of CBS, a Sweep to Forget
The Winter Olympics coverage on CBS so dominated the competition in the television sweep month of February that it left the other networks working hard to dismiss the results as meaningless.
In fact, Sandy Grushow, the president of the Fox Entertainment Group, scoffed at the whole notion of sweep months, saying those special ratings periods have become "a joke by and large anyway."


A Failed Premise Is Razed in Newark


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK REAL ESTATE IS BACK
New York City's commercial real-estate brokers and landlords are unanimous: Buildings are filling up.
Average midtown rents have stopped their slide.
Landlords are getting more from tenants and giving them less.
Some companies are even buying buildings again.
All told, brokers and landlords say, the real-estate recession is ending.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  THE IRON AGE LIVES AGAIN
Ironworkers have had a slow time of it lately in New York City, settling for maintenance chores like bridge repair instead of building skyscrapers.
But a majestic project on the East Side, the first stage in the construction of an $842 million addition to New York Hospital between 68th and 70th Streets, is filling the union hall and bringing back the swagger.
B3.


Whitewater Issue May Prove Costly to Clinton in Congress
For months, Republicans have pressed the White House and Congress's Democratic majority to look into the involvement of Federal agencies in the Whitewater affair.
For months, the White House and Democrats have replied with a stiff-arm.
Now, if the talk on Capitol Hill is any indication, President Clinton is about to reap the whirlwind of that policy in Congress.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes
WATCH out, "60 Minutes."
Corporate America has finally caught on.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In an age of celebrity shills, two new campaigns take a contrarian tack using 'endorsement virgins.'
TWO campaigns, coincidentally by two Omnicom Group agencies, are offering a fresh twist on that hoariest of advertising devices, the celebrity endorsement.
The idea behind both is to use people who may be known, even well known, but not known for lending their names to advertisements.
A campaign for Tabasco, by Tracy-Locke, a unit of the DDB Needham Worldwide Dallas Group, features an eclectic, even eccentric, list of famous names praising the pepper sauce: the comedians Dan Aykroyd and Sinbad; the author Anne Rice; the singers Ted Nugent, Linda Ronstadt and Randy Travis; football players past (Walter Payton) and present (Dan Marino); the golfer Payne Stewart, and even a former Senator and Presidential candidate, Barry M. Goldwater.


Big Decisions Before Spring Planting
It is more than two months before David Rothermel starts running flat out to plant corn and soybeans on nearly 3,000 acres here in central Illinois, but the tall 39-year-old farmer with the neatly trimmed beard is still pretty busy by most people's standards.
There are hours spent on big decisions, like which strains he will plant, how he will spend close to $100,000 on fertilizer and a similar amount on chemicals, and how he will market his crops.
Many more hours are gobbled up by smaller chores, like a trip last week to Paxton, Ill., to get an irrigation engine repaired.


Weighing Caution Against Compassion
It seemed an effort for him even to smile but William Morrow could not help himself as he stared at the ceiling in his hospital room and recalled a distant other life: A robbery at 16, an arrest on the subway with two guns, jail, smoking crack with his wife, burglaries and more jail.
"Then I got sick," Mr.
Morrow said.
"I was just 21. How old am I? I'm 28. I must have been 23. I got PCP pneumonia."


INSIDE
No Early Burmese Talks
The Burmese military leader ruled out early talks with the detained democracy leader, calling her attitude "counterproductive." Page A8.
Dutch Build on the Ecology
In the crowded Netherlands, a movement is taking root to design communities based on the best environmental and health standards.
Page A3.
Melina Mercouri Is Dead
The actress, known for the 1960 film "Never on Sunday," capped her career with a real-life role as Greece's Minister of Culture.
Page D8.
A2 Arts


Bridge
It is likely that two New Zealanders form the best young partnership in the world and are headed for international distinction.
They are 21-year-old Ishmael Del'Monte, now residing in Sydney, Australia, and 20-year-old Ashley Bach, who are known Down Under as "Ish" and "Ash."
Two weeks ago they scored convincing victories in the main pair and team events at the Australian national championships at Surfer's Paradise on Queensland's Gold Coast, one of the world's most beautiful resort areas.
Del'Monte had achieved the same double a year earlier with a different partner.


Let the Market Decide About Milk Hormone
To the Editor:
"Farmers Eager to Test Drug to Get More Milk" (news article, Feb. 5), about bovine growth hormone, was very fair.
I agree with and support "The Milk Brouhaha" (editorial, Feb. 10).
But I must raise strong objection to "Make Them Label It" (letter, Feb. 21) by Michael K. Hansen and Jean M. Halloran of Consumers Union's Consumer Policy Institute.
They are using misinformation to create a food scare.


Rescuing Troubled Boys: An Unlikely Story; Program Teaches Work Ethic Through Close Attention and Friendly Pressure
By the time he was 11, Aron Myers had already been kicked out of four foster homes and five schools, usually for fighting.
A dozen years later, he is a senior psychology major at Canisius College in Buffalo, completing his course work by correspondence while working full-time at a Syracuse center for adults with developmental disabilities.
In his off-hours, he developed the curriculum for a summer course he teaches at Onondaga Community College: "Building Friendships." And he hopes to enter graduate school in 1995 to study both social work and law.
"I'm trying to find someone who's done that," he said earnestly, "and find out how did they meet their goals and why."


Classical Music in Review
Alban Berg Quartet  Carnegie Hall
The Alban Berg Quartet is plentifully represented on records, mostly in standard Romantic repertory.
But the Viennese group also has an adventurous streak, which it showed on Saturday evening by making the New York premiere of Luciano Berio's "Notturno" (1993) the centerpiece of its program.


New Refugees May Still Leave Vietnam; Do What's Right
To the Editor:
I agree with your Feb. 22 editorial on the boat people: It is time to put the wars in Indochina behind us.
Replacing the remnants of our negative policies with positive steps is long overdue.
But would the involuntary return of 80,000 refugees in camps in Southeast Asia really be, as you maintain, a step in that direction?


Surrounded by Angry Arabs, Jews Vow to Stay in Hebron
Even as the Israeli Cabinet considered dismantling the Jewish settler enclaves in Hebron, Rabbi Moshe Blaycher made clear today that he was determined to stay put: he celebrated his son's bar mitzvah near the Cave of the Patriarchs, which contains the mosque where Muslim worshipers were massacred by a settler nine days ago.
The Jewish population here will not be moved, asserted Rabbi Blaycher, who heads the Shavei Hevron yeshiva, adjacent to the shrine.


Jarvis Won't Change A Thing
Coach Mike Jarvis of George Washington has fond memories of what happened a year ago.
That is why he is not going to do anything different.
"We're going to be in the same locker room as today, eat at the same restaurant, go to bed at the same time as the night before, because you never know," Jarvis said.


Let the Market Decide About Milk Hormone; The Health of Cows
To the Editor:
"When the Geneticists' Fingers Get in the Food" states, "scientists keep insisting that there is nothing to be concerned about" when bovine growth hormone is used to make cows into "veritable milk machines" (The Week in Review, Feb. 20).
But many scientists are very concerned.


John E. Corette; Utilities Executive, 85
John E. Corette, an official with the Montana Power Company for more than 40 years, died on Saturday at a retirement home in Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif.
He was 85 and had spent most his life in Butte, Mont.
He died of natural causes, said a spokesman for Montana Power.


CHRONICLE
The DALAI LAMA, the exiled spiritual leader of Tibet, has been named the recipient of the 1994 Franklin Delano Roosevelt Freedom Medal by the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute.
"He is such a universal symbol of human rights, and we must remember the oppression from which he and his countrymen have suffered," WILLIAM J. VANDEN HEUVEL, president of the Roosevelt Institute, said the other day.
"All of us recognize the importance of our relationship to China, but we shouldn't lessen our commitment to him and to what he represents." The award will be presented at ceremonies in Middelburg, the Netherlands on June 4.


U.N. Fears Bosnia Peace Momentum Is Faltering
Striving to open up this besieged city, United Nations officials are increasingly worried that the impetus of their peace effort is slipping away, risking the resumption of the brutal, stalemated war.
"We must press this momentum," one officer involved in the planning said.
"If the momentum dissipates, they will go back to their old manipulative ways, back to the Balkan way of doing things."


Corrections
A caption on Friday with a photograph of Jewish leaders who met with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani about the shooting of Hasidic students on the Brooklyn Bridge gave an incorrect date for the gathering.
It was on Wednesday.


2 Chairmen Seem United on Health
Two major Congressional committee chairmen insisted today that Congress would pass legislation guaranteeing health insurance for all Americans, with most employers required to pay most of the costs.
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who heads the House Ways and Means Committee, and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who heads the Senate Finance Committee, scoffed at assertions by many Republicans that President Clinton's plan, or at least many of its major provisions, was dead.


Books of The Times; From the Distractions of Life, a Man's Journey Back to Himself
A Family Place  A Man Returns to the Center of His Life  By Charles Gaines  Illustrated. 195 pages.
The Atlantic Monthly Press. $20.
It was not exactly as Thoreau had done it.


Review/Pop; When Things Like Nirvana Were Merely a State of Mind
Direct from the psychedelic late 1960's, Arthur Lee came to Tramps on Friday night with songs from his fondly remembered band, Love.
The songs were artifacts of a time when experimentation and Top 40 ambitions didn't seem completely incompatible.
As performed by Mr.
Lee and the members of Das Damen, they were as odd, catchy, propulsive and ultimately moving as they were when they were written.
Love's songs drew together folk-rock guitars, Beatles chord changes, touches of bossa nova and hints of hard-rock and punk-rock to come.
Love could rev up the barreling drums and guitars of "Seven and Seven Is" (recently remade by the Ramones) or ease into the gentle yearning of a ballad like "Andmore again," while Mr.
Lee's singing shifted between the breathy, tremulous pop crooning and the vehemence of a rocker.


Essay; No Client Privilege
I called Bernard Nussbaum last Wednesday to find out whether he had hired a lawyer for himself; he had not.
Further poking-about revealed that no White House aides had yet been asked about their cozy consultation with "investigators," nor had a warning been issued about destroying notes of the improper meeting.
The barb here about that laxity, made puissant by The Washington Post's stunning revelation of two similar abuses of White House influence, helped get the non-independent counsel off his duff.


U.S. Said to Extend Inquiry To 2 More Prudential Units
As part of the criminal investigation of Prudential Securities, Federal prosecutors are examining potential licensing deficiencies in the sales forces of at least two companies within the firm's parent, the Prudential Insurance Company of America, people with knowledge of the inquiry said over the weekend.
Government officials have conducted numerous interviews in recent weeks asking possible witnesses about a program through which agents of Pruco Securities, a division of Prudential Insurance, improperly sold limited partnerships without having the necessary licenses to sell securities.


Tokyo's Magic Kingdom Outshines Its Role Model
The air was bone chilling, but the admiring throngs hardly noticed one afternoon as a blue-eyed Snow White smiled engagingly and the Seven Dwarfs performed their antics, singing the tune every child raised on Disney fare knows: "Hi-ho! Hi-ho! Shinpai nai utai tsuzukeyo!"
If home is where the cash registers ring loudest, it would be hard to imagine Mickey Mouse and his friends ensconced more comfortably anyplace other than this bustling plot of landfill on the shores of Tokyo Bay, at Tokyo Disneyland.


Ukrainian Hints Deal on Warheads Is in Danger
As Russia's natural-gas company announced a further deep cut in supplies to Ukraine over the weekend, President Leonid M. Kravchuk suggested that the move could derail the deal to give up his country's large nuclear arsenal.
Speaking to the television of the Commonwealth of Independent States from Washington on Saturday night, Mr.
Kravchuk said: "Fulfillment of all agreements, including agreements on nuclear commitments, is possible only if the economy works. If tomorrow factories come to a halt in Ukraine, and this is a reality if there is no gas, what carrying out of commitments can be spoken of?"


New Miller Account Put in Review Again
Six weeks after a review that ended with the Miller Brewing Company assigning its new Lite Ice beer brand to Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago, the account is in review again, said advertising executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Billings were estimated at as much as $20 million.
The executives said Friday that the review involved Miller's main agencies: Burnett, which also handles the flagship Miller Lite brand; Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. in New York; J. Walter Thompson Chicago, and Young &amp; Rubicam Chicago.
Scott Epstein, a spokesman for Miller in Milwaukee, said the company did not comment on industry speculation.


Treasury Auction Schedule Has Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.51 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.72 percent.


Commercial Realty in New York Shows Signs of a Strong Recovery
They cannot agree on how much space still languishes empty, or on what the average rents are.
But on some things, New York's commercial real-estate brokers and building owners are unanimous: Buildings are filling up.
Landlords are getting more from tenants and giving them less.
Some companies are even buying buildings again.
All told, brokers and landlords say, the real-estate recession is ending.
"If February's numbers are an indication of what the rest of 1994 will look like, the New York real-estate market is in for a sustained period of recovery," said Barry Gosin, chief executive officer of Newmark &amp; Company Real Estate.


Interstate Warning Over Welfare Fraud
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has asked five neighboring states to guard against people's enrolling in welfare programs in more than one state after an investigation found that some New Jersey residents have illegally collected a total of more than $1 million in payments from New York since 1991.
Governor Cuomo, in letters sent yesterday to the governors of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Massachusetts and Vermont, asked for their cooperation in stopping welfare double-dipping.


White House Memo; Looking for White Knight To Do the Same Old Thing
Enter the knight.
The routine is beginning to weary even the most loyal and hardened members of Bill Clinton's White House staff.


No Headline
The ocean is a farm.
If you take away all the feed and the females, when it comes time to plant, you haven't got any seed.
Leave it alone.
Seed the ocean and allow the fish to grow. -- HAROLD LASHLEY, a retired fisherman.  [ B7:4. ]


Sinatra Collapses During Concert in Virginia
Frank Sinatra, the blue-eyed crooner, collapsed on stage and "passed out for a few moments" while singing "My Way" at an auditorium here tonight, a spokeswoman for the entertainer said.
Mr.
Sinatra, 78, was taken to a hospital about 10 P.M.
The spokeswoman, Susan Reynolds, said he was alert and talking and "just overheated."


Isles Need a Fast Recovery To Resume Playoff Chase
In 84 games, there will be the losses.
But that last one stung.
That one ended the comeback party.
After the second game of a home-and-home series with the Rangers, the Islander players walked around Saturday night as if they had just been eliminated from the playoffs.
Coach Al Arbour was almost curt and was visibly disappointed.


CHARGE BY WOMAN AT U.N. IS UPHELD
An international judge has found in favor of an American woman at the United Nations who accused a high-ranking Argentine superior of sexual harassment, and the accused official has resigned.
But rather than quelling the long-running furor, the ruling in the United Nations' first formal sexual harassment case has opened new wounds.


Purdue Moves Into First In Big Ten
Purdue 95, Michigan 94
Glenn Robinson scored 37 points for Purdue yesterday in Ann Arbor, Mich., including a driving jumper with 6.5 seconds to play that gave No. 9 Purdue a 95-94 victory over No. 3 Michigan and moved the Boilermakers into first place in the Big Ten.


Reviews/Cabaret; A Spokeswoman for Jazz Who Can Play It, Too
Marian McPartland is an important jazz figure not so much for her piano-playing as for her articulate advocacy of the form.
Ms.
McPartland, who is performing through Sunday at Tavern on the Green (Central Park West at 67th Street), is also the host of "Piano Jazz," a syndicated radio show on which some of the best pianists in the country have performed informally and been interviewed.
The show has clearly had an effect on Ms.
McPartland, and on Tuesday night, backed by bass and drums, she moved through all sorts of music, from a piece by John Coltrane to material by Jerome Kern.
And Ms.
McPartland can play, if in a restrained way: she has a nice touch, drawing smooth, pure tones out of the instrument.
She keeps her improvisations short, down to two or three choruses.
And she's interested in harmony; she regularly draped chords and scales over a tune's harmony, wringing out meaning and texture.


Reviews/Cabaret; In the McCorkle Style, Echoes of Youth in Paris
Although it has no title, Susannah McCorkle's smart, engaging new show at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza) might be called "The Making of a Modern Pop-Jazz Singer." Mixing a selection of astutely chosen songs with anecdotes and an occasional vocal impression, Ms.
McCorkle shows how she created her sultry pop-jazz style after discovering America's prerock musical culture while visiting Paris as a young woman.
It was in Paris, she recalls, that she first heard the Billie Holiday recordings (in particular, "I Gotta Right to Sing the Blues") that formed the bedrock of her style.
From there, she went on to discover Bessie Smith and Louis Armstrong, two of Holiday's crucial influences.


Comeback Campaign For Chuck Wagon
The speedy chuck wagon that tore through kitchens, signaling a dog that it was meal time, has returned.
Now, the miniature wagon has expanded its horizons, racing through neighborhoods with a frenzied stampede of dogs in its wake.


F. Murray Abraham Finds Roy Cohn In Ron Leibman's Formidable Wake
In his first attempts to portray Roy Cohn, F. Murray Abraham said: "I found myself doing Ron. Doing his voice. His mannerisms. It was exasperating to me -- it was Ron."
He was speaking of Ron Leibman, of course, who won a Tony Award last June for his high-voltage, pit-bull performance as Cohn in "Angels in America," Tony Kushner's two-part anthem for the era of AIDS.
Since late last month Mr.
Abraham has been perfecting his own Roy Cohn before audiences.
He has found it an unexpected challenge, not only because of Mr.
Leibman's star turn in the most sensational role of Broadway's most celebrated production, but also because he is joining a seasoned cast that, Mr.
Abraham said, "runs like well-oiled machinery."


A Loss to American Politics
George Mitchell's surprise decision not to run for re-election this fall will deprive the Senate of a capable majority leader, President Clinton of a vital legislative ally and American public life of an increasingly rare bird: a politician who thinks first of the duties, not the privileges, of power.
Mr.
Mitchell was not a leader in the larger-than-life mold of Lyndon Johnson or Everett Dirksen.
Though tenacious and tough, he usually preferred consultation to combat.
Nor did he succumb to the common conceit of indispensability.
"The position should not be regarded as permanent to the person," he told reporters on Saturday.


Review/Theater; A Fantastic Voyage Into Medical History
The performance artist Theodora Skipitares, who usually uses puppets in miniature environments to comment on society, has dramatically upped the ante in "Under the Knife," a spooky romp through the annals of death and medicine.
This multi-media show, her first major undertaking since "The Radiant City" in 1991, is spread out all over the La Mama Annex theater.
The audience is limited to 50 spectators a night, who pass under the skirts of a giant Medusa at the entrance, then follow a zigzagging path, up stairs and down, around corners and behind curtains.
Along the way are various exhibits (midwives presiding over the birth of a baby, skeletons engaged in a medieval danse macabre), such as you might find in some perverse museum of natural science.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about Israel's efforts to prevent violence described some remarks by Israeli officials incorrectly.
The officials said that Washington had told them that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin must do more to protect Palestinians from militant Israeli settlers.
They did not say that Washington must do more to protect Palestinians.


Naples Journal; Live by the Rules? A Smugglers' Haven Smolders
Nobody is saying Naples is not a normal city, least of all Amato Lamberti.
But he still fidgets when explaining why, for now, he is the only municipal official in Italy with the title Commissioner for Normalcy.
"The idea was to return to normalcy the city and all its productive activities, like industry, the crafts, commerce," said Mr.
Lamberti, a sociologist in his 40's from the Environmental League, part of a leftist coalition elected in December to run the city.


Abroad at Home; A Bleak Vision
A particular nightmare, for most human beings, would be to live in a society without order of any kind, without predictability: in a country that has no effective government, subject to crime and disease and primitive rapacity without recourse to any saving authority.
That is the future foreseen for much of the world in an extraordinarily chilling and, alas, compelling article.
It is "The Coming Anarchy" by Robert D. Kaplan, who has reported from many parts of the world and written among other books "Balkan Ghosts." His anti-utopian vision of the future appeared in the February Atlantic Monthly.


States Set Fines for Met Life
In a scathing report to state insurance commissioners, Florida's Insurance Commissioner asserted yesterday that Metropolitan Life had failed to heed its own knowledge of improper sales practices by its agents.
The commissioners accepted a Florida proposal that the company pay fines totaling $20 million, $12.5 million of that in cash to states.
The Florida report, presented by Tom Gallagher, the state's commissioner, at a meeting of insurance commissioners in Denver, found that Metropolitan's sales practices violated the laws of most states and were "widespread, nationwide and virtually unpoliced by the management." Mr.
Gallagher added that the company could face larger fines from individual states if it rejected the $20 million offer.


WNYC-TV Offers New Yorkers an Alternative, Not a Clone
To the Editor:
In "New York City Could Sell a Station or Two Without Much Loss" (letter, Feb. 22) Guy LeBow states that "WNYC-TV's most cherished products are often reruns of programs seen on public television's Channel 13, WNET."


The N.A.A.C.P.'s Mistake
This page has urged the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People to follow the example of the Congressional Black Caucus in distancing itself from Louis Farrakhan, the race-baiting leader of the Nation of Islam.
The decision of the N.A.A.C.P.'s executive director, the Rev.
Benjamin Chavis Jr., to invite Mr.
Farrakhan to a leadership conference this spring means instead that the nation's most venerable civil rights organization is playing into Mr.
Farrakhan's hands.
To be sure, there is a historical logic in Mr.
Chavis's preference for preserving big-tent unity among the nation's black leaders.
Such solidarity has served the N.A.A.C.P., the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, the Urban League and other traditional organizations very well.
But the Nation of Islam has always been an outsider, willing to use the mainstream groups for its own convenience, yet equally eager to denounce their leaders as tools of the white establishment.


Man Guilty of Murder in Death of Abortion Doctor
After jury deliberations that lasted less than three hours, Michael F. Griffin was found guilty of first-degree murder on Saturday in the shooting death of a doctor during a demonstration outside an abortion clinic here last year.
Judge John Parnham of Escambia County Circuit Court immediately sentenced Mr.
Griffin, a 32-year-old abortion opponent who originally claimed to have acted in God's name, to life in prison, the mandatory sentence in Florida for first-degree murder cases in which the death penalty is not sought.
Mr.
Griffin must serve at least 25 years before he becomes eligible for parole.


New Refugees May Still Leave Vietnam
To the Editor:
Re "The Boat People: A Chapter Closes" (editorial, Feb. 22):


In a Town 'Cleansed' of Muslims, Serb Church Will Crown the Deed
Up through a ghostly terrain of smashed and ransacked former Muslim homes, Branko Grujic led the way, intent on showing off his crowning contribution to what he calls the victory of Serbian Orthodox Christianity over Islam in Bosnia.
Mr.
Grujic, the Mayor of this northeastern Bosnian town now controlled by Serbs and completely "cleansed" of its 40,000 prewar Muslim inhabitants, has a pet project.
It stands atop the escarpment that overlooks Zvornik and the meandering sweep of the Drina River.


Nine 3's Are Margin For Nets In Blowout
Armon Gilliam came off the Nets' bench to score the first 8 points of the fourth quarter tonight and went on to get 16 points in the period.
But New Jersey hardly needed sixth-man heroics.
Leading by 22 points entering the fourth quarter, the Nets coasted to a 126-99 victory over the Philadelphia 76ers at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Review/Fashion; Lang Points the Way to a New Elegance
If there is any conversation stopper at the Paris fashion collections this year, it's the question, "Where is fashion going?" The one thing everyone seems to agree on is that it has turned back from the road to Canterbury.
Fashion's short trip to the confessional seems to be nearing an end.
If penitential dressing was the industry's self-flagellation, fashion is ready to sin again.
Updating Dorothy Parker's quip "Men don't make passes at girls who wear glasses," Maria Luisa Pomaillou, the owner of the Maria Luisa boutique here, said, "Women are fed up with clothes that think instead of make you beautiful."


Louis Gargiulo; Restaurateur, 92
Louis Gargiulo, who ran his family's restaurant, Gargiulo's, on Coney Island for more than 50 years, died on Tuesday at Kings Highway Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 92.
He died of natural causes, said his son, Michael Gargiulo.


Why Fingerprint Only for Welfare?
To the Editor:
The idea of fingerprinting welfare recipients, which Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani envisions for New York City and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is testing for New York State, has some merit if we want to be sure that people are not double-dipping, exaggerating their need or otherwise practicing fraud.


Bronx Synagogue Is Defaced With Graffiti


Files in East Germany Aided U.S. in Spy Case
Information from the files of the former East German intelligence service aided an American inquiry that led to the arrest of Aldrich H. Ames on espionage charges, Government officials said Saturday night.
It was not clear what the precise nature of the information was or the extent to which it helped the inquiry, but the officials said it helped narrow their search for a mole at the Central Intelligence Agency.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
One Shot, No Goal for Gretzky  Wayne Gretzky's pursuit of Gordie Howe's National Hockey League goal-scoring record was stalled yesterday when he was shut out as the Los Angeles Kings and the Blackhawks played to a 3-3 tie in Chicago.
Gretzky attempted only one shot, that coming in the third period and is still three goals short of tying Howe's record of 801. (AP)


A New Name to Be Reckoned With: Scuffleburg
The seniors tour of racing, which has been looking for a star during a season dominated by younger Kentucky Derby candidates, may have found one today: Scuffleburg, a 5-year-old horse with a peculiar name and a peculiar running style who missed 15 months of racing before making a comeback this year in Florida.
The comeback reached a peak today when Scuffleburg dashed from fourth place to first in the final strides and won the $500,000 Gulfstream Park Handicap by a head over Migrating Moon.
It was his first victory since Sept. 25, 1992, when he made a similar charge through the stretch at the Meadowlands to win the Pegasus Handicap.


Kerrigan Parades For Fans
Fresh from Disney World's Main Street, U.S.A., Nancy Kerrigan led a homecoming parade today down the real Main Street in her hometown of Stoneham.
Waving to thousands of friends, neighbors and complete strangers who lined the street and set up lawn chairs on top of the slowly melting snow banks, Kerrigan rode in a red Mustang with the top down, surrounded by a bevy of motorcycle policemen.


Classical Music in Review
Orchestra of St. Luke's  Alice Tully Hall
"Mongrel Airs," the delightful title of the first movement of John Adams's new Chamber Symphony, could as well have been applied to the entire program Mr.
Adams conducted on Thursday evening.
As he suggested in an amiable preconcert talk, what all the works had in common was one foot planted squarely in the vernacular, the other wedged in the door of the concert hall.
Jazz, folk and pop accents abounded in small-scale works by Revueltas, Shostakovich, Nancarrow and Milhaud, as well as in the Adams symphony, in its New York premiere.


Clinton's Air Traffic Plan Touching Off Dispute in Congress
President Clinton's plan to create a corporation to run the nation's air traffic control system, a pillar of the Administration's ambitious program to reinvent government, has touched off a dispute with Congress that could rival the debate that preceded airline deregulation in 1978.
The move, which will be introduced by the Administration in April, is intended to change the system from a slow-paced bureaucracy to a businesslike environment that Administration officials say will free the system from onerous regulations, simplify personnel policies, reward initiative and provide stable financing for a long-delayed, $33 billion modernization program. 'Bold Change' Is Urged
"We want to create a corporate entrepreneurial culture," Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena said in an interview, adding, "We have to quit tinkering, and bring about bold change."


Classical Music in Review
Todd Crow  Pianist Kathryn Bache Miller Theater
Todd Crow's piano recital on Thursday was less an attempt to impress than a shared inquiry into the tone and design of fascinating music.
There were Schoenberg's cheerless masterpieces, the "Drei Klavierstucke"; Schubert's most ambitious A-minor Sonata (D. 845); the second book of Debussy's "Images" and the Bartok Dance Suite from 1923.


Burmese General Bars Talks Soon With Arrested Democracy Leader
The head of Burmese military intelligence, Lieut.
Gen.
Khin Nyunt, today ruled out early talks between himself and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the imprisoned democracy leader and Nobel Peace Prize winner, describing her attitude as "negative and counterproductive."
In an interview, General Khin Nyunt, who is widely seen as the most powerful member of the junta that runs Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, said he had sent senior military officers in recent weeks to meet with Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi.


Erector Set, Big-Time: Drama on F.D.R. Drive
Ironworkers -- the few, the proud -- are in the superstructure business, but lately business has been awful in New York City.
Instead of erecting shiny new high-rises, ironworkers, who consider themselves the aristocracy of the building trades, have had to settle largely for what many consider scut work: bridge repair, which is dirty, demeaning and sometimes hazardous due to old lead-based paints.
But as a crew of ironworkers erected a complicated steel and concrete platform over the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive one night last week, on top of which a two-block-long building will be erected, some of the good times returned, along with this fraternity's traditional swagger, profanity-laced repartee and lumpen asides on politics and women.


WNYC-TV Offers New Yorkers an Alternative, Not a Clone; Civility for Our City
To the Editor:
Guy LeBow (letter, Feb. 22) could not be further from the mark.
WNYC radio provides New York City listeners with the finest in classical music, news and public affairs broadcasting.
City life would be greatly diminished by the demise of either the AM or FM station.
WNYC-AM airs top-rate news and public affairs shows.
WNYC-FM provides the best classicial music on radio in the city.
News and classical music are separate missions.


State Hopes Car-Pool Lanes Will Dent Solo Commuting
Diane McCully is fed up with her morning commute through Morris County.
On really good days, she says, it takes an hour to creep the 33 miles from her home near Hackettstown to her office here.


End of an Esthete
A tall plumpish young man loomed up, whom it was impossible to contemplate as an undergraduate; his umbrella was rolled cane-tight but no snugger than he was, into a long tube of a black overcoat . . . as he advanced out of the swirling mist, it became clear that it was not just the weather, he was doing his own swirling . . .
The young man of the playwright Emlyn Williams's awed -- indeed, astonished -- description was an Oxford contemporary named Harold Acton, who died last month at 89.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Consumer Credit . . .
Jan.
Tuesday  Productivity . . . 4th Qtr.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Retail Sales . . .
Feb.


Potholes
New York City's Transportation Department estimates that it will fill a quarter of a million new potholes this season.
That would be 20 percent more than last year, a testament to the severity of this winter.
The 15 storms and nine freeze-thaw cycles have played havoc with streets and highways.
Water seeps under the road surface, then expands as it freezes, forcing the pavement to bulge.
When the ice melts and the water drains away, it leaves an empty pocket that becomes exposed when traffic crushes the bulged pavement.


Melina Mercouri, Actress and Politician, Is Dead
Melina Mercouri, the vivacious actress with a husky laugh who went on to become Greece's Minister of Culture, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
Miss Mercouri, whose greatest screen success was her role as a flamboyant prostitute in the 1960 film "Never on Sunday," was 68, her family said, although references disagree on the year of her birth.
The cause was complications from lung cancer, said Patricia Turi, a hospital spokeswoman.
Miss Mercouri was hospitalized in early February and underwent surgery on Feb. 23 to remove cancerous tissue, but her conditioned deteriorated on Saturday because of an infection, Ms.
Turi said.


Market Place; A one-two combination staggers the cable television industry.
THE last few weeks have not been happy ones for cable television companies.
Not only did the Federal Communications Commission announce that cable rates were being rolled back by 7 percent, but the huge $33 billion merger between the Bell Atlantic Corporation and Tele-Communications Inc. fizzled.


Problem Found in Engine of Jet That Skidded Off Runway
A hangar examination of the Continental Airlines jet that aborted a takeoff and skidded off a runway at La Guardia Airport in a snowstorm last week found that one of its two tail-nested engines does not turn properly, a spokesman for the Federal agency investigating the accident said yesterday.
Investigators found the engine, on the left side of the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 jet, "hard to turn," while the right-side engine turned freely, said Alan Pollock, a spokesman for the National Transportation Safety Board.
He said investigators would dismantle the engine to seek the cause of the irregularity.


CHRONICLE
Balancing the budget, tra-la-la, or once again, art imitates life in Washington.
Next Monday the Living Stage Theater Company, a branch of the Arena Stage that works with inner-city children, will benefit from a performance of "I'd Rather Be Right," a rarely performed 1937 musical spoof about President Franklin D. Roosevelt and how he must balance the budget so that a young couple can be married.
Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart wrote the music and lyrics; the book is by George S. Kaufman and Moss Hart.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8 ISRAEL CONSIDERS SETTLEMENTS
Pressure grew within the Israeli Cabinet to remove Jewish settlers from Hebron, to prevent further violence where a settler massacred Palestinians in a mosque; but no decision was reached.
A1


Out Magazine's National Reach
Out, a national magazine aimed at affluent gay men and lesbians, says it has more then doubled its circulation in its two-year history -- to more than 100,000.
In the expanding field of gay publications, Out attributes its growth to a flurry of efforts: an early push to attract editors, writers and designers from well-known magazines; a national marketing campaign to build name recognition among gay readers, and the development of a sleek format that has drawn some high-profile advertisers to make their first gay media buys.


ISRAELI MINISTERS DEBATE EVICTIONS OF JEWS IN HEBRON
Pressure intensified within the Israeli Government today to clear Jewish settlers out of the tinderbox West Bank town of Hebron, where worshiping Palestinians were massacred at a mosque nine days ago.
At the weekly Cabinet meeting, seven of the 15 members reportedly spoke out against keeping the Hebron enclaves, where some 400 Jews live among more than 70,000 Arabs, creating what some ministers called needless frictions and security risks.
Only two opposed removing the settlers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Florida's Insurance Commissioner presented a scathing report about Metropolitan Life, asserting that it failed to heed its own knowledge of improper sales practices and proposed that the company pay fines totaling $20 million.
The fines were agreed to by all 50 states.  [ Page D1. ]


Georgetown Breezes To Title
It was supposed to be close, but it was no contest.
Georgetown's distance runners piled on the points early in the IC4A indoor track and field championships and turned an expected confrontation with George Mason into a rout at Princeton's Jadwin Gym.
With an 18 1/2-point edge on George Mason after Saturday's competition, the Hoyas quickly added 38 points by scoring in three of the day's four events.


Lonely Golfer Becomes Comeback Champion
John Huston won the Doral-Ryder Open today by ambushing the field, coming from a four-stroke deficit to a three-stroke victory with a final round of 66 that was nearly accomplished in private.
Playing the first 11 holes by himself, because his scheduled playing partner, Fred Couples, had to withdraw because of a bad back, the 32-year-old Huston powered his way into a tie for the lead with five birdies and a bogey and then birdied two more holes coming in for a 14-under-par total of 274 that closed out a faltering Billy Andrade (73) and a charging Brad Bryant (69) by three strokes.


Hasidic Student Shot on Brooklyn Bridge Is Buried


Tomba Settles for Sixth
There were no shenanigans, no theatrics at the finish line here today for Alberto Tomba, Italy's flamboyant five-time Olympic medalist.
His hopes for another victory here vanished in the fog and snow as Fredrik Nyberg of Sweden showed that he could better negotiate the World Cup giant slalom course.
The 24-year-old Nyberg, 18th in the giant slalom at Lillehammer, finished in a combined time of 1 minute 51.26 seconds, two-tenths faster than Christian Mayer of Austria.


Double the Expectations in the State of Huskymania
After one more stop near the end of a basketball season, the players on Connecticut women's team had no way of knowing what Donyell Marshall was doing for them.
Having clinched first place in the Big East conference a week ago, they were riding home from a victory over St.
John's on Saturday, just as the men were winning their conference at the Hartford Civic Center.
And what they missed was a moment that Marshall, a finalist for national player of the year, could have taken as his own but shared with them instead.
Moments after the men defeated Pittsburgh to win the regular-season title by a three-game margin -- the largest in the 15-year history of the conference -- Marshall took the public address microphone to thank the celebrating sellout crowd on behalf of his teammates "and the girls' team."


Chinese Crackdown: Challenge Is Still Prohibited
The arrest of a dozen or more pro-democracy leaders in recent days is a timely reminder that China's rulers command a vast security apparatus that, for now, remains unable to tolerate any challenge to Communist Party authority.
While these arrests may seem an affront to the Clinton Administration's push for more progress on human rights in China, they also reflect the mounting tension in China as democracy campaigners begin to stir from the dormancy that followed the Tiananmen Square massacre in June 1989.


All's Well (Sort of) for Most High Yankee
George Steinbrenner sat in his box seat along the first-base line today, chatted with friends and watched his Yankees lose to the crosstown rival Mets without so much as flinching.
The Yankee owner's demeanor was in stark contrast to his onetime declaration equating the intracity series to all-out war, perhaps because he now understands that he has the better team and never mind today's 7-6 loss before 6,664 fans at Fort Lauderdale Stadium.


Review/Fashion; At Lacroix, Hollywood Meets Paris
Robert Altman began shooting "Pret-a-Porter," his film based on the fashion industry, this morning at the Christian Lacroix show.
Only the Lacroix clothes could withstand the onslaught, and they seemed over the top.
But never mind the clothes.
The stars of the film started a frenzy among the hundreds of photographers as they entered the room.
Sophia Loren was sophisticated in a big black hat with a veil and a black suit by Christian Dior.
Lauren Bacall and Sally Kellerman looked contemporary in pants suits by Giorgio Armani and Calvin Klein, respectively.
Kim Basinger's pants suit was raspberry and you could tell it was by Mr.
Lacroix because it had his signature red heart appliqued on a shoulder.
Model?
What Model?
The action started with a fight staged at the entrance of the show as groupies, actually actors, tried to push past the guards.
The attention then moved to the stars as they watched the show and later congratulated the designer backstage.
For once the models, usually lionized, were neglected by the photographers backstage, and they said that was fine by them.


Dividend Meetings


Keeping Campaign Pledge, Giuliani Restores Queens Engine Company
A three-year battle to reopen an engine company in Richmond Hill, Queens, culminated in victory for local residents yesterday when Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani made good on a campaign pledge and declared Engine Company 294 officially back in business.
The company's 22 firefighters, 3 lieutenants and 1 captain actually returned to work last Monday, dousing three fires within the last week, officials said.
But yesterday's ceremony, attended by civic leaders, Fire Department officials and more than 200 community residents, marked the official restoration of the company, which fell victim to city budget cuts under former Mayor David N. Dinkins in January 1991.


A Big Mac, Fries -- and Clean Air
Ten years ago, legislation like the proposed Smoke-Free Environment Act, which would ban smoking in any public buildings -- spaces regularly entered by 10 or more people at least once a week -- was unthinkable.
But when Senator Frank Lautenberg and Representative Henry Waxman introduced the bill last fall, such restrictions just seemed commonsensical.
Americans know a lot more now about the health risks involved in inhaling somebody else's cigarette smoke than they did a decade ago, and the evidence continues to mount.


Patents
FIFTY years after he proposed a theory of supersonic flight, the aerodynamicist Leonard M. Greene dreams of a passenger airplane that will travel cross-country at three times the speed of sound, touching down in Los Angeles 90 minutes after taking off from New York.
Supersonic flights are currently banned over continents because the sonic booms they create are so loud that they hurt eardrums and break windows 60,000 feet below.
Thus, the Concorde, the only supersonic jet in commercial use, reaches Mach 2 -- twice the speed of sound -- only as it crosses the ocean to deliver passengers in about half the time of a normal transoceanic flight.


WNYC-TV Offers New Yorkers an Alternative, Not a Clone; Foreign Programming
To the Editor:
As president of a company that has leased time since 1985 on WNYC-TV to air Italian-language programs, I would like to tell Guy LeBow (letter, Feb. 22) that WNYC's greatest asset is not public television reruns, but the chance it provides ethnic minorities in this city to see programs from their native countries.
Where else can you tune in to see and hear Italian, Ukrainian, Iranian, Indian, Haitian, Brazilian, Japanese and Chinese television?
UMBERTO BONETTI  President, RAI Corporation New York, Feb. 25, 1994


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about retailers' sales in February misstated the sales increase at the Ann Taylor Corporation.
The company's same-store sales increased 12.2 percent, not 4 percent.


4 High-Rises Torn Down By Newark
Four bleak high-rises that have long symbolized Newark's inability to provide decent shelter for its poor were torn down this morning, opening a new chapter in the city's struggle to rebuild its public housing after decades of neglect.
A rumbling explosion destroyed the four 13-story towers at the Christopher Columbus Homes, which were closed in 1990 after local officials, like many of their counterparts around the nation, decided that tall housing projects were ill-conceived social experiments often plagued by overcrowding, crime, vandalism and poor maintenance.


Is Healy In Goal Or Is He in Doghouse?
Simmering since September, the Glenn Healy-Mike Keenan stew has come to a boil.
As the Rangers take their league-leading record into tonight's game against second-best Detroit at Madison Square Garden, the treatment of the backup goalie by his coach overwhelms the other major plot lines that color a fascinating stretch of an interesting season.


Classical Music in Review
Guarneri Quartet  Gary Graffman Pianist Alice Tully Hall
More Schnittke on Wednesday night, this time the Piano Quintet played by the Guarneri Quartet and Gary Graffman.
Eighteen years old, the piece bears only embryos of the mystical Schnittkean non sequiturs currently running around our concert halls in such profusion.
Its four movements reveal symptoms of things to come, however, namely the cheery, unannounced waltz figures that pop in and out of pervasive gloom.


Day of TV Defense for Administration on Whitewater
Vice President Al Gore offered a vigorous defense of President Clinton today, but acknowledged that "mistakes have been made" in the handling of an inquiry into an Arkansas land venture and that the White House must approach the case from now on with "hypersensitivity."
To underscore that commitment, senior Administration officials said Mr.
Clinton would move within days to replace Bernard W. Nussbaum, the White House counsel who is stepping down over the matter, with a successor with Washington experience and a background that is beyond reproach.


Saberhagen Has a Following
Bret Saberhagen is scheduled to make his spring debut on Monday, and he should do so in front of a few observers even though it's a "B" game being played at 10 A.M.
Saberhagen, who has been on the trading block since the off season, was scratched for his scheduled start last Thursday because of a twinge in his right shoulder, and there was a row of disappointed scouts when he didn't pitch.
Toronto, one of the few teams that could absorb Saberhagen's three-year, $15,337,000 contract, is known to be very interested in obtaining him and is expected to have a few scouts on hand Monday.


New Pressure on Minority Journalists
For six years, four associations of minority journalists have been planning their first joint convention.
Unity '94, scheduled to begin on July 27 in Atlanta, was supposed to recognize the coming of age of minority journalists.
As the date approaches, however, some minority journalists have been saying that the meeting may instead be the beginning of a new period of challenge in a long history of challenges.


Ready, Set, Bid: Time for Fringe Teams to Toe the Line
It is tournament time and the madness of March has commenced.
The selection committee of the National Collegiate Athletic Association will reveal the field for its 64-team tournament next Sunday, and a dozen or so marginal candidates have final chances this week -- many in league tourneys -- to prove their worth.


Marshfield Journal; Heaven for a Forecaster: Nearly 9 Feet of Snow
Roger Hill's pipes burst six weeks ago, and he guesses his family won't have running water again until, oh, about May, when the last frost melts.
But Mr.
Hill, who is the local radio weather forecaster here, is nonetheless a happy man.
This town of 900 people in northern Vermont has had 106 inches of snow so far this winter, including the paltry 16 inches that fell in February, which Mr.
Hill wrote off on the air as "a real downer." He grew up in Los Angeles, and this is just the sort of meteorological excitement that he was looking for when he migrated to Vermont seven years ago.


Review/Television; Gay Girls Make a Stand At a High School Prom
Gay and lesbian characters in television drama, virtually invisible not too long ago, are being seen and heard with increasing frequency nowadays.
Same-sex kisses are almost commonplace, popping up in January's "Tales of the City" on PBS, last week's "Roseanne" on ABC and now tonight's "More Than Friends: The Coming Out of Heidi Leiter" on HBO.
Reality inches forward.
Part of the HBO series "Lifestories: Families in Crisis," the true story of Heidi, which got considerable coverage in the national press, tells of a high-school girl who decides to attend her prom with another girl.
Heidi (Sabrina Lloyd) and Missy Peters (Kate Anthony) have fallen in love.
Heidi's parents, especially her mother, are upset and insist she see a psychologist.
The doctor explains to them that usually "homosexuality is not just a stage to heterosexuality." They had better get used to the idea of their daughter's being a lesbian.


Gooden In Need Of Advice
There was a moment early this afternoon at Thomas J. White Stadium when one almost expected to see Mel Stottlemyre stroll out of the dugout and to the pitcher's mound.
Dwight Gooden certainly needed him.
Gooden made his spring training debut today and every pitch he threw seemed to cross the plate high.


Van Breda Kolff Exits a Champion
Double overtime is a fitting way to end an illustrious career.
Even when you have a heart condition.
In Butch van Breda Kolff's final game as a collegiate basketball head coach, his Hofstra Flying Dutchmen completed an improbable run to the East Coast Conference tournament title, knocking off Northeastern Illinois by 88-86 in two extra sessions at the University of Buffalo's Alumni Arena this afternoon.


Review/Dance; A Canadian Company That Speaks of Europe
A handsome group of 16 classical dancers whose bold demeanor evokes the tough, frank manner of contemporary ballet troupes in Europe may seem an anomaly in the well-bred ballet precincts of North America.
Ballet British Columbia from Vancouver is indeed a company with a refreshing difference, as its New York debut demonstrated on Saturday night in Whitman Hall at Brooklyn College.
Even the work of familiar choreographers looked transformed under the amazingly strong stylistic imprint of this eight-year-old company.


To Probert, Rink's a Ring at Drop of a Glove
When Bob Probert of the Red Wings trades punches with a member of the opposing hockey team at Detroit's Joe Louis Arena, the music on the speaker system doesn't miss a beat while the beating goes on.
Backed by drums and loud guitar power chords, a woman's voice shrieks, "Hit me with your best shot! Fire away!" while Probert, more often than not, pounds his foe to the ice, sometimes drawing blood, amid the cheers of fans who use their fists to pound the glass along the boards.


Earth-Friendly Dutch Homes Use Sod and Science
Living on the edge of a marshland with plants sprouting from his roof, Maarten Regenboog could well be considered a guinea pig in yet another Dutch social experiment.
Instead he sees himself as a happy resident of a community of the future.
The top of his house is covered with grassy sod rather than tiles.
Inside, the walls emit solar heat.
Rainwater flushes the toilets, and the sewage pipes are made of ceramic rather than the usual plastic.
Gauges check levels of humidity, dust, radon and gamma rays.


Knicks' Deposed Starters Focusing on a Big Finish
Charles Smith says it hurts.
John Starks says he's used to it.
Greg Anthony is not saying much.
While the newest members of his bench try to cope with the recent lineup changes, Coach Pat Riley also has something to say.


Protest Off: Foes Prefer A Dialogue
On the east bank of the East River, as surely as on the West Bank of the Jordan, the parties to ethnic conflict often cannot see each other as aggrieved.
For that reason alone, what happened yesterday in Brooklyn was noteworthy.
A scheduled protest by Arab-Americans in Midwood, Brooklyn, against the militant Zionist group Kahane Chai was called off at the request of a local Jewish politician.
Instead, Jewish and Arab leaders met for 75 minutes in the basement of a police station, emerging to blow away some of the rhetorical heat rising from the violence here and in the Middle East.


U.S. DRUG INDUSTRY FIGHTS REPUTATION FOR PRICE GOUGING
When President Clinton stood before an audience at an Arlington, Va., health clinic last year and characterized the pharmaceutical industry as a bunch of price gougers, executives of the nation's drug companies had what their scientists might call a convulsive reaction.
After the initial shock, the industry sought strong remedies to counter the threat.
In the 12 months since that speech, the drug companies have mounted a sophisticated campaign that has included frequent visits to Washington by their top executives, a multimillion-dollar advertising blitz, hefty campaign contributions to members of Congress and intense lobbying of the lawmakers who receive those donations.
Counteroffensive Moves
Lodewijk J. R. de Vink, president of the Warner-Lambert Company, said: "The President's accusations put us immediately on guard, in a very defensive mode. We never anticipated that kind of frontal attack. We decided to mount a counteroffensive."


Thousands Join to Mourn Slain Hasidic Student
The men and women stood apart, cleaved by Hasidic law, but wept together in common pain.
People came by the thousands yesterday to stand in the weak winter sunshine on Eastern Parkway in Crown Heights and say goodbye to Aaron Halberstam, 16 years old, one of the four Hasidic students shot on the Brooklyn Bridge last week.
Dozens of young men pressed against a cordon of police officers for the honor of touching the coffin of the student who has become, in death, a martyr and a holy sacrifice.


Fishing Fleet Trawling Seas That Yield Many Fewer Fish
For the volunteers who count fish returning from the sea to fresh water, this has been the loneliest year ever.
The surging Pacific salmon and steelhead are gone; what the fish counters at the Puget Sound ship locks see when they stare at the glass wall separating them from the water is nothing but a reflection of their own faces.
Across the country, in Gloucester and New Bedford, Mass., the story is the same.
After 350 years, the oldest American fishing area is largely barren of the great swarms of haddock, cod and flounder that sustained more than 10 generations of New Englanders and became millions of fish sticks.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Bay Apartment Communities Inc., San Jose, Calif., an initial public offering of 7.9 million shares.
Kidder, Peabody.


United Way Affiliates Plan Changes in Regional Governing Board
Faced with shrinking charitable contributions but growing demands for assistance, United Way affiliates in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut are moving to overhaul their regional association to streamline the organization.
Advocates of the proposed reorganization hope it will raise more money and trim operating costs, but the changes are also likely to draw some objections since they will reduce the decision-making powers of the 32 individual United Way affiliates in the region.


Rabbi Agrees to Guilty Plea in Boy's Kidnapping
A rabbi pleaded guilty yesterday in the Brooklyn kidnapping of a 15-year-old boy who has been at the center of a bitter dispute between his family and the rabbi, who sought to convert him to his ultra-Orthodox brand of Judaism.
But with a complex custody battle swirling around him, the fate of the boy, Shai Fhima, remained as uncertain yesterday as it was two years ago when he first disappeared.
And even the facts surrounding his disappearance remained murky, as Shai and the rabbi, Shlomo Helbrans, continued to insist that Rabbi Helbrans had done nothing wrong, despite the guilty plea.
Deal With District Attorney
Rabbi Helbrans offered the plea of guilty to a charge of conspiracy to kidnap in the fourth degree in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.
The plea was part of an intricate arrangement with the Brooklyn District Attorney that will give the rabbi a sentence of five years' probation and 250 hours of community service.
But under the terms of the agreement, the rabbi and another man, Mordechai Weisz, who will also receive five years' probation for the kidnapping conspiracy, did not admit that they had committed any of the specific acts with which they were charged.


Lott Breaks the Impasse on the Jets' Salary Cap
Safety Ronnie Lott, who will be entering his 14th season in the National Football League, has become the first Jets player to bite the bullet and agree to have his 1994 contract restructured in order to make room under the salary cap to sign unrestricted free agents.
The Jets did not release terms of the re-negotiated contract.
Lott was due to earn $1.4 million in 1994, the final year of a two-year deal.
He earned $2.2 million in base salary and bonuses last season, his first with the Jets.


Abaxis
Abaxis Inc., a Sunnyvale, Calif., medical equipment maker, introduced a blood analyzer yesterday for use by veterinarians.
The news, announced just before the market opened, helped lift the stock 8.8 percent in Nasdaq trading.
Abaxis had traded as low as 4 a share in June and 5 3/8 last Wednesday.


China Says a Top Dissident Is Not Being Held but Has Left Beijing
Apparently in an effort at damage control, the Public Security Bureau issued a statement this evening denying that it was arresting and intimidating political dissidents.
The official New China News Agency quoted "sources" at the bureau as saying the country's most prominent dissident, Wei Jingsheng, and a former student leader, Wang Dan, were not "under detention."


Death Is Cheap: Maybe It's Just $14.95
Here's a statement you won't hear made by Don King, Seth Abraham, Dan Duva or any other pay-per-view sports purveyor: "I don't want anyone to die. It may be good for the buy rate. But I don't want anyone to die."
Thus spoke Campbell McLaren, general manager of the Semaphore Entertainment Group, which on Friday will air "The Ultimate Fighting Championship II," a no-rules war among martial artists that could conclude in rigor mortis.


Mitsubishi Dealers Award Accounts
Zimmerman &amp; Partners Advertising in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said yesterday that it had captured the accounts of three additional Mitsubishi Motors dealer associations, bringing the total it handles to 11, with combined billings estimated at $30 million.
Jordan Zimmerman, the chairman and president of Zimmerman, confirmed a report of the appointment this week in Adweek.
He said his agency had been awarded the accounts of dealer groups in Chicago, Dallas and Houston, with combined billings estimated at $9 million.
The agency already handles dealer groups in markets including Boston, New York, San Francisco and metropolitan Washington.
Mr.
Zimmerman added that his agency would continue to pitch for dealer groups in areas including Denver and Baltimore.


Visiting Moscow, Nixon Muses With an Ousted Hard-Liner


Lloyd Cutler Is Picked as Clinton's Interim Counsel
President Clinton has chosen Lloyd N. Cutler, the White House counsel under President Jimmy Carter, to return to the job temporarily until the battered office is reorganized and a permanent White House lawyer is selected, Administration officials and associates of Mr.
Cutler said tonight.
Mr.
Cutler, 76, a highly regarded Washington lawyer, is to serve without pay during his interim posting and will remain in the White House for no longer than six months, the associates said.


Regulators Seek Limits On Insurer Sales Pitches
State insurance regulators are moving closer to sharply limiting how sales agents may describe the future benefits of life insurance policies, despite strong objections from insurance companies and agents.
Approval of the changes by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners is more likely because of recent reports of improper sales activities by some agents of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, regulators said yesterday.
A report describing how Met Life improperly sold insurance policies disguised as retirement or savings plans to about 60,000 customers was issued by the Florida Insurance Commissioner on Sunday.
The report led commissioners to approve a plan to fine Metropolitan $20 million.


3 Officers Will Face Shakedown Charges
Charges will be filed today against three Brooklyn police officers suspected of shaking down drug dealers for cash, guns and cocaine, the chief lawyer for the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association said.
The lawyer, James Lysaght, said he was informed last night by the United States Attorney's office in Brooklyn that the officers, among five officers in the 73d Precinct who were removed from active duty on Feb. 1, will be arrested and charged with crimes including Federal civil rights violations.


Compania Cervecerias Unidas S.A. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sidewalk Naturalists
To the Editor:
We New York City 4-Hers are not as surprised as the scientists that male bats lactate (news article, Feb. 24).
As part of our pigeon project in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, we learned that male pigeons lactate and also stay in the nest during the day while the female hunts for food.
They also mate for life!


A Flourish for Fedorov as the Rangers Fall
So far this season, the Rangers have the best team but the Detroit Red Wings have the best player.
That player, Sergei Fedorov, scored one goal and assisted on two others last night to pace the Red Wings to a 6-3 victory at Madison Square Garden, ending the Rangers' four-game unbeaten streak.
The three points left Fedorov with 107 for the season, 4 behind Wayne Gretzky of the Los Angeles Kings in the race for the league scoring title.
Both players have 18 games remaining.


Market Place; Making Millions on Grumman Deal
The Grumman and Martin Marietta corporations are in a business that requires them to protect classified information.
Let's hope they are better at keeping the Government's secrets than they are at keeping their own.
It appears all but certain that word of their planned combination, which was announced yesterday, leaked out last week, enabling some to profit greatly.
The buyers, whose identities are unknown, used a popular vehicle for such bets known as options.
Trading records indicate that they made more than a million dollars in a few days.


A New Agency For Staples Inc.
Staples Inc., the office supply store chain, said yesterday that it had selected Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners in New York to handle the creative broadcast portion of its account, which for the last two years had been handled on a project basis by Clarke Goward Fitts Matteson in Boston, as well as by other agencies on a freelance basis.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications estimated them at $12 million to $20 million.


Owners Promise To Open The Books
With more than 70 players acting as the receivers, Richard Ravitch threw out the first pitch tonight in the negotiations between the players and club owners for a new collective bargaining agreement.
It was more than ceremonial.
In explaining that the owners wanted to achieve "cost certainty" for their business, Ravitch told the players he would share with them all the financial information he and his staff used in hammering out thousands of revenue-sharing plans, one of which the owners finally accepted in January.


Head of Transit Authority Opposes Merger for Police
The president of the New York City Transit Authority yesterday condemned a plan by the Giuliani administration to merge the city's three police forces, saying it would weaken safety on the subways.
But Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said he still thought the authority's parent board would enact his proposal.
Speaking at a hearing of the City Council's Committee on Transportation, the Transit Authority president, Alan F. Kiepper, said the Mayor's plan to consolidate the New York City Police Department, the housing police and the transit police into one entity would lead to an increase in subway crime, which has been declining in the last four years.


Through Bosnian Smoke, Russians and Serbs Turn to the West; Sarajevo Haggadah
To the Editor:
Amid the unrelenting atrocities inflicted on the people of Sarajevo during the long months of siege, there may be a terrible loss to art as well.


Jacobson Stores Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Spies, Lies, Averted Eyes
The day after the arrest of the accused spy Aldrich H. Ames was announced, the Director of Central Intelligence, R. James Woolsey, met with several hundred C.I.A. employees in the agency's auditorium at Langley, Va.
After recounting what employees already knew from the news media, Mr.
Woolsey -- whose address was seen on closed-circuit television by every C.I.A. employee -- spent five minutes explaining why he himself had refused to take a polygraph test, as other recent directors had done.
Besides the fact that political appointees are not required to take such tests, Mr.
Woolsey said he remained "skeptical" about the polygraph's effectiveness.
The speech sickened many officers, according to one who watched.
They point out privately that they, too, have questions about the efficacy of the polygraph but are required to take the test every five years or lose their jobs.
That the Director would not take it, then would have the effrontery to defend his decision even after thedisclosure of the biggest security breach in the agency's history, tells a lot about the indifference that allowed the Ames case to happen.


Yesterday's Public Housing Is Today's Inspiration


Men's Wearhouse reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Mr. Natcher's Amazing String
Lou Gehrig appeared in 2,135 consecutive baseball games.
Joe DiMaggio hit safely in 56 consecutive games.
In the durability department, their Congressional counterpart is clearly Representative William Natcher, the chairman of the House Appropriations Committee.
Last week, when illness finally forced an end to an amazing 40-year streak, the Kentucky Democrat had cast 18,401 consecutive House votes -- a record, House Speaker Thomas Foley observed, that is likely to stand forever.


'Don't Ask, Don't Tell' Is Challenged in Suit
Two civil rights groups today filed the first legal challenge to the Pentagon's new policy and regulations governing homosexuals in the military.
The American Civil Liberties Union and the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund filed suit in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York on behalf of two service members on active duty and four in the reserves, who are all homosexual.


For a Number of Israelis, It's 'Next Year in Hebron'
A day after nearly half of Israel's Cabinet ministers said they wanted all Jews out of Hebron, an Orthodox Jewish couple came to town to apartment hunt today.
If the Government doesn't want them here, Hanna and Emanuel Lopez decided, that is as good an incentive as any for them to move in.
"We wanted to live in Hebron since we were teen-agers," said Mrs.
Lopez, who like her husband is 30 and lives in the West Bank settlement of Betar, 12 miles north of here, near Bethlehem. 'It Is Very Important'
"Every year we said, 'Next year,' " she said.
"Now when the Government says it is not important to live here, we want to show that it is very important."


Donovan Lands Coaching Job at Marshall
BILLY DONOVAN , an assistant coach at Kentucky since 1990, was named Marshall University's new basketball coach yesterday, making him the youngest coach in Division I of ther National Collegiate Athletic Association.
At 28, Donovan is one year and five months younger than TODD BOZEMAN of the University of California, who is 30.
He will replace DWIGHT FREEMAN , who said last month he was resigning at the end of the season.
Marshall, which is situated in Huntington, W. Va., finished with a 9-18 record this season.


Albertson's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3


PRESIDENT ADMITS HE KNEW OF INQUIRY ON LAND DEALINGS
President Clinton today defended his wife and his White House against accusations of interfering in the Whitewater investigation, but he quickly found himself facing new questions about his knowledge of the inquiry's earliest stages.
After a stormy weekend watching from Camp David as his Administration came under attack for its handling of the Whitewater case, Mr.
Clinton held a White House news conference today on relations with the former Soviet Union.
But he clearly expected to be asked about Whitewater and was prepared to offer extended comments.


Classical Music in Review
Hesperion XX  Alice Tully Hall
The viola da gamba is rarely thought of as a solo instrument, and gambists are unlikely stars.
The film "Tous les Matins du Monde" was a split-focus reminder of the exceptions.
On screen, Gerard Depardieu brought to life the French composer and gambist Marin Marais.
And offscreen, Jordi Savall contributed soundtrack performances that put the gamba and its music on the charts.


INSIDE
Estrogen Link to Alzheimer's
In the wake of recent reports that supplements of the hormone may help prevent dementia, scientists are studying the mechanism by which it may work.
Science Times, page C3.
Peril for the Repo Man
Life has always been tense for automobile repossessors, but in Texas, because of an old law that permits the killing of night intruders, it has become fatally dangerous.
Page A16.
Giuliani's Plan to Curb Guns
Mayor Giuliani announced that the police would place new emphasis on reducing the number of illegal guns in New York City streets by investigating gunrunners with more detectives and better computers.
Page B1.


Books of The Times; A New Lost Generation Gathers Wool at the Mall
Life After God  By Douglas Coupland  Illustrated. 360 pages. Pocket Books. $17.
With his first two novels, "Generation X" and "Shampoo Planet," Douglas Coupland established himself as a kind of spokesman for the post-baby-boom generation that grew up on Watergate, disco music and recession.
As portrayed by Mr.
Coup land, Richard Linklater (the director of the cult film "Slacker") and others, it's a generation of cynics, nihilists and lost souls, a generation of mall rats, computer hackers and channel surfers, a generation, in Mr.
Linklater's words, that boasts of its "total nonbelief in everything."


Classical Music in Review
'The Barber of Seville'  Children's Performance John Jay Theater
Figaro bicycled on stage on Saturday afternoon with a banner billing his specialties: "cosmetic improvement, hair restoration, health foods." Don Basilio was a sleazy nightclub entertainer with an overly plaid jacket and a mouth that worked overtime.
And Count Almaviva, posing as Basilio's assistant, proved deft at programming a synthesizer.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  THE DEFIANCE OF JEWISH SETTLERS  The determination of some Jews who want to move to the West Bank town of Hebron is a sign of the difficulties that the Israeli Government will face if it decides to dislodge the Jewish settlers there.
A1


New Yorkers Feeling Let Down by Clinton
After 12 years of spending cuts and cold shoulders from Republicans in the White House, New York Democrats believed that Bill Clinton's victory, sped at several turning points by strong New York support, would change all that.
But now, with perhaps as many New Yorkers holding senior jobs in the White House and Federal agencies as at any time since the New Deal, New York officials complain that New York is being taken for granted.


Review/Music; In Order, Sturm und Drang
It was inevitable that an era so trusting in the powers of the mind would from time to time confront a mirror opposition.
While civilized citizens of the 18th century pursued reasonable deliberation and tried to subdue the chaos of the world, a kind of shadow government of the spirit emerged, burning with the need for irrationality, disorder, even violence.
Goethe's Faust and Werther seethed.
Haydn's middle symphonies dipped into weird key signatures and trembling passions.
Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, perhaps the unsung godfather of the Sturm und Drang movement, wrote music of sudden humors and unpredictable phrase lengths.
The melodrama, the merger of music and dramatic reading, was a natural product of this brief revolt three quarters of the way through the 1700's.
Even Mozart, in his early G-minor Symphony, had a teen-age fling at storm and stress.
The Brooklyn Philharmonic included most of these elements in its programs on Friday and Saturday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, also dredging up a C-minor Symphony by Joseph Martin Kraus.


Stop &amp; Shop Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Promotion at Times Co. Unit
Jacqueline McCord Leo, the editor in chief of Family Circle, has been named senior vice president and editorial director of The New York Times Company Women's Magazines, effective March 15.
The announcement was made yesterday by Charles H. Townsend, the group's president and chief executive.
In the newly created job, Ms.
Leo will report to Mr.
Townsend and will oversee the editorial development of the magazines in the group, which include Family Circle, McCall's, Child and Fitness.


McDowell, a Pitcher, Gets Hit That Jordan Desperately Needs
Like Michael Jordan, Jack McDowell has never batted in a regular-season major league baseball game.
But batting three spots after Jordan in the Chicago White Sox lineup today, McDowell, the Cy Young award-winning pitcher, got his first spring exhibition hit before Jordan did.
McDowell, batting because the designated hitter is not used in National League parks, slugged a run-scoring double against the left-center-field fence in the fourth inning against Scott Scudder of the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Jordan slugged nothing.


Sharper Image Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Plutonium-Test Series Wins Polk Award
A reporter for The Albuquerque Tribune has won the George Polk Award for national reporting for a series of articles about secret plutonium experiments conducted on American citizens by the Government.
The awards were announced yesterday by Long Island University, which administers the awards for excellence in journalism.


SOCCER
World Cup Report
The International Football Association Board, which is responsible for the Laws of the Game, gave its final approval on Saturday for a third substitute in the World Cup next summer.


Israeli Envoy Meets Arafat For First Time Since Killings
With passions and bloodletting still coursing through the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza, Israel sent envoys today to meet the P.L.O. leader Yasir Arafat for the first time since the Hebron massacre brought Middle East peace talks to an abrupt halt.
Israeli officials said Jacques Neriah, the political adviser to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, and a military aide, Amos Gilad, had met Mr.
Arafat in Cairo to discuss the issues blocking resumption of the talks, including a demand by the Palestine Liberation Organization for an international force to protect the 1.8 million Palestinians living under Israeli occupation.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the funeral for Aaron Halberstam, one of four Hasidic students shot on the Brooklyn Bridge last week, incorrectly paraphrased a statement from one mourner, Chani Kreisel.
She said the killing was part of a cycle of pain; she did not say it was part of a cycle of revenge.


Politicians Discovering An Issue: Immigration
In the seven months since hundreds of Federal immigration agents were deployed along the banks of the Rio Grande here, the traffic of illegal workers from Mexico has all but stopped.
But the flow of politicians to the border here has surged: From across Texas, Washington and California, Republicans and Democrats want to see, and be seen at, a get-tough effort to control immigration.


A Civics Lesson for the Mayor
In an attempt to force budget cuts on New York City's Board of Education, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani recently froze $68 million in board funds.
It was an ill-considered power grab that backfired.
If Mr.
Giuliani wants more control over the board, he needs to go to Albany and lobby for it.
The board is a quasi-independent agency whose $7.5 billion budget comes from city, state and Federal funds.
To help close a projected $2.3 billion budget gap next year, Mr.
Giuliani has demanded that the board produce $332 million in cuts, mostly from slashing administrative jobs.
While Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines has tried to identify all excess administrators, he has sharply contested the level of cuts demanded by City Hall.


In Killing of Repo Man, Law Shields the Killer
Jim Douglass has been screamed at, spat on, punched, kicked, even stabbed in the shoulder.
These things happen to a repo man.
But nothing, Mr.
Douglass says, justifies what happened to his friend and colleague, Tommy Deen Morris.
He was shot to death.
The 54-year-old Mr.
Morris, a licensed automobile repossessor, was shot through the neck and both lungs at 3:30 A.M. on Feb. 25, as he was hooking his tow truck to a Ford truck in an unincorporated section of Harris County here.
The man who killed him with a .30-30 telescopic rifle, Jerry Casey Jr., was behind on his payments.


On My Mind; The New Palestine
In an apartment here earlier this winter, two men sat watching their children light Hanukkah candles.
Then they talked of another winter night when they themselves had lighted Hanukkah candles.
They remembered how hard it had been to keep the flame burning in Chistopol prison, in one of the cold cells set aside for men like them who had challenged the Soviet Union with their minds.
The candles were small pieces of wax paper that they had squirreled away for months.
The hope of the two cellmates was that the paper would burn long enough for them to say their prayers.
Some scraps did.


Champion and Defender Of Orphaned Animals
MIMI STONE had a customer, sort of.
The woman who walked into the Elmsford Animal Shelter with her two daughters looked braced for root canal.
"She'd like a dog -- a little dog," the mother said, putting her hands on the shoulder of the younger girl, about 11.


PennCorp Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS NEWS
AMERICAN CONSUMER PRODUCTS INC., Solon, Ohio, a consumer hardware products company, said it had agreed to acquire Curtis Industries Inc., Eastlake, Ohio, a consumer and industrial products company, for $23.5 million in stock and debt.
RAYMOND CORP., Greene, N.Y., a maker of electric forklifts, declared a 5 percent stock dividend, which will be distributed on April 14 to shareholders of record March 31.


Birth of a TV Show: A Drama All Its Own
It was supposed to be "Grease" updated for the 1990's and packaged for television.
Every week, a bunch of high school students would grapple with -- and make wisecracks about -- issues of life and love.
Occasionally they would break into song.
The idea for this musical sitcom belonged to Marta Kauffman and David Crane, who have been writing together for 16 years.
A few months ago, they pitched it to a group of high-ranking ABC executives here.
The reaction was immediate.


Spring Cleaning of Another Sort


Observer; Eptitude Not Awesome
On health care the Republicans bring to mind an old Leo Durocher story: After watching a rookie infielder make three or four consecutive errors at third base, old pro Durocher steps onto the field, sends the rookie to the sidelines, says, "Let me show you how to play third base, kid." Next ball bounces down to Durocher, skids off his shins, caroms into the outfield.
Durocher turns to the kid and screams, "You've got third base so screwed up nobody can play it!"
On health care the Republicans will apparently have to be satisfied with yelling a similar curse at Bill Clinton, a Democratic President who could have been designed at Republican headquarters, such is his genius for making a mess of the governing game.


Laurentian Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Paul K. Feyerabend, 70, Anti-Science Philosopher
Prof.
Paul Karl Feyerabend, a gadfly philosopher of science who asserted that scientists have no particular claims on truth, died on Feb. 11 in Geneva.
He was 70.
He died of a brain tumor, said officials at the University of California at Berkeley, where he taught from 1959 until he reached emeritus status in 1990.
He held a concurrent appointment at the Polytechnic Institute of Zurich.


Chiron Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Suspect and the I.N.S.
Rashid Baz, the man accused of killing a Hasidic student and wounding three others on the Brooklyn Bridge last week, lost his legal immigration status a year ago, Federal immigration officials said yesterday.
Article, page B2.


One More With Feeling: Temple-UMass Round 3
Near the end of a season that not long ago was both painful and embarrassing, John Chaney's 500th victory was a masterpiece.
With a stunning defensive effort, his Temple Owls held George Washington to 10 second-half points tonight on the way to a 54-34 victory that propelled the Owls into the Atlantic 10 conference championship game for the sixth time in 10 years.
But before the capacity crowd in the Palestra began to head out before the end of what had once been a taut semifinal, the chant resounded through the old building, especially in the corner where the Temple Owl had reestablished his perch.


New Jersey's Tax Cut Becomes Law


Mogadishu Journal; To Find a Happy Ending, Somalis Take In a Movie
The metal chairs are rusted and broken, the walls are riddled with bullets and part of the screen had to be patched after a recent mortar hit, yet the Cinema Equatore, Mogadishu's biggest movie theater, still attracts a couple of hundred spectators every night.
The towering whitewashed cement screen juts up beyond the theater's two-story pale yellow walls.
The soundtrack blares into the eerily empty streets outlined in silver moonlight, the noise competing with the nearby mosque's call to prayer.
In a city whose survival depends on the politics of faction leaders and armed gunmen, the theater's owner, Ali Hassan Mohammed, 48, is known and liked by just about everyone.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A TV commercial for a new airline service steps into the murky matter of code sharing.
INSOMNIACS in search of help could do worse than watch the latest television commercials from Northwest Airlines by Fallon McElligott.
To the tune of "Mr. Sandman," the soothing, blanket-warm voice of James Earl Jones describes how a new service from Northwest and its partner, KLM, allows overnight business travelers to eat quickly, then bed down in recliner seats and "go . . . to . . . sleep." Zzzzzz.
But this soporific advertising campaign also happens to be quite a sleeper, belying a controversy surrounding a popular idea among airlines to form marketing alliances to broaden their route networks.
Such alliances are also common among companies in other industries, like the automobile business.


Auto Aristocrat Trims Down
For 90 years, Rolls-Royce Motor Cars Ltd. has been all about doing things the old-fashioned way, costs and vulgar fads be damned.
But now revolution -- or what passes for it, in this most tradition-bound company -- has come to Rolls-Royce.


U.S. Urges the Burmese Military To Talk to Imprisoned Laureate
The United States expressed surprise today that a leader of the Burmese military junta had ruled out early talks with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the imprisoned democracy campaigner and Nobel peace laureate.
The United States urged the military dictatorship to open "a genuine dialogue" with Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi as soon as possible, said a State Department spokesman, David Johnson.


Strangers, Not Their Computers, Build a Network in Time of Grief
It was all too familiar a New York story.
A gunman, after robbing a topless club in Times Square, turned and fired at his pursuers.
A stray bullet instantly killed a bystander in a nearby store.
The victim, David Alsberg, was a 42-year-old computer programmer.
He left behind a wife, a young son, and hundreds of grieving friends in both of the neighborhoods in which he lived: one in Astoria, Queens, and the other in the electronic community called cyberspace.


Second Tribe Recognized As a Nation
The Department of the Interior said today that the Mohegans of eastern Connecticut have qualified to become the 545th Indian tribe recognized by the Federal Government, opening the way for Federal aid for the 900-member tribe, settlement of its 18-year-old land-claim suit against the state, and possibly a second Indian casino in Connecticut.
"The Federal Government has recognized us as a nation, and from now on they deal with us as a nation, instead of just a tribe or individuals," the Mohegans' tribal chairman, Ralph Sturges, said from their offices in Montville, a town on the Thames River where the tribe had a reservation until 1861.


Abbott Shows Braves Little in Way of Charity
There was no visible sign of George Steinbrenner, and the talk about doing or not doing charity events was tabled.
Jim Abbott found peace and success for about an hour today on the pitcher's mound.
His path to a fresh beginning was smooth.
On the field, at least.
For one day, at least.
With sunshine splashed across the diamond at Municipal Stadium and fans applauding the visiting pitcher virtually every time he blinked, Abbott provided a nifty performance in his first appearance of the spring.
Using three different pitches effectively, he buzzed past Atlanta batters, inducing nine groundouts and stifling the Braves on one hit over three innings.
It was a new start for Abbott, who is certain to be studied like an amazing new specimen under a microscope this summer.


U.S. MOVES TO EASE BEIJING SANCTIONS
In a gesture of good will toward Beijing, the Clinton Administration has begun to pave the way for the Hughes Aircraft Company to launch a commercial satellite from China.
If the Administration gives its approval within the next few weeks, as expected, it will represent the second time this year that the United States has eased punitive economic sanctions against China.


Sports of The Times; Kerrigan Is No Bambi
TO some, Nancy Kerrigan is a rat because she was supposed to have scorned a mouse.
Saying anything negative about Mickey Mouse in America is tantamount to being insulting about the flag, or the national anthem, or a Big Mac.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about the yeshiva in Crown Heights attended by the students who were shot on the Brooklyn Bridge referred incorrectly in some editions to a book called the Baba Kama.
It is a tract of the Gemara, which is part of the Talmud, not a treatise on the Gemara.


Management Shifting Again At Harvard Business Review
The Harvard Business Review is going through its third management shakeup in 18 months.
Last week, The Review quietly informed its staff that it was bringing back Nan Stone, an editor at large who has spent a year away on other projects, to run the bimonthly management magazine on a day-to-day basis.
Her new title, effective immediately, will be editorial director.


By Design; From the Far East
The newest jackets and shirts for spring (it will get here eventually, honest) are inspired by traditional costumes of the Far East.
With stand-up collars and long slender shapes, the jackets somehow have a more feminine appeal than blazers.
The shirts, long enough to wear as tunics, are an elegant twist on the classic white shirt.
Best of all, there are variations in a wide range of prices.
Ralph Lauren's spring collection, inspired by Indochina, includes mandarin-collar jackets ($870) and vests ($295) in black wool crepe.
They're at Bergdorf Goodman, which also has mandarin-collar shirt tunics in ivory or pink cotton with frog closures by Voyage ($200).


Ray Arcel, Trainer Who Handled Many Boxing Stars, Is Dead at 94
Ray Arcel, a boxing trainer who handled numerous champions in a career that dated back to the 1920's, died yesterday.
He was 93.
His wife, Stephanie, said she brought him to Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan during the morning when he complained of feeling ill.
Arcel, who lived in Manhattan, died several hours later.


A School Cancels 'Peter Pan,' Calling It Offensive to Indians
Peter Pan, the fairy tale character who flies through the sky and battles with pirates, has been grounded by a new foe: the 1990's debate over multiculturalism.
A middle school in Southampton last month canceled its production of "Peter Pan," scheduled to open last weekend, because administrators found that its portrayal of Indians was offensive to members of the Shinnecock tribe, whose reservation is on the town's border and whose children make up about 9 percent of the district's student body.


NASA Budget Cuts Raise Serious Concerns Over Safety of Shuttle
DESPITE a picture-perfect blastoff of the space shuttle Columbia on Friday and recent euphoria over the successful repair of the Hubble Space Telescope, funds for upkeep of the nation's shuttle fleet have been going down steadily, touching off a debate over whether the space agency is being forced to cut corners and raise the risk that its temperamental spaceships might break down or blow up.
Private experts say a rush of belt-tightening is threatening safety.
But the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, while conceding that it is trimming fat, insists that nothing is being done that would endanger the lives of astronauts.
NASA officials say no program change will weaken the agency's commitment to put safety first at all times.


Sanderson Farms Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Varlen Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $150 million of notes due 1995 priced at 100 to yield 4.7 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The notes are nocallable.
*
Ford Motor Credit, Dearborn, Mich., a subsidiary of Ford Motor Co., is selling $100 million of floating medium-term notes due 1997 through Dean WitterReynolds.
The notes are noncallable and rated A-2 by Moody's and S.&amp; P. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Ruling on Rap Song, High Court Frees Parody From Copyright Law
The Supreme Court, carving out a safety zone for parody within the constraints of Federal copyright law, today unanimously overturned a lower court's judgment that the rap group 2 Live Crew had infringed the copyright on the rock classic "Oh, Pretty Woman" by recording its own rap version of the Roy Orbison original.
The Justices ruled that 2 Live Crew was entitled to a trial to show that its bawdy recasting of the 1964 song was a "fair use" of the original, exempt from a copyright infringement claim.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on March 2 about women's rights in Turkey referred incorrectly to Istanbul.
It is not the capital; Ankara is.


How Estrogen May Work to Protect Against Alzheimer's
IN the wake of recent and widely publicized studies hinting that estrogen replacement therapy may help prevent Alzheimer's disease, neuroscientists have expressed relief that at last the world may begin to appreciate the importance of the hormone to the health of the human brain.
They are also exploring the mechanisms through which estrogen may protect against Alzheimer's and other types of dementia.
New research suggests that estrogen operates in brain cells throughout life to assure the production of critical enzymes and to maintain the densest possible mesh of fibers connecting one nerve cell to the next, the kind of synaptic complexity that characterizes a thinking, remembering, robust brain.


Citicorp's Chairman Reaps Big Payday on Bank's Gains
Citicorp paid its chairman, John S. Reed, $6.2 million in cash and stock last year, triple his pay from 1992, as a reward for nursing the company back to health, according to the company's proxy statement, which was released yesterday.
The banking company also granted Mr.
Reed options on 450,000 shares of Citicorp stock.
The options would be worth $21 million in 10 years if the stock appreciated at a rate of 10 percent a year, according to the statement.
For 1992, Mr.
Reed received options on 250,000 shares.


In Ancient Times, Flowers and Fennel For Family Planning
BACK in the first century B.C., the Roman poet Catullus suggested to his lover Lesbia that they might exchange kisses numbering "as many as there are grains of sand on Cyrene's silphium shores."
Romantic as the reference to the ancient Greek city on the coast of North Africa was, it also apparently contained a practical note.
Silphium, now extinct, was a plant used for birth control, says Dr.
John M. Riddle, a historian at North Carolina State University, in a provocative article in the March/April issue of Archeology magazine.


Mischief in Macedonia
Even as glimmers of peace appear in Bosnia, Greece is fueling tensions in another former Yugoslav republic, Macedonia, by imposing a strangling economic blockade.
Greece's Western allies understand that Athens has had serious problems with Macedonia in the past.
But they are losing patience with Greece's bullying tactics against a much weaker neighbor already suffering ethnic tensions.
Ancient Macedonia was the homeland of Alexander the Great.
Modern Macedonia was, for most of this century, part Greek, part Yugoslav.
During the Greek civil war of the late 1940's, Yugoslavia allied itself with the losing Communist side, and at one point Marshal Tito tried to assert his authority over all of Macedonia.
Greece, not yet a NATO member and threatened by what seemed to be global Communism, was traumatized.


Jacob Fisher, 89, Dies; Was Expert on Aging
Jacob Fisher, an author and an expert on aging, died on Thursday at his home in the Collington Retirement Community in Mitchellville, Md.
He was 89.
The cause was neuro-degenerative disease, his family said.


Classical Music in Review
Moscow Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
At the first notes of the "Russlan and Ludmilla" Overture on Sunday evening, this listener ducked for cover.
In the hands of the Moscow Philharmonic under Vasily Sinaisky, Glinka's charming little entertainment emerged armed to the teeth, spitting fire with appalling precision.
This is a high-performance orchestra in the automotive sense of the word.
Its devastating string prowess, explosive brass and acidic wind virtuosity did wonders for the last two movements of Shostakovich's Sixth Symphony.
If one absolutely has to be run over, better by a BMW like this.
There is, after all, that splendid engineering to mitigate the pain.


Panel Finds Fewer Patrol Officers Than a Law Recommends
A panel set up by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the city was failing to put as many police officers on the street as envisioned in a 1991 anti-crime law that provided for a substantial increase in the size of the Police Department through special taxes.
The panel said that since the law, known as "Safe Streets, Safe City," was put in place, the number of police officers patrolling the city had increased 21 percent, from 6,640 each day in 1990 to 8,050 now.


Lingering Ailment Costs Kruk 2 Weeks
Philadelphia Phillies first baseman JOHN KRUK will miss about two weeks of spring training with an inflammation in his groin.
Kruk, who sustained the injury last July when he was hit by an errant throw to first by reliever MITCH WILLIAMS , will be examined in Philadelphia today by Dr.
GRANT MULHOLLAND , said the Phillies' team physician, PHILLIP MARONE .
"Whatever Dr. Mulholland feels should be done will be done tomorrow," Marone said.
"Either he'll go home right away or they'll do a biopsy of some sort to see what it is."


Road to Derby Gets Less Crowded but More Confused
On a fateful weekend when Dehere was forced off the road to the Kentucky Derby by a fractured leg, Tabasco Cat raced toward the head of the line of travelers when he won the San Rafael Stakes at Santa Anita.
But all the candidates on both coasts this week are approaching milestones that will establish the final rankings going into the Run for the Roses.
For the colts taking the road in the East, the major test comes in the Florida Derby on Saturday at Gulfstream Park.
For the California colts, the next turn in the road arrives eight days later in the San Felipe Stakes at Santa Anita, a race that will mark the 1994 debuts of Brocco, who won the Breeders' Cup Juvenile in November, and Valiant Nature, who outran him in the Hollywood Futurity a month later.


Hicks, Muse Buyout Firm Is Acquiring a New Identity
Hicks, Muse &amp; Company, a Dallas investment firm that specializes in leveraged buyouts, said today that it was changing its name to Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst Inc.
The change, which took effect immmediately, added the names of two partners who have been key players in the firm's fast growth -- Charles W. Tate and Jack D. Furst.


Winpak Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A chart on Thursday showing arms that the police said were found in the possession of Rashid Baz, a suspect in the Brooklyn Bridge shooting, omitted one gun and included another erroneously.
A correction in this space on Friday repeated the error.
The weapon in question, the police say, was a Colbray submachine pistol; no 9-millimeter Ruger pistol was recovered.


Crown Heights Gunfire Kills 1, Wounds 4
One man was killed and four others wounded about 10 P.M. yesterday in a shooting at a clothing store in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, the police said.
The circumstances of the shooting, at 814 Nostrand Avenue near Union Street, were not immediately known, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.


Western Co. of North America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the resignation of Bernard W. Nussbaum as White House counsel misidentified the Congressional committee on which both he and Hillary Rodham Clinton were staff lawyers.
It was the House Judiciary Committee, which was considering the impeachment of President Richard M. Nixon, not the Senate Watergate committee.


Midnight Tolls in Last Minute As Jaspers Miss N.C.A.A. Ball
Last season, Manhattan College made it to the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament for the first time in 35 years.
It looks as though the Jaspers are going to have to wait at least another season to make it back.
Darius Johnson buried a wide-open 3-pointer with 31.3 seconds left and Milton Williams, in the lineup because starting point guard Tracy Bergan had fouled out, came up with a crucial rebound, two clutch free throws and an in-bounds steal in the last eight seconds, as Loyola of Maryland captured the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference final tonight with a stunning 80-75 victory.


Patterns
An Edited Galliano Line
Fashion editors who can count great fashion moments on one hand probably use three of those fingers for John Galliano's unforgettable shows.
That is why, when Mr.
Galliano was considering not presenting a fashion show here this season because of financial difficulties, Vogue magazine stepped in, taking an unusually active role.


Sage Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Digital Will Cut 6,000 Jobs in Europe
The Digital Equipment Corporation confirmed yesterday that it planned to lay off 6,000 employees, or 20 percent of its European work force, within the next 12 to 18 months.
In an internal memorandum sent out this weekend and dated yesterday, Vincenzo Damiani, the recently appointed president of Digital Europe, told the company's European managers that estimates he had made last month on projected cutbacks were accurate.
Mr.
Damiani, who left I.B.M. to join Digital Europe on Jan. 1, was quoted in the press in February as anticipating cutting as many as 5,000 to 6,000 workers from Digital's European work force of 29,000 employees.


Foster Care for Elderly: Like a New Home
In the middle of the night, when she gets a hankering for something tasty, Mary Taub slides into her slippers, goes into the kitchen and raids the refrigerator.
If she were in a nursing home, which is where some people thought the 77-year-old woman should go last year when she became too forgetful and scared to live on her own, she would not be able to indulge in the pleasure of a bologna sandwich at midnight.


Pop and Jazz in Review
pinanes  CBGB
During the Spinanes' set on Friday night, Rebecca Gates strummed power chords to open "Suffice" with a grand crescendo.
Then she paused and, in the silence, calmly brushed her hair out of her eyes before resuming the song.
That's the kind of flexibility that comes with a band of just two members: Ms.
Gates on guitar and vocals; Scott Plouf on drums.


Excerpts From President's Remarks on the Whitewater Investigation
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's remarks about the Whitewater investigation at his news conference today, as transcribed by the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription service:
Q.
Mr.
President, there were at least three occasions where White House officials were briefed by Federal regulators about the status of the Whitewater investigation.
Were you and Mrs.
Clinton aware of those contacts, and what were you told about the content of those discussions?


Review/Theater; Two Brothers Glaring Across an Urban Gulf
K.
Todd Freeman may have the most articulate eyes of any actor on a New York stage these days.
Playing an emotionally bruised ex-convict in Charles Smith's sentimental drama "Freefall" at the Theater Row Theater, he uses them the way Billie Holiday could use her voice, to convey both a fathoms-deep sense of pain and a defiant self-reliance.
Emanating from a gaunt, attenuated face that suggests an El Greco martyr, his roving gaze glistens with ironic appraisal and then suddenly shuts down into defensive opacity.
Its pull is so propulsively magnetic that it creates the illusion that one is somehow, miraculously, watching him in cinematic close-up.


Tapes Hint at Bid to Distance Cleric From Any Terror Plots
Tapes secretly recorded by a Government informer show a studied effort by a follower of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman to insulate him from the appearance of involvement in a plot to terrorize New York City, transcripts in the court file show.
In one conversation, one of the leaders in what the Government contends was a plot to destroy New York landmarks tells the informer, "So Abdel Rahman, for example, he likes consultation in everything; however, there are things that don't need consultation."


BOWLING
It's a professional sport that has an amateur base of millions and that regularly outdraws golf on television.
So how come the Professional Bowling Association circuit isn't a big-money tour?
"It's the sponsors," Marshall Holman, No. 2 on bowling's career money list, said yesterday.
"Cadillac executives play golf with other executives. They don't go bowling with their employees."


Consolidation of Contractors Suits the Pentagon
The proposed merger of the Grumman Corporation and the Martin Marietta Corporation fits snugly in the Defense Department's post-cold-war strategy to maintain a smaller but robust base of military contractors.
The end of the cold war has left military contractors scrambling to survive on a shrinking Pentagon budget for jets, ships and tanks.
The Pentagon's purchases of new weapons and equipment have declined 64 percent since 1985, military industry analysts say.


Americans Reducing Fat in Diet
SLOWLY but surely, Americans are getting the fat out of their diets.
According to the latest national survey of what Americans eat, by 1990 fat consumption had dropped to 34 percent of daily calories from 36 percent in 1978, which in turn was down from 42 percent in the mid-1960's.
Saturated fats, the kind that are most closely linked to heart attacks, dropped to 12 percent of daily calories, from 13 percent in 1978 and from 16 percent in the 1960's.


Spy Suspect Replied Deceptively On Lie Test in 1991, F.B.I. Says
Contrary to assertions by the Central Intelligence Agency, F.B.I. officials say Aldrich H. Ames gave deceptive answers on a 1991 lie detector test in which he was asked, in effect, whether he was a spy, Government officials said today.
Rather than picking up on the deception, the F.B.I. officials say, the C.I.A.'s examiners performing the routine polygraph gave Mr.
Ames a second chance by rephrasing their questions.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Ex  The Knitting Factory
The Ex, an obscurely legendary avant-garde punk band that performed on Friday and Saturday nights, makes the overworked, crippled word "alternative" actually mean something.
For 14 years, these Dutch rockers have viewed the entire commercial music industry as an adjunct of capitalist oppression, and they have had no part of it.
Their many dozens of independently produced albums and singles, now being reissued by Cargo Records, are freighted with an amazing assortment of left-wing propaganda and poster art.
One album encourages home taping by supplying a cut-out liner note for a blank cassette, while another encloses a 140-page treatise on the Spanish Civil War.


What About the Public Toilets We Have?
To the Editor:
"City Hall: Test the Toilets" (editorial, Feb. 26) notes that the larger Decaux public toilets tested in New York City in 1992 were attended.


Hospitals Chief Orders Review of Contracts
The president of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation last night ordered a review of hundreds of consulting and technical contracts that were awarded without competitive bids, saying he was afraid the agency was not getting its money's worth.
The new president, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, said he asked for the review in response to questions raised by his staff about the way the corporation selected companies for some jobs, like billing and consulting.


An Honest Gift Ban
At the urging of Senator Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey, the Senate approved a resolution last May committing the chamber to strict new curbs, by the end of 1993, on gift-giving by lobbyists to members of Congress.
The deadline passed, but last week Mr.
Lautenberg served notice that he was ready to push the matter.
That is a promising development for Congressional ethics reform.
Mr.
Lautenberg and another strong critic of the unseemly financial ties between lobbyists and lawmakers, Senator Paul Wellstone of Minnesota, made public an amendment they will offer to bar the free meals, resort vacations and other life style enhancers that powerful interests now bestow on members, hoping to buy legislative advantage.


British Air Halts Move Into USAir
British Airways said yesterday that it would hold off investing any more money in its United States partner, USAir, until it lowers operating costs, a move that prompted the American carrier to seek more concessions from its unions.
USAir has lost $1.8 billion since 1988 and has not reported a profit since the second quarter of 1989.
Nevertheless, industry analysts said that USAir's cash and credit line of more than $800 million should carry it through two years of operations with no changes while it campaigns for help from its unions.


Review/Pop; Bryan Adams, More Mr. Nice Guy
A fan who kept yelling "Summer of '69!" started to annoy Bryan Adams during his concert on Sunday night at Madison Square Garden.
"Have you ever been to a rock concert before?" Mr.
Adams asked patiently.
"As the show progresses, the songs come that you recognize."
Mr.
Adams doesn't do anything that hasn't been done at a rock concert before.
He strums his electric guitar, strolls around the stage, embraces his band mates and jumps off a drum riser; he belts the words in an earnest rasp of a voice.
The audience, filled with teen-age girls, happily does its part by singing choruses, holding up the flames of cigarette lighters during ballads and squealing when he approaches the edge of the stage.
On Sunday, as the fan continued to shout, Mr.
Adams brought him on stage; Seth from Long Island sang a few lines of "The Best Is Yet To Come," doing his best Bryan Adams impression.


Executive Changes
MORGAN STANLEY GROUP INC., New York, named Michael Martin a managing director in the financial institutions group of its investment banking division.
NATIONAL CITY CORP., Cleveland, promoted Jeffrey D. Kelly and Robert J. Ondercik, senior vice presidents, to executive vice presidents.
J.
Armando Ramirez, a vice president, was promoted to senior vice president.


Energy Ventures (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Knicks Get Serious At Just Right Time
For the Knicks, it was a stunning comeback.
For the Detroit Pistons, it was a stunning collapse.
Trailing by 73-57 late in the third quarter at the Palace of Auburn Hills, the Knicks put together their longest run of the season, scoring the next 20 points.
Led by Charles Smith, Anthony Mason and John Starks, the Knicks regrouped for the rally that saved them from an embarrassing loss, for they were playing the lowly Pistons and had no excuse for trailing by 16 points.


Through Bosnian Smoke, Russians and Serbs Turn to the West; Give Clinton Credit
To the Editor:
As an American businessman stationed in Paris and one who has helped United States physicians and medical supplies enter Sarajevo, I believe the Clinton Administration has been 100 percent correct in keeping our soldiers out of the former Yugoslavia as long as possible.
From the humanitarian standpoint I have seen many ills and wounds to heal.
We should not confuse the complete innocence of civilian victims with the absence of innocents among all the political sides there.


Treasury Prices Climb As Cost of Oil Declines
Buoyed by a decline in oil prices and a rally in European bonds, Treasury prices rose and yields fell yesterday for only the sixth time since the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates on Feb. 4.
The price of the Treasury's 30-year bond rose 12/32 yesterday in late trading to 934/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of the prices, fell to 6.79 percent, from 6.83 percent on Friday.
Still, the yield has risen about half a percentage point since the Fed acted.


Review/Fashion; Westwood Presents a Riddle
Why does everyone have such a good time at a Vivienne Westwood show?
The models seem to enjoy themselves, looking cheerful in the most absurd creations.
They even take their clothes off when the designer asks them to.
When Ms.
Westwood comes down the runway at the end of the show wearing a perfectly sensible twin sweater set and plaid pants, the audience, which has been smiling all the way through, gives her a standing ovation.
Most of her designs are not quite wearable to begin with, and then she exaggerates the accessories so much that the clothes seem to become costumes from a cockeyed theater piece.
But some of her ideas, like the high platform shoes and tartan plaids she has been featuring for years, pass into the general language of fashion.


CHRONICLE
FRANK SINATRA, who collapsed on Sunday night while singing "My Way" during a concert in Richmond, got out of the hospital his way -- as fast as possible.
Two hours after the 78-year-old singer was taken to the emergency room at the Medical College of Virginia, he departed, waving at the hospital staff as he left for a flight home to Rancho Mirage, Calif.


Nynex Takes New Look at Investment
Frederic V. Salerno, Nynex vice chairman, said yesterday that his company might want to restructure its investment in Viacom Inc., but added that there were no discussions about such a move at this time.
Viacom is already said to be facing pressures from its potential merger partner, the Blockbuster Entertainment Company, about renegotiating its own deal in the wake of Viacom's stock decline.
Blockbuster has some leverage because its merger with Viacom has not yet been approved by the Blockbuster board or shareholders.


Genzyme Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chess
The closest of the International Chess Federation's elimination matches to select a challenger for its 1995 title contest paired Jan Timman of the Netherlands with Joel Lautier of France.
Timman won the series in Wijk-aan-Zee, the Netherlands, by 4 1/2-3 1/2, the narrowest of margins.
The comparatively inexperienced 20-year-old Frenchman fought spiritedly and stubbornly and his efforts were bolstered when Timman's technique let him down in a two-pawns-ahead ending in Game 1, which he only drew.
After Timman came through with a nice positional victory in Game 5 he clung to his one-point lead by running out the 8-game regulation string with draws.


Teamsters To Organize At United Air
The bid by the unions of United Airlines to gain majority control of the company took a new twist yesterday with an announcement by the teamsters' union that it would try to organize about 20,000 nonunion employees at United.
It was unclear yesterday what impact, if any, the teamsters could have on the outcome of a bid by the Air Line Pilots Association and the International Association of Machinists to trade $4.5 billion worth of concessions for a 53 percent stake and create the nation's largest employee-owned company.
However, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters said that if workers voted for its representation, their concessions would no longer be certain.
Possible Vote Within 60 Days
And those concessions are considered important.
If shareholders approve the deal this summer, the 28,000 nonunionized workers at United will be required to trade more than $450 million worth of concessions over about six years in exchange for a 7.7 percent stake in the UAL Corporation, the parent company of United.
In addition to the 20,000 workers to be approached by the teamsters, there are 8,000 nonunionized managers at the company.


South Africa's Game of Chicken: Who Will Yield on Election?
Listening to dissidents, both white and black, dither over whether to boycott South Africa's first free election, a visiting American judge said he was reminded of embittered husbands he had encountered in divorce cases.
"Give her the house?" the husband declares, as the couple divides up its life.
"I'd sooner burn it down!"


Writing On a Pad: Period of Adjustment
THE Apple Newton Messagepad was almost universally criticized after its introduction for its flawed recognition of handwriting.
Even "Doonesbury" got into the act.
No one spends close to $1,000, with a few accessories, for a device that is supposed to fit in his pocket and free him from a keyboard and then enjoys watching it interpret the hand-printed "flawed" as "trained," "Doonesbury" as "Bookshop," or even "Apple" as "Eddie," as the Newton here just did.


Bringing Another Presidency and Inquiry to Mind
His own travails in the Whitewater affair have nothing in common with the Watergate scandal that drove Richard M. Nixon from office 20 years ago, President Clinton insisted today at a news conference in which he fought his political corner as tenaciously as Mr.
Nixon ever did.
"We're not covering anything up," he said. "We are opening up."


Sheldon I. Diesenhouse; Lawyer, 51
Sheldon I. Diesenhouse, a lawyer who practiced in Middletown, N.Y., for 21 years, died yesterday in Horton Memorial Hospital there.
He was 51 and a resident of Middletown.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Martin Marietta agreed to acquire Grumman, the Long Island-based military contractor, for $55 a share, or $1.9 billion.  [ Page A1. ]  Grumman has been synonymous with jobs and economic security on Long Island for more than five decades, so the announcement of its acquisition shocked many residents.  [ D6. ]  The proposed merger fits snugly in the Defense Department's post-cold-war strategy to maintain a smaller but robust base of military contractors.  [ D7. ]


Q&amp;A
Rescuing Birds
Q.  How can you save a bird flapping about on your lawn?


Long Islanders Shocked by Grumman's Merger
The name Grumman has been synonymous with jobs and economic security on Long Island for more than five decades, so today's announcement that Grumman was being acquired by Martin Marietta, and that still more layoffs might result, shocked many here.
"I'm sorry to see it go," said Lynn V. McDonald, a 69-year-old engineer who spent 30 years at the Grumman Corporation and worked on almost every plane the company produced, as well as the Lunar Module that landed on the Moon.


Mexican Uprising Gives No Lift to Left's Champion
The sign on a wall announced "Democratic Insurrection!" and as its partisans marched in circles around this city's central square there was no mistaking the brighter mood on the Mexican left since peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas rose up against the Government on Jan. 1.
"People were really discouraged before," Amalia Garcia, a city assemblywoman who is a leader of the leftist Democratic Revolutionary Party, said cheerily.
"Now, they feel like the Government is up against the wall."


Morris's Thumb Fractured
Chris Morris broke his right thumb in three places during Sunday's victory over the Philadelphia 76ers, the Nets said yesterday.
But although Morris will miss tomorrow night's game against the Pistons in Detroit, club officials said they did not know just how long the forward would be out.
The injury to the thumb on his shooting hand drove Morris from Sunday's game during the third quarter, but it was not until X-rays were taken yesterday that it was diagnosed as a multiple fracture.
Team spokesmen said Morris had seen several doctors during the day, but would not identify them and could not explain why there was no immediate prognosis.


MARTIN MARIETTA IS BUYING GRUMMAN IN $1.9 BILLION DEAL
The Martin Marietta Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Grumman Corporation, a longtime Long Island military contractor, for $55 a share, or a total of $1.9 billion.
It was the latest step in a steady march of consolidation in the nation's weapons industry, a move that executives said was certain to mean further job cuts in the New York area.
Grumman is the largest corporate employer on Long Island, with about 8,900 workers at its Bethpage headquarters and in nearby plants.
It had faced a future with few promising military projects, because many of its aircraft and weapons programs are being phased out by the Pentagon.
Fewer and Fewer Jobs
In the last five years, Grumman has reduced its work force by 64 percent on Long Island alone, has pared its production and has tried to build up a business away from the Pentagon.
But its results have been erratic.
Sales have fallen 23 percent since 1990 and profits last year were $65 million from continuing operations, a 45 percent decline from the previous year.


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  Alice Tully Hall
Bright Sheng's melding of Chinese and Western materials has yielded some evocative pieces in recent years, the most powerful of them being "H'un," a heart-rending memoir of the Cultural Revolution.
But not all of Mr.
Sheng's musical allusions to his homeland are so tormented.
His new Concertino for Clarinet and String Quartet, played by David Shifrin and the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center on Sunday afternoon and to be repeated tonight, has a glittery, outgoing sound.


No Headline
"I do not believe for a moment that she has done anything wrong. If everybody in this country had a character half as strong as hers, we wouldn't have half the problems we've got." -- PRESIDENT CLINTON, defending his wife.  [ A1:6. ]


Barry Dismissed as Coach by C.B.A. Team
RICK BARRY , the basketball Hall of Famer who took a coaching job in the Continental Basketball Association, has been fired by the Fort Wayne (Ind.) Fury following a 12-game losing streak.
He was replaced on an interim basis by CLIFFORD RAY , who played with Barry on Golden State when it won the N.B.A. title in 1975.
Barry's dismissal came Friday after the 12-game losing streak dropped Fort Wayne's record to 14-30.
Ray lost his first game as Fury coach on Sunday, 92-91, to Wichita Falls. (AP)


Bronx Officials Disavow Appointee
A delegation of City Council members from the Bronx yesterday criticized comments by the Rev.
Ruben Diaz critical of homosexuals and said they did not intend to reappoint him to the Civilian Complaint Review Board when his term expires next year.
Mr.
Diaz has been the subject of intense criticism by a number of elected officials for his comments on the Gay Games, to be held in New York in June, including his view that the games would lead to an increase in AIDS cases.


Classical Music in Review
Metropolitan Opera Orchestra  James Levine, Conductor Carnegie Hall
William Bolcom's Fantasia Concertante for Viola, Cello and Orchestra brought a less exploited tendency among American composers to Sunday afternoon's concert by the Met Orchestra under James Levine.
No wide-open spaces here, no jazz or pop or comic-book high jinks.
This was sheer nostalgia for the old country, a clever scrambling of 18th- and 19th-century Europe in which Saint-Saens had a way of dropping suddenly into Mozartean cadences and vice versa.
Unfailingly pleasant and well performed by two Metropolitan Opera principal players, Michael Ouzounian and Jerry Grossman, the Fantasia is unashamedly and cheerfully designed to please.
Salzburg and the Vienna Philharmonic commissioned the music in 1985, and it manages to serve conservatism without losing its sense of humor.


Giuliani Offers Plan To Curb Guns
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that the police would place new emphasis on reducing the number of illegal guns in New York City streets by investigating gunrunners with more detectives and better computers.
At the core of Mr.
Giuliani's strategy, detectives have been ordered to apply the same kind of effort to investigating illegal guns as they do to organized crime and narcotics.
For the first time, the police will question every person arrested with a gun to find out where the gun was obtained and from whom.
That information will be transferred to Federal authorities to arrest traffickers who run guns from the plains of Georgia and Texas to the youth gangs of the South Bronx.


At Robot Olympics, the Battle of the Nanomice
Staggering, shuddering, palpably straining, more than 100 robots from around the United States and Canada did battle over the weekend here in a robot Olympics that demonstrated its human participants' enthusiasm, ingenuity and persistence rather than any scientific breakthrough.
Racing or battering each other, feeling their way through mazes or throwing themselves into the air in the high jump, the robots demonstrated versatility, hardiness, agility and sometimes a stubbornness or reluctance to perform that would have done a prima donna proud.


Shooting Suspect Slipped I.N.S. Procedural Net
Rashid Baz, the man accused of killing a Hasidic student and wounding three others on the Brooklyn Bridge last week, lost his legal immigration status a year ago, Federal immigration officials said yesterday, but the immigration service apparently took no action against him.
His legal status was terminated when he failed to file an application to show that his marriage to a United States citizen was not a sham to evade immigration laws.


Critic's Notebook; Bernstein's Mahler: A Tangle Of Conflicted Jewishness
"This is not Mahler," Leonard Bernstein once told the Vienna Philharmonic in rehearsal when a phrase from the Ninth Symphony failed to take flight.
Only Bernstein could have said such a thing to the orchestra that Mahler himself conducted for a decade.
But he was within his rights; the Vienna had played the symphonies infrequently since the 1930's and did not know them well.
While Bernstein did not "rediscover" Mahler by any stretch of the imagination -- to say so would defame the memory of conductors like Walter, Klemperer, Barbirolli and Horenstein -- he almost single-handedly brought the composer to the center of the international repertory.
In the absence of important new compositions or of any educational projects on the order of the "Omnibus" programs and "Young People's Concerts," Bernstein's deepening relationship with the music of Gustav Mahler was the great story of his final years.
His second recorded cycle of the symphonies, on Deutsche Grammophon, may have been his finest achievement as a conductor.
"The Little Drummer Boy," a 1984 Bernstein monologue filmed by Humphrey Burton for the BBC and shown at the Metropolitan Museum's "Leonard Bernstein Day" on Saturday, intriguingly hints at the tangled roots of his later Mahler interpretations.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL Xavier Is Eliminated in a Big Upset Herman Jenkins hit an 18-foot jumper from the wing with 59 seconds to play, giving Detroit Mercy (15-13) the lead for good as the Titans knocked off top-seeded Xavier, Ohio, 79-75, last night in the semifinals of the Midwestern Collegiate Conference tournament.
The loss marked only the second time that Xavier will not appear in the M.C.C. championship game in Coach Pete Gillen's nine years. (AP)


Pool Energy Services Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ukraine Won't Barter Fleet To Pay Fuel Debt to Russia
Ukraine has ruled out handing over its share of the Black Sea Fleet to Russia as part payment of a mounting debt for oil and gas, the commander of the Ukrainian Navy said in an interview last week.
Six months ago, the barter looked like a promising resolution to two of the most irksome issues between Russia and Ukraine.
It emerged after September talks between President Boris N. Yeltsin and President Leonid M. Kravchuk in Massandra on the Black Sea.


Wiley (John) &amp; Sons reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Falcons' Miller Reportedly Jumps to Rams
Quarterback CHRIS MILLER , an unrestricted free agent, agreed to a three-year contract with the Los Angeles Rams yesterday, ending his seven-year stint with the Atlanta Falcons, The Atlanta Journal reported.
The newspaper said the Rams' vice president, JAY ZYGMUNT , and Miller's agent, FRANK BAUER , concluded all-night negotiations by reaching agreement on a deal that will pay Miller $9 million.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.25
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.52
3.51
2.98
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.75
3.72
3.09
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.31
6.36
5.84
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.79
6.83
6.72
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.61
7.67
7.66
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.96
5.99
5.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Classical Music in Review
Trio Fontenay Weill Recital Hall


Corrections
Maps on Friday and in some editions on Thursday with articles about an aborted takeoff at La Guardia Airport misstated the location where the plane came to rest.
It was the southeastern end of the runway, not the northwestern end.


Georgian Asks U.S. to Back Peace Force
President Eduard A. Shevardnadze of Georgia met President Clinton today and made one of those requests that Washington hates to hear: he asked the United States to contribute to a peacekeeping force to help stop Georgia's civil war.
Mr.
Clinton's response was that he would support an international peacekeeping force but only under strict conditions, one being that the United States not be asked to contribute troops.


1 Is the Fastball, 2 Is the Curve, 3 Is a Nice Bow
Chan Ho Park realizes that the umpire probably thought he was crazy.
It isn't often, after all, that hitters turn their backs to the plate and bow to the man who calls strikes and balls.
But Park is getting used to the strange looks, and the confusion and the good-natured laughter that seem to follow him around.
Park, a native of South Korea, is a 20-year-old right-hander with a fastball that clocks in the mid-90's and an above-average breaking ball.
He speaks little to no English -- his favorite saying is "Hey Dude" -- and his knowledge of American baseball customs is limited to the high-five taught him by a fellow rookie, Darren Dreifort.


Mitchell's Surprise Transforms Politics in Maine
So many candidates, so little time.
Senator George J. Mitchell's surprise decision not to seek re-election has produced an outbreak of campaign fever here among all sorts of politicians, from erstwhile governors to legislative batboys.


Arab vs. Arab; Other Conflict in Territories Divides Secular and Fundamentalist Muslims
The clashes between Palestinians and Israeli soldiers in the occupied territories mask a deadlier struggle between rival Arab factions bent on taking power once the Israelis withdraw.
This struggle, which many now expect to be a violent one, already mirrors the conflict between militant Islamic groups and the secular dictatorships in much of the Arab world.
Its outcome could see Yasir Arafat's quest for Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank town of Jericho and the Gaza strip descend into bedlam.


The Early Scout May Catch Saberhagen
Bret Saberhagen didn't draw the fans, not at 10 o'clock in the morning, not with two "B" squads on the baseball field.
But the scouts were there, more than a dozen strong, seated in the stands behind the plate.
The Mets' biggest trade bait -- and perhaps their biggest question mark -- went on display at Thomas J. White Stadium this morning when Saberhagen pitched three innings in a "B" squad game against the Los Angeles Dodgers.


Fearing Tax Rise Will Cost Jobs, Tobacco Workers Plan a Protest
The colossal Philip Morris U.S.A. plant here, which turns out half a billion cigarettes a day, will go silent on Wednesday as the employees get the day off and a free ride to Washington for a march against a proposed increase in Federal tobacco taxes.
Organizers of the demonstration, billed as a "Save Our Jobs" rally, predicted that 17,000 cigarette workers and tobacco growers would gather at the White House, then march to the Capitol and distribute petitions opposing the tax increase.


To Buy or to Upgrade? Or Perhaps Just to Wait?
ON one of those 100-degree weekends last summer, Pierre Belarge and Eric Messer were helping to build an elementary school playground when the conversation turned to computers.
The two contractors found they shared a problem: their businesses had outgrown the computers, powered by 386 microprocessors, they had bought several years ago.
Millions of computer owners own similar machines, and they face some confusing choices if they want more power.
Should they keep the machine, swapping some new components for old or adding additional equipment?
Are they better off selling the old one and buying a new one?
Or should they procrastinate, knowing that before too long they will have a choice between a new technology with more power and what are today's hot machines at lower prices?


Nussbaum Cast as All-Star, in Another League
Even as Washington writes off Bernard W. Nussbaum, who was forced to resign on Saturday as the White House counsel, his once and future colleagues in the upper echelons of the New York bar, where he has 27 years' experience as a top corporate litigator, are rallying around him.
Indeed, most say the sin that cost him his post is actually a point in his favor: his inability to adapt to what they regard as the back-stabbing ways of the nation's capital.
Promised anonymity, some of Mr.
Nussbaum's many friends nonetheless concede that he brought certain liabilities to the White House job.
In corporate litigation, they note, hand-holding with individual clients looms less large, disputes remain more private and the game, though still played with a hard ball, is largely about the law and is almost devoid of the kind of politics that permeates Washington.


Push for Environment Institute
IN the belief that environmental policy is often made in scientific ignorance, a broadly based group of scientists, businessmen, environmentalists and politicians has been promoting the establishment of a new Federal institute to guide and finance long-term research on the environment.
After five years of effort, the institute's backers have secured substantial bipartisan support in Congress.
And with the appointment today of a leader with international stature on environmental issues to head the campaign, the backers have high hopes that environmental science will soon no longer be, as they see it, the poor stepchild of the Federal research establishment.


Dow Rallies by 23.92 Points, to 3,856.22
In a week with few significant economic statistics to jangle their nerves, the financial markets will likely play the game of "When Will (Not if) the Fed Raise Interest Rates Again?" So the stock market rallied yesterday in moderate trading, when the Federal Reserve Board did nothing and long-term rates on bonds declined.
Stocks like Caterpillar, Allied Signal and Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing benefited, as well as defense stocks like Northrop and United Technologies, after the announcement of Martin Marietta's plans to acquire Grumman.


Edward Goodell, 91, A Lawyer and Judge
Edward Goodell, a New York lawyer and former Civil Court judge, died on Sunday at Montefiore Hospital.
He was 91 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Bridge
Expert reasoning can be easy to understand.
A good example is the diagramed deal, one of 56 from a new book by Jeff Rubens, "Swiss Match Challenge." It is available for $13.75 including mailing from the Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y., 10025.
South bid quickly to four hearts after West had opened one spade and East had passed.
West led the ace and another heart, and South could count five trump tricks, a ruff in the dummy, and three top winners in the minor suits.
To make a tenth he needed to score a trick with the spade king or the club jack.
Unfortunately it was highly probable that West held both the spade ace and the club queen.


Cuomo Holds Narrower Lead Over Likely Rivals, Poll Shows
Suggesting that New York State voters are deeply confused about who they want as their governor, an independent statewide poll released today showed that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's lead over several potential Republican challengers has slipped but remains comfortably in the double digits.
Providing a trove of seemingly contradictory information, the poll by the Marist Institute for Public Opinion in Poughkeepsie showed that while 60 percent of voters think Mr.
Cuomo has generally been a good governor since he took office in 1983, 61 percent also think the state is heading in the wrong direction.


U.N. Aide and Sudan Clash on Islamic Laws
A dispute has broken out at the main human rights enforcement agency after the Sudan accused a United Nations monitor of blasphemy.
The monitor had reported that punishments under the Sudan's Islamic laws violated its agreement to observe human rights treaties.
The dispute has divided Islamic countries at a meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission by publicly highlighting the apparent incompatibility between Islamic law and agreements like the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which most Muslim countries have signed.


Big East Tourney to UConn Women
Fate seemed to have ordained that Connecticut and Seton Hall would meet in the final of the Big East women's basketball tournament tonight.
After all, Connecticut, ranked third in the nation, had won 17 straight games after being upset by Seton Hall, 74-53, on Jan. 5.
And the 14th-ranked Pirates had run off eight straight victories after losing to UConn here on Feb. 6 to wind up a game behind the Huskies, who won the regular-season Big East championship.
But in tonight's rubber match between the two top-seeded teams, Connecticut clearly demonstrated its supremacy with a 77-51 victory before a record Big East women's crowd of 5,144 at Gampel Pavilion.
Next stop for the Huskies is the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, where, given their 27-2 record and 18 consecutive triumphs, they could reach the Final Four, as they did in 1991.


CHRONICLE
ALEX KATZ wanted to show his gratitude to his alma mater, Cooper Union, so he invited JOHN JAY ISELIN, the college's president, and three other administrators to choose 10 of his paintings from the Marlborough Gallery's warehouse.
They could pick any 10 paintings, with no restrictions.
But Mr.
Katz didn't want Cooper Union to keep the paintings.
He asked that the school sell them, and use the proceeds to establish a nontenured professorship in painting.


A Harlem Hospital Begins an Inoculation Program


Great American Communications Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Devtek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Richer Predicts Tying Goal, Then Delivers
Stephane Richer, the flamboyant wing of the Devils, predicted he would score a goal, and sure enough, he did.
And he was so elated he blew kisses to the crowd after his dazzling move gave New Jersey a 2-2 tie with the Quebec Nordiques tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena before 16,620 fans.
Taking the puck in the neutral zone during a four-on-four situation, Richer beat every Quebec skater with dazzling moves down the right side before finishing his foray with a backhand shot that beat goaltender Stephane Fiset.


Why Chancellors Need Corporate Ties
To the Editor:
I read with great interest your Feb. 22 and 24 articles about Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds of CUNY and her corporate board involvement.


A Fading Political Powerhouse; New York Democrats Complain to Washington of Needs Ignored and Favors Forgotten
For 12 long years, as the Democratic politicians who led New York endured deep Republican spending cuts and cold shoulders from Washington, their perpetual cry was that pointed Brooklynese lament: "We was robbed!" They took it for granted that Bill Clinton's victory, sped at several turning points by strong New York support, would change all that.
But now, with perhaps as many New Yorkers holding senior jobs in the White House and Federal agencies as at any time since the New Deal (when the President was a former New York Governor), New York officials complain that New York itself is what's taken for granted, and their rising cry is, "What have you done for us lately?"


When News and Entertainment Look Alike
To the Editor:
Writing about "checkbook journalism" in "We Pay for News. We Have To" (Op-Ed, Feb. 26), Bill O'Reilly explains and excuses, but ignores the distinctions between what he does for a living and what I do.


More Prominent Voices Are Heard on Health Care


Review/Dance; Originality, Vancouver-Style
Ballet British Columbia deserves to be proud of itself.
Its good-looking dancers move with boldness and clarity.
Best of all, John Alleyne, its artistic director, emphasizes the creation of new works.
These virtues were apparent on Sunday afternoon when the company from Vancouver offered the second of its two programs at Brooklyn College, as an attraction in the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts dance series.
Not all the ballets were equally effective, yet each was worth watching.


Accord Seeks to Curb Graft in Carpenters Union
Federal prosecutors say they have worked out a legal agreement that will curb organized-crime corruption in a major construction union that represents 30,000 carpenters in New York City and Long Island.
Under the settlement with the union -- the New York District Council of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners -- many of its activities will be overseen for 30 months by a court-appointed official.
Prosecutors said the settlement would also significantly change the method of electing top union officials, limit the number of posts they can hold and restrict the power officials have in assigning members to jobs.


Through Bosnian Smoke, Russians and Serbs Turn to the West
To the Editor:
The friendly reception that was given to Russian United Nations troops in the Bosnian Serb capital, Pale, expresses a triumph of the will of two peoples who were separated not so much by geography as by the prolonged inner Communist squabbling between a Georgian dictator, Stalin, and a half-Croat, half-Slovene dictator, Tito.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ELDERLY FOSTER CARE: LIKE A NEW HOME
Foster care, a system developed to find homes for abandoned and abused children, is growing in the New York region and across the nation as a way to keep elderly people in home settings and communities they know.
A1.


At Asian Feast, Risk Is Part of the Fun
ON Monday night at the Feast of Many Moons, an Asian food festival to benefit Citymeals-on-Wheels, the early bird got the fugu.
The fugu, a rarely served Japanese fish that can be fatal when eaten unless it is cleaned and prepared properly, was the star of the party.
Everyone wanted to eat it and play culinary Russian roulette.


Monmouth Names Aide
Eight months after becoming the first woman to serve as president of Monmouth College, REBECCA STAFFORD has named the first woman to serve as the 60-year-old college's athletic director.
She is MARILYN McNEIL, a former Canadian coach of the year who has been associate athletic director at Cal Poly since 1987.
She succeeds WAYNE SZOKE, the men's basketball coach, who relinquished his duties as athletic director so he could devote full time to his coaching duties.


In School
Maurice Romulus is an escapee from the 19th century.
He is legally blind and was reared by nuns in a school for the handicapped in Haiti.
There he learned to play classical trumpet, which was good for the school when the nuns did fund-raising concerts on cruise ships or in the United States.
But the school taught few of the skills needed for independent living -- class work stopped in ninth grade.
And so, in 1978, at the age of 22, during a concert tour, this blind man, with help from a friend at Miami Airport, escaped to the 20th century.
Mr.
Romulus can see just enough and is so bright, hard-working and friendly, he is usually able to fool people for a while. (He stopped using a cane years ago; if he's wearing magnifying eyeglasses, holds a paper to his nose and the light is good, he can make out letters.) His first job in New York was at a tobacco shop where he worked for two months until he was promoted to messenger and had to quit.
"I couldn't see the addresses," he said.


Murder of 6-Year-Old Girl Stuns a Close Neighborhood
Over the years, the handful of couples living near the intersection of Alexandria Drive and Cherry Hill Lane in this sprawling suburb in the flatlands of central New Jersey had developed a tight friendship.
Most were young families with young children, new settlers in a new housing complex of pleasant split-level houses that sprang up in the open fields here in the 1980's.
The children romped through each other's backyards and homes and the parents enjoyed dinners, holiday parties and summer barbecues together.
Some even vacationed together.
Two of the couples, Ronald and Karen Wengert and Hector and Carmella Aquino, lived three doors apart and were integral parts of what outsiders might consider a model suburban neighborhood.
But over the weekend, the neighborhood's special bond was shattered during an anniversary party the Wengerts and five other couples attended for the Aquinos just down Alexandria Lane from their home.
Girl Reported Missing
Law-enforcement officials say that sometime between 11 P.M.
Saturday and 2 A.M.
Sunday, the Aquinos' 19-year-old son, Kevin, broke into the Wengerts' home on Cherry Hill Lane.
He then abducted their 6-year-old daughter, Amanda, murdered her by fracturing her skull and left her body behind a fence in his backyard, the Monmouth County Prosecutor, John Kaye, has charged.


Israel Ends Curfew in Jericho But Hope Remains Confined
The curfew imposed here after the Hebron massacre was lifted today and Jericho, the would-be capital of an embryo Palestine, returned to normal.
That is to say: American tourists fresh from baptism in the Jordan River frolicked on camels under the gaze of Israeli soldiers; Ihab Atayi, a Palestinian, wondered if peace would ever come and inject some energy into his new business in satellite dishes; and Badr Bassan, a 26-year-old carpentry teacher, predicted that, even if peace came, it would not be worth having.


'Show Boat' to Move Without Robert Morse
Robert Morse, the Tony-winning actor and comedian who has been starring as Cap'n Andy in the Toronto production of "Show Boat," will not move to New York with the show in the fall.
In a statement yesterday, Mr.
Morse said he needed a break from performing and that he had reached an agreement with the show's producer, Garth Drabinsky, that would give him one.


Prices for Recycled Materials Have Become Low and Attractive
To the Editor:
In response to Mark Shantzis of Hi-Rise Recycling Systems in "Recycling Creates More Problems Than It Was Meant to Solve" (letter, March 2), I would like to clarify a few points about the markets for recyclable materials and the economics of recycling in the United States.


Indictment in Brooklyn Bridge Shooting


Wiser Heads Are Sometimes Drier Ones, Too


Court Overturns Georgia Accord On New Judges
A Federal judge in Savannah has refused to approve a consent decree that would have radically changed the way judges are chosen in Georgia to increase the number of blacks on the bench.
The ruling is the most recent example of a gulf between what Justice Department lawyers specializing in voting rights believe states must do to comply with the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and what several Federal courts say the states must do.


Berkshire Hathaway Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Thoughts Deep in the Heart of Texas
Perhaps Will Clark can replace Rafael Palmeiro, the hitter, in the Texas lineup, but the man Clark replaces firmly believes that the Rangers will miss Rafael Palmeiro, the diplomat.
Still stung by the Rangers' failure to sign him as a free agent last December, Palmeiro spoke of his role as a liaison between various groups of players in the Rangers' clubhouse, especially Americans and Latin Americans.


Book Notes
A Novel Ignored
Patiently and painstakingly, Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, N.C., has been praising, pushing and selling Louis Nordan's novel "Wolf Whistle" since it was published early last fall.
The book has been admired in the press.
It has been featured on National Public Radio, included by USA Today in an article called "Hidden Gems: Looking Back at Neglected Fiction" and even designated as 1 of the 11 best fiction books of the year by the American Library Association.
In The Nation, Randall Kenan called "Wolf Whistle" an "outrageous, audacious book that should be applauded not only as a brave social act but as an extraordinary esthetic achievement."
So why has a book that reviewers have generally loved been generally overlooked by most readers?


O. Scott Petty, Early Oil Explorer And Geophysicist, Is Dead at 98
O.
Scott Petty, a geophysicist and inventor since the early years of oil exploration, died last Wednesday at his home in San Antonio.
He was 98.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.





Scores Killed in South African Train Derailment


Review/Television; Manson Murders Revisited
ABC News gets this week's award for the story you really didn't know you needed to hear more about.
"The Manson Women: Inside the Murders" delivers the accounts of Leslie Van Houten and Patricia Krenwinkel of how they and other members of their love-in went about killing seven people in California 25 years ago. (No re-enactments; just the camera moving threateningly to spooky sounds.)
Charles Manson himself, hairy and running to fat, with a swastika decorating the bridge of his nose, is also heard from.
He is plainly impressed with himself and has the nerve to address Diane Sawyer as "woman."


Bulls' Pippen Scores 39 In Trouncing of Hawks
Bulls 116, Hawks 95
Scottie Pippen scored a season-high 39 points last night as Chicago defeated Atlanta, 116-95, snapping the Bulls' five-game losing streak and the visiting Hawks' six-game winning streak.


Jump Ball! It's a New Kind of March
You know it is going to be a different kind of March when Jerry Falwell and Lefty Driesell are already cutting down nets.
Falwell was celebrating the Big South Conference championship of the Liberty University Flames.
Driesell, the coach of the Dukes of James Madison, earned a return ticket to the national collegiate tournament with a Colonial Athletic Association title.
Driesell is the coach who when asked 13 years ago if he had been maligned for the poor tournament record of his Maryland teams, responded, "I haven't been aligned."
It is a time of year that nudges personalities into the bright lights -- ready or not -- to make sure the automobile commercials do not crash into each other.
From the tiniest, sweaty high school gyms to the nationally-televised spectacular that the N.C.A.A.
Final Four has become, their best and worst moments become memories that can forever deify or scar adolescents and their coaches.
Seedings and Pairing on Sunday
For the very best ones, the instant memories are replayed from every angle.
The conference tournaments, continuing through this Sunday, provide a last opportunity for teams to complete their fine-tuning and National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament officials to separate the barely worthy from the not-so-lucky.
The national tournament, an event marketed for its madness but memorable for its heartfelt moments, will begin to take shape Sunday evening with the announcement of the seedings and pairings.


In Paris, Miyake turns pleats into stars: C12


Managers of Co-ops and Condos Are Accused of Payoffs Scheme
Managers of hundreds of Manhattan cooperative and condominium apartment buildings have routinely extorted payoffs from contractors for work in the buildings, a three-year investigation by the Manhattan District Attorney's office has concluded.
Investigators said the practice of extracting payoffs from the contractors, who did buildingwide work like waterproofing and painting, was commonplace, as routine as tipping the doorman at Christmas.
In fact, some managers insisted to prosecutors that they had done nothing illegal, although they acknowledged that they would not want their co-op and condo boards to know what they had done.


A DAY WITH: Marvin Zindler; The Best Little Sideshow in Texas
HOUSTON'S best-known face has been sculptured and framed by four complete lifts, two nose jobs, a cartilage chin implant, a brow lift, an eye job, collagen injections, cheek implants, full rows of capped teeth, blue tinted sunglasses and white pompadour wigs.
Fans of Marvin Zindler -- the 72-year-old star of the evening news on KTRK, Channel 13, and the man who shut down the best-known whorehouse in Texas -- expect no less.
"It's show business," Mr.
Zindler said, his voice only beginning to approach the roar that confronts his nightly viewers.
"And if this isn't show business, then I'm a fairy godmother."


CBS to Offer 'Eye on Sports'
CBS plugged a hole in its sports schedule yesterday by announcing the start of a new magazine show, "Eye on Sports," that will run for 15 consecutive Sundays from April 17 through July 24, then twice in August.
Each program, whose host will be either Greg Gumbel or Andrea Joyce, will run from 90 minutes to four hours, and will feature track and field, including the New York Games, figure skating, rhythmic gymnastics, the Tour du Pont and Paris-Roubaix cycling races, wildlife segments and women's pro beach volleyball.


Tiffany &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Willcox &amp; Gibbs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tiffany
The financial performance of Tiffany &amp; Company, the jeweler and luxury-goods retailer, has not dazzled shareholders, especially after poor sales at its Japanese stores.
But yesterday Tiffany posted fourth-quarter earnings --$1.14 a share -- that were double those of a year ago.
Though the earnings were less than analysts' estimates, the stock still rose.


Kenj Fairman, 82; Served at Princeton As Athletic Director
Roy Kenneth (Ken) Fairman, an illustrious Princeton athlete of the 1930's who then served as the university's director of athletics for 32 years, died yesterday at the Medical Center of Princeton.
He was 82 and a resident of Princeton Borough.
The cause of death was a stroke, a university spokesman said.


Bridge
The great authority on whist in the 19th century was Henry Jones, who used the aristocratic pseudonym Cavendish.
That name has been adopted by numerous bridge clubs, and although the most famous of them, in Manhattan, is sadly defunct, others flourish.
The Cavendish in Hallandale, Fla., recently organized a special Imp Pair event welcoming Alvin Roth, a lifelong New York resident now living in Boca Raton, Fla.
Roth has contributed more to the theory of bidding than anyone else, with the possible exception of Ely Culbertson.
He is now in his 80th year, but is as sharp as ever as the diagramed deal from the Imp game demonstrates.
He sat West at a table at which all the players were veteran experts whose early bridge careers were in the New York metropolitan area.
East was Bernard Chazen, and North and South were Bill Root and Bill Passell.


Gerald Elliott, 62, Lawyer, Art Critic And Art Collector
Gerald S. Elliott, a lawyer and prominent collector of contemporary art, died on Monday at his home in Chicago.
He was 62.
The cause was complications of diabetes, said Mel Fingerut, a close friend.


Runway Safety, Runaway Red Tape
The runway extensions at La Guardia Airport in New York City are too short.
Everyone knows that.
But only now, in the wake of a near disaster, have plans for an additional safety zone become urgent -- nearly 10 years and 10 miles of red tape since the start of planning to correct the problem.
Last week, at the end of another wintry day, the pilot of a Continental Airlines flight to Denver aborted his takeoff and skidded to a stop at the edge of Flushing Bay.
La Guardia's two 7,000-foot runways are short, as major airport runways go; but 7,000 feet is more than a mile and a quarter, fully adequate for authorized aircraft.


Productivity Had Big Jump In 4th Quarter
The productivity of American companies rose in last year's fourth quarter by the largest amount in more than seven years, the Labor Department reported yesterday.
But for all the talk of America's newly achieved competitiveness, the new numbers failed to show that corporate America has regained its old ability to rapidly increase its efficiency, the department said.
Productivity -- that is, the quantity of goods and services that the nation's workers produce in a given hour -- rose at an annual rate of 6.1 percent in the fourth quarter.
That rise, covering all business except farming, was the best showing since the first quarter of 1986, when productivity rose by 6.9 percent.
Most of last quarter's gain was in manufacturing, where productivity advanced by a very strong 7.2 percent.
Debate Over Data
The latest productivity figure, which is a sharp revision from the previous estimate of 4.2 percent, renewed a debate that flares up whenever the Labor Department releases productivity figures.
On one side are those who argue that American business, and particularly manufacturing, has finally returned to the high levels of productivity growth that prevailed until 1973.
As a result, they say, American companies are now as competitive as German and Japanese companies.
That view has been invoked frequently by companies to justify the layoffs of thousands of workers considered a drag on efficiency.


Kohl's Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Rocket Hits NATO Troop Transport Over Croatia
A NATO airplane flying over Croatia was hit by antiaircraft fire today and forced to make an emergency landing on the northwestern coast of Croatia.
The Croatian Government said the rockets that struck the Spanish military transport were fired by nationalist Serbian rebels in the Krajina region, the part of Croatia seized by Serbs nearly three years ago.


On the Bus From Ivanovo: How the Russians Cope
"Ton-ya! Tonya! Thank you! Thank you, Tonya!"
Nina V. Kapralova, her lined face pressed to the frosty window of the bus, waved at her relatives standing outside at the Ivanovo bus station in central Russia's bone-shrinking cold.


ISRAELI ARMY SAYS SECURITY WAS LAX AT MASSACRE SITE
Israel began its formal inquiry into the Hebron massacre today with the army commander for the West Bank testifying that a breakdown had occurred in security arrangements that could have prevented the mass killing of Palestinian worshipers by an Israeli settler.
The commander, Maj.
Gen.
Danny Yatom, also acknowledged that the army's entire focus had been on potential terrorist acts by Arabs against Jews in the occupied territories, and that the possibility of a reverse situation had never been considered.


Deb Shops (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
In the market for a Russian spouse, a load of chicken parts or a place to park rubles?
Then modem on into Russia, where tens of thousands of people have turned from unreliable communications services to a burgeoning electronic-mail network.  [ Page A1. ]


Survey Finds Decrease in Anti-Gay Violence
The number of incidents of violence against homosexuals declined last year for the first time since 1988, according to a survey released today by the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.
The number of incidents against gay men, lesbians and bisexuals declined by 14 percent, the group said, but more of the incidents involved multiple and extreme crimes like extortion, rape and murder.


How to Investigate Whitewater
A potentially destructive battle over how best to investigate the Whitewater affair has erupted between Republicans who are pressing for Congressional hearings and the independent counsel, Robert Fiske, who is pursuing a criminal investigation.
Mr.
Fiske fears that a rogue Congress could foul up his work -- which it could if it plunges ahead with abandon.
But Congress has a clear right to ask questions about government regulation of the savings and loan mess in Arkansas and, even more urgently, about whether the recently disclosed White House meetings with bank regulators represented an attempt to obstruct justice.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Waiting to claim our coats at the Jewish Museum, my wife and I were behind a young mother and her 5-year-old daughter.
Costumed as a cat for the museum's Purim party, Amanda (as we learned) was exuberant in a black leotard, long white tail and exquisitely made-up cat face.
Mother carried a camcorder and began filming Amanda in the lobby; a guard approached and said sternly, "No pictures in the museum."


Don't Trust Those Lying Lie Detectors
To the Editor:
William Safire makes some powerful arguments against the lie detector in "Holy Moley!" (column, Feb. 24).
Two other arguments are compelling.


Review/Music; An Ambitious Soprano, Without Excuses, at 70
Long after the house lights went up at Alice Tully Hall, signaling that Victoria de los Angeles had sung all she intended to sing, the audience continued stamping, applauding and calling for the 70-year-old Spanish soprano, bringing her out for what must have been nearly a dozen curtain calls.
Miss de los Angeles had sung an ambitious program that drew on everything from a French Baroque aria and groups of Schubert and Faure songs to colorful Spanish, Portuguese and English folk song settings.
But the ovation -- an only slightly tamer version of which also greeted her 90 minutes earlier, when she first took the stage -- was a response not only to the music just performed but also to the musical pleasures that Miss de los Angeles has afforded in concert and on recordings for 50 years.


Healthdyne Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Death Penalty Bill Passes
For the 18th year in a row, the Senate passed legislation today legalizing the death penalty, but Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo again vowed that he would veto the bill.
The vote was 40-20.
The vote apparently left the Republican-led Senate at least one vote shy of the 41 votes needed in that house to override the Governor's expected veto.


Yankees Confront An Early Complainer
The batch of newspaper clippings about the Yankees rolled off the fax machine Monday morning.
Minutes later, General Manager Gene Michael was rolling his eyes over one article.
Where are you, Sterling Hitchcock?
Who do you think you are, Sterling Hitchcock?
Michael was perturbed.
Three days after the rookie left-hander strongly criticized the Yankees in print for failing to give pitching prospects legitimate opportunities, Hitchcock and his agent met with Michael for more than an hour today.
Although both sides said that the meeting had been scheduled for a week and was intended to discuss the pitcher's future, the timing was notable.


RESULTS PLUS
YACHT RACING  Intrum Justitia in Lead  Intrum Justitia opened a lead of 31 nautical miles yesterday on the fourth leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race.
The European Whitbread 60 Class yacht, skippered by Lawrie Smith of Britain, was reported 917 miles from the finish of the leg in Punta del Este, Uruguay.
New Zealand Endeavor, the leading Maxiclass entry, was second and Tokio was in third place, 37 miles behind Endeavor, with Yamaha another three miles back.
Most of the 14-yacht fleet have rounded Cape Horn, but some were struggling to continue.
The British boat Dolphin and Youth reported a badly damaged mainsail, while the all-female entry, Heineken, suffered a broken rudder.
The leaders are expected to reach Punta del Este on Friday.
The 5,900-mile leg began Feb. 20 in Auckland, New Zealand.
The 32,000-mile, six-leg race is expected to finish in Southampton, England, in July. (AP) TENNIS  Svensson Advances
The second-seeded Jonas Svensson of Sweden defeated Johan Van Herck of Belgium, 6-1, 6-4, yesterday in the ATP Zaragoza Open in Zaragoza, Spain.
Svensson became the highest seeded player in the event when Karel Novacek, top-seeded player and defending champion, was upset in his first-round match on Monday. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Moroccan Wins 5,000  Mohammed Issangar of Morocco beat the world champion, Ismael Kirui, in the 5,000-meter run yesterday to score a surprising victory at the DN Games meet in Stockholm.
Issangar won in 13 minutes 26.84 seconds at Globe arena, finishing 5.06 seconds ahead of Kirui.
His victory overshadowed winning performances by Colin Jackson, Merlene Ottey and Dennis Mitchell.
Jackson, the indoor world-record holder in the 60-meter hurdles, won his event in 7.42 seconds.
Ottey took the 60-meter final in 7.09 in her final event of her indoor season.
Mitchell ran the 60 meters in 6.61, just 0.03 seconds ahead of Joel Isasi of Cuba. (AP)


No Headline
"When I visit the cemetery and see the fresh graves of my students, I wonder how I can ever be friends with the Croats again. My family is still afraid to come out of the basement because they don't believe this cease-fire. To trust the people who have done this to us is impossible." EMIR ZVONIC, a Bosnian Muslim schoolteacher.  [ A1:1. ]


INSIDE
3 Officers Held in Extortion
Three police officers in Brooklyn were held on charges that they shook down drug dealers, traded in stolen guns, made false arrests and used their badges to intimidate.
Page B3.
Migrant Students Ignored
A California school district with a $10 million surplus shortchanged children of migrant workers by not providing bilingual instruction.
Page B9.
Cable TV Antitrust Inquiry
The Justice Department is investigating whether General Instrument has a stranglehold on technologies used to provide cable television.
Page D1.
Studying Sleep Habits
A sleep researcher has realized her fondest dream: interviewing Long Island Rail Road commuters about their dozing on trains.
Page B1.


CHRONICLE
Among the moments of levity in Washington this week, was one yesterday at the end of a coffee hour that the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held in the Capitol for the visiting President of Georgia, EDUARD A. SHEVARDNADZE.
After serious discussions concluded, Senator EDWARD M. KENNEDY turned to Mr.
Shevardnadze and reminded him of a visit that Senator Claiborne Pell, the chairman of the committee, had made to his country in 1984.


Personal Health
AT the age of 96, George Abbott, the grand old man of American theater, had a pacemaker installed to maintain a normal rhythm in his aging heart.
The surgeon told him that it would last about a decade, to which a distressed Mr.
Abbott replied to the bemused doctor, "You mean I'm going to have to come back here in 10 years and go through all this again?"
Well, last month at the age of 106, Mr.
Abbott returned to have a new pacemaker battery installed, leaving him well prepared to attend last week's Broadway opening of a revival of one of his greatest triumphs, "Damn Yankees."


Beyond Auto Shop: An Experiment in High School Job Training
Kim Jabbie, a high school freshman, spent three hours at a local morning radio station the other day.
She visited with Josh Reynolds, the producer of the show.
She tried speaking into the microphone.
She watched as he wrote copy.
It seemed like fun.
Soon, she will visit Emanuel Hospital here, to see what health workers do.
And, at the end of the school year,


This Very Likeable Met Is Catching
If Greg Olson wanted to make friends with his new Mets teammates, he found the right way to do it this afternoon.
Starting at catcher for the second time this spring, Olson nabbed Chuck Carr, the Marlins' center fielder, trying to steal second in the first inning of the Mets-Marlins game.
And after Carr walked in the third, Olson scared Carr -- the league's No. 1 base stealer last season -- into holding tight at first.


All's Quiet But Busy On Giants' Front
The Giants are quiet, but don't let that fool you.
They are still busy behind the salary-cap scene.
First, they have initiated contingency plans in case they lose Greg Jackson, a free-agent safety, by putting another free agent on their list, New Orleans safety Keith Taylor.


Charles G. Bolte, 74, Viking Press Executive
Charles G. Bolte, a former executive vice president of the Viking Press in New York and vice president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, died on Monday at Kennebec Valley Medical Center in Augusta, Me.
He was 74 and lived in Gardiner, Me.
He had a short illness, his family said.


Military Tightens Its Rules Against Smoking
The Pentagon today tightened its rules against smoking in the military workplace, giving cigar-chomping generals and admirals fewer places to light up.
The rules will apply to all offices and any other indoor work areas, but smoking will still be allowed in barracks, family housing, prison cells, clubs, recreational areas and restaurants.
"I'll look at the new rules, but I don't really think there's much of a change," said one Marine general.


63 IN SOUTH AFRICA DIE IN TRAIN WRECK
A speeding train packed with commuters derailed early this morning and jack- knifed into a wooded gorge near Durban, flinging scores of passengers to their deaths.
By tonight rescue crews had found 63 dead and 370 injured, and more were believed trapped in the wreckage of the eight cars on the train.


ADT Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


3 Officers Held on Charges Of Extortion Conspiracy
Three New York City police officers were arrested yesterday on Federal charges that they shook down drug dealers, traded in stolen guns, made false arrests and used their badges to intimidate people along their Brooklyn beat.
The officers, from the 73d Precinct in Brownsville, typically traveled in caravans of three and four patrol cars as they went on their near-nightly raids, ignoring assignments that came over their police radios, senior law-enforcement officials said, adding that more arrests are expected.


Albany Alters Its Handling Of Abuse List
State officials said yesterday that they would immediately change the way they release information about suspected child abusers to comply with a Federal court ruling last Friday that called the state's system of tracking suspects unacceptably flawed.
The officials said that the state would still maintain its central registry of suspects, but that it would now require a higher level of proof that abuse occurred before releasing a person's name to agencies screening prospective child-care workers, foster parents and adoptive parents.


Man Is Taunted and Stabbed on Train Platform
A Bronx man standing with his family on a nearly deserted Metro-North commuter train platform here Monday night was stabbed in the chest by one of several young men who had taunted the family with racial epithets, the authorities said today.
The long, hunting-style knife narrowly missed the heart and left lung of the victim, Nikolle Bajrami, 23, who was released from Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville this morning after doctors treated his wound.


Knicks Aiming At the Hawks And Manning
The Knicks still believe they will catch the Atlanta Hawks.
But time is running out.
That is why Wednesday's Knicks-Hawks showdown in Atlanta is one of New York's most important games to date.
The Hawks have the best record in the Eastern Conference, holding an edge of two games over New York.


A Happy Anachronism
To the Editor:
If opponents to carriage horses on Fifth Avenue believe the horses are not well cared for, which has not been demonstrated, they should present their evidence.
If they believe vehicular traffic is a hazard to man and beast, they should advocate removal of the hazards, not confine people and horses to Central Park.


Review/Fashion; Quest for Novelty: Miyake's Pleats
His collections are always filled with whimsy and charm, but this time Issey Miyake has surpassed himself.
His longtime preoccupation with new fabrics has finally paid off.
He has a commercial success in a group of clothes called Pleats Please: the pleats are permanent, washable and packable.
The pleated pieces in synthetic fabrics can be layered over one another in different colors.


Koch to Choose Team
It was last summer that the first rumblings surfaced about the intentions of BILL KOCH to underwrite an all-women's yachting team for the 1995 America's Cup races.
After months of negotiations with the San Diego Yacht Club, which is organizing the competition, Koch is ready to go public with his plans.
The yachtsman and financier from Palm Beach, Fla., is expected to announce his team members today during a news conference at the Plaza Hotel.
The new yachting syndicate will continue under the banner of the America
Foundation, the nonprofit group that sponsored Koch's successful defense of the America's Cup against Italy in 1992.


Which Way Forward on Haiti?
The Clinton Administration and Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, have been at odds for some time, but never has the split more apparent than now, in the dispute over a peace plan backed by Washington.
The plan, which is also supported by half a dozen Haitian legislators, calls on Father Aristide and Haiti's military to take a series of steps aimed at restoring him to power.


Fiction Can Beam Them Up to Science
To the Editor:
Ken Kalfus's "Science Fiction at the Planetarium" (Op-Ed, Feb. 26) is critical of the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History in New York for blurring the line between science and entertainment by offering a "Star Trek" sky show and exhibition.
He ought to have noted that the first attraction to science for many scientists, often when they were children, came through science fiction, whether in books, comics, radio, television or movies.


Some Call Them Kasha Varnishkas
THE origins of a recipe calling for bulgur and bow-tie noodles are found in a well-known Jewish side dish that calls for buckwheat groats, or kasha, and bow ties.
It is traditionally served with brisket, the gravy from the meat poured liberally over the starches.
While bulgur does not have the same nutty flavor as buckwheat groats, it has a similar texture and marries well with the egg noodles.
By adding a number of other ingredients, it stands as a main dish.


IDB Communications Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton's Coming to New York, But Mayor May Skip Invitation
President Clinton is due at Brooklyn College for a talk-show-style get-together on community policing and national service on Thursday and has invited Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
But in a revealing example of what can happen when a besieged Democratic White House wants to share the crime-fighting glow of a newly Republican City Hall, and a new Republican Mayor wants the spotlight for his gun-control ideas but only on his terms, Mr.
Giuliani has "no plans" to attend, a top Giuliani aide said today.


Charming Shoppes Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Democratic Figure Said to Be Linked to Hospital Pact
Assemblyman Clarence Norman Jr., the head of the Brooklyn Democratic party and a vocal supporter of the project to rebuild Kings County Hospital Center, is a business partner of a man whose company has won $2.5 million in contracts in the reconstruction effort, according to documents filed with the School Construction Authority.
The company, Darryl E. Greene &amp; Associates, has won a series of contracts with the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation since 1988 to advise the agency in efforts to increase participation of minority-owned companies in the construction project.
Two of the three contracts were awarded without a competitive bid.


House Panel Begins Deliberations on a Health Bill
Congress today entered a new phase in its effort to revamp the nation's health care system as a House subcommittee began deliberations on a bill substantially different from President Clinton's proposal.
The Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health began analyzing the bill, proposed by its chairman, Representative Pete Stark, Democrat of California, with lawmakers of both parties saying they felt they were participating in a historic process.


Public &amp; Private; The Little Woman
From the moment she first became a major player in national politics, Hillary Rodham Clinton has been a combination of brilliant technocrat, political wife, new woman, savvy adviser and power behind the throne, confusing and compelling in equal parts.
Oh, but you ain't seen nothin' yet.


Theater in Review
Foirades/Fizzles  La Mama E.T.C. 74A East Fourth Street East Village Through Sunday
Text by Samuel Beckett; images adapted from illustrations by Jasper Johns; conceived, adapted and directed by Michael Rush; set by Joy Wulke; lighting by Howard Thies; sound score by David Lawson; choreographed by David Maurice Sharp; photography by Silvia Taccani; stage manager, Nancy Kramer.
Presented by La Mama E.T.C.


Esquire's Publishing Director Resigns to Join Conde Nast
Ronald A. Galotti, who was named publishing director of Esquire in January, resigned unexpectedly yesterday, saying that he had accepted a job at Conde Nast Publications.
He declined to specify what the job was and said an announcement would be made on Friday.
Bernard Leser, president of Conde Nast Publications, said late yesterday that he had no information about Mr.
Galotti's move.
"I have no knowledge of any comment from Mr. Galotti," he said, "and am not party to any decision, if it is true."


Maxicare Health Plans Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A former TV star is reborn as an all-too-human spokeswoman for a Weight Watchers' campaign.
NO matter what celebrity Kathleen Sullivan might once have enjoyed as a Famous Person for ABC Sports and CBS News, she has demonstrated a remarkable willingness to play the role of Everywoman in leading America into the perilous world of dieting.
Perilous, because diets don't always work.
They're hard.
They can be lonely.
Some diet companies are not always straight with consumers.
And who wouldn't rather eat chocolate ice cream and potato chips?


Clinton to Unveil Jobs Bill That Focuses on Retraining
President Clinton on Wednesday will announce a jobs bill that would mark a shift in Government emphasis from providing temporary relief for laid-off employees to trying to meet the needs of workers whose jobs will not reappear, even in an improving economy.
The proposal would focus on retraining and job placement for the unemployed by establishing one-stop career centers, financed by Federal and state funds.


Southwestern Louisiana in the Big Show
Southwestern Louisiana 78; Western Kentucky 72
Southwestern Louisiana earned its sixth trip to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament last night, defeating Western Kentucky, 78-72, in the Sun Belt Conference championship game in Bowling Green, Ky.
Southwestern Louisiana (22-7) avenged two regular-season losses to top-seeded Western Kentucky (20-10) and snapped an eight-game winning streak by the Hilltoppers as each team hit a tournament-record 10 3-pointers.


Martin Marietta Gobbles Up Grumman
In the latest mega-dollar deal in the defense industry, the Martin Marietta Corporation has agreed to buy the Grumman Corporation for $1.9 billion.
Grumman, the venerable Long Island aerospace company, founded in 1929, is just another in a long line of military contractors to fold its wings as Pentagon procurements slow to match a vastly shrunken threat.
Defense jobs will continue to disappear.
That is not the consequence of consolidation in the industry, but of smaller Pentagon budgets.
Grumman's work force, for instance, is down to 18,000, from 33,700 in 1987.
Many more layoffs are likely with the end of F-14 production and cancellation of other carrier-based aircraft.


Paramount Records Loss For Quarter
Paramount Communications Inc. yesterday confirmed earlier estimates of its performance in the third quarter, reporting a loss of $36.6 million for the period that ended on Jan. 31, compared with a loss of $66.8 million for the comparable period a year ago.
Revenues for the quarter rose slightly to $1.01 billion, compared with $943.7 million in the comparable period a year ago.
Last month the company had indicated that it expected a loss, which it attributed primarily to the poor performance of several television series on USA Network, the cable service it owns jointly with MCA Inc.


Dow Drops 4.50, Following Bonds Lower
Stocks moved lower yesterday, following a bond market that was briefly puzzled by a two-word remark that the Federal Reserve Board later said was an attempt at humor by a Fed governor.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed down 4.50 points, to 3,851.72, and the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 was down 1.03 points, to 465.88.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index dropped 2.93 points, to 792.12.


Bowe Keeps His Glove in HBO View
Riddick Bowe, who seemed so invincible only a few months ago, seemed so much history yesterday.
The name of Bowe, the former heavyweight champion of the world, rarely came up as the people who run the careers of the current champions, Lennox Lewis and Evander Holyfield, spoke of an eventual showdown between the pair next November.


Big Cable Company to Offer A High-Speed Internet Link
Continental Cablevision Inc., the nation's third-largest cable television company, said yesterday that it had begun offering a high-speed link to the Internet data network over the same coaxial cables that carry television channels into the home.
Although several other companies are testing the delivery of two-way data services over cable television systems, Continental is believed to be the first to begin selling the service commercially.
Its partner is Performance Systems International of Herndon, Va., the country's largest Internet service provider.


Nets Put Morris On Injured List
The timing could not have been worse.
Just when the Nets are making a run for the playoffs, Chris Morris, their best 3-point shooter, was placed on the injured list today with a broken right thumb.
Morris, who was injured Sunday night during the Nets' 126-99 victory over the 76ers, will be sidelined for a minimum of five games and could miss at least three weeks.
His spot on the roster will be taken by Rick Mahorn, 35, who has been on the injured list since Jan. 12 with back problems.


Therapy Saves Premature Babies' Lives
RARELY these days does an advance in medical technology end up saving dollars as well as lives.
But one such development was enthusiastically endorsed last week by a panel of experts: a simple drug treatment administered to pregnant women to speed the development of fetuses in danger of being born prematurely.
The therapy, involving injections of corticosteroids that cost less than $10 a dose, can save the lives and health of large numbers of babies born prematurely, including many very tiny infants, the panel found after a year of study.
The therapy can also reduce the time that such babies spend in hospitals by about one-third, the panel said.
The study projected a "conservative" saving of $157 million a year in initial hospital costs alone, even if the treatment is used in only 60 percent of premature births.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ADVENT TECHNOLOGIES INC., Miami, a provider of consulting services to hospitals and medical diagnostic testing to physicians, signed a letter of intent to acquire MedTek Imaging Inc., Miami, a maker of mobile diagnostic imaging products, for an undisclosed amount of cash and stock.


Stewart Enterprises Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Elbit Ltd.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mayor Details Buyout Offer for City Workers
Negotiating with New York City's municipal unions for the first time, the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani offered yesterday to pay workers $5,000 to $10,000 each in cash and provide up to a year of health benefits to entice about 7,600 of them to leave the municipal payroll, administration officials said.
As part of its offer, the Mayor's office told the unions that it would allow workers to collect pay for unused vacation days and sick leave, in payments spread out over the next three years.
That could amount to "extraordinarily large pots of money," one of the officials said.
The offer also included unemployment insurance in most cases, the official said, and a job retraining program.


The Supreme Form of Flattery
If imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, what is parody?
A commercial ripoff, said Acuff-Rose Music Inc., owner of the copyright to the rock ballad "Oh, Pretty Woman." No, parody is a legitimate artistic commentary on the original work, said the rap group 2 Live Crew, defending its recorded rap version as a "fair use" exception to the copyright laws.
The Supreme Court, which rarely before had considered such a case, deftly split the difference.
It ruled unanimously on Monday that parody can indeed qualify as fair use and called on lower courts to decide, case by case, whether a particular work qualifies -- or infringes on a copyright.


Books of The Times; Not-So-Timeless Musings On Topics Once Timely
The Man in the Water
By Roger Rosenblatt
424 pages. Random House. $25.
Roger Rosenblatt writes or has written for Time, Vanity Fair, The New Republic, Men's Journal and Family Cirle; on PBS, he also provides the MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour with essays and commentary.
His job is to produce light or serious but always civilized musings on many subjects: the gulf war, one man's heroism after an airplane crash; the meaning of Christmas, New Year's, Mother's or Father's Day; the charms and follies of mass culture; the pleasure of good talk and good literature.


Accounts
*
The Clorox Company, Oakland, Calif., to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco, to handle its S.O.S. soap pads account, which had been previously inactive.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Bristol-Myers Squibb, London, to Bozell Europe and DFSD Bozell, both of London, to handle advertising for the Mum deodorant brand in Europe, previously at CME KHBB Advertising, London.
Bozell Europe was named to manage the account while DFSD Bozell will handle the creative portion.
Billings were not disclosed.


Reviews/Film: Four Weddings and a Funeral; Special Occasions And the Urges That Lurk Within
If ever a film resembled a wedding cake it is "Four Weddings and a Funeral," a multi-tiered confection with a romantic spirit and an enchantingly pretty veneer.
Elegant, festive and very, very funny, this deft English comedy also constitutes a remarkable tightrope act on the part of Mike Newell ("Enchanted April"), who directed, and Richard Curtis ("The Tall Guy"), the screenwriter.
In a feat of daring gamesmanship, they confine their film's central love story to the events described by the title, veering off only occasionally to nearby hotels or shops for wedding-related gambits.
That conceit would seem strained if it didn't prove so unexpectedly graceful and inspired.


Fay's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


WPP Group Reports Rise in Earnings
The WPP Group P.L.C. of London reported yesterday that its earnings for 1993 had increased significantly from the previous year.
WPP, a holding company that owns advertising agencies like Ogilvy &amp; Mather and J. Walter Thompson, said its pretax profit rose to $:54.4 million, or $81.7 million, from $:7.8 million, or $11.7 million, in 1992.
Revenues rose 12.3 percent, to $:1.431 billion, or $2.149 billion, from $:1.273 billion, or $1.912 billion, the year before.


Simmons to Review Mattress Account
The Simmons Company, the bed and mattress maker based in Atlanta, said yesterday that it had placed its account, estimated at $10 million to $15 million, in review after three and a half years at Pollak Levitt Chaiet Advertising in Atlanta.
"We're at a point in our growth and development where we need to pursue some new opportunities," Marv Beneteau, Simmons's vice president of advertising, said in confirming a report of the review this week in Adweek.
For the last three years, Simmons has trailed Sealy, the market leader; Sealy has an 18.5 percent share of the market, Simmons has 17.5 percent and Serta, at No. 3, has 10.5 percent.


Sharpe James to Seek a 3d Term as Mayor of Newark


Postal Service Seeks 3-Cent Rise For First-Class Stamp in Early '95
The United States Postal Board of Governors today approved a proposal to increase the price of a first-class stamp by 10.3 percent, to 32 cents from 29 early in 1995.
The plan, announced by Postmaster General Marvin T. Runyon and the postal board's chairman, J. Sam Winters, is part of an increase in all postal rates.


Review/Music; Kissin's Ways of Wonder
Yevgeny Kissin pulled all the stops at the end of his recital on Friday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, finishing with four of Liszt's "Transcendental Etudes" and returning to Liszt in his encores, regaling the appreciative crowd with one blockbuster after another.
The results were spectacular.
As familiar as Mr.
Kissin's fabulous technique has become, it is hard to take for granted; he is, after all, only 22.
Still, the less showy moments earlier in the evening were almost more impressive in their maturity.
Mr.
Kissin began with excellent performances of two Schumann works.
At the start of the "Arabesque" (Op. 18), all the rippling notes seemed to dissolve in eloquent long-breathed phrases.
The outer movement of the Fantasy in C (Op. 17) had a fine reflective quality; in the middle movement, some smudges at the first return of the big chords came as welcome reassurance that Mr.
Kissin is only human, however much the later evidence seemed to suggest otherwise.


Russians' Newest Space Adventure: Cyberspace
Is anyone looking to import a few hundred Mercedes sedans, purchase an elevator conveniently dismantled for shipping or acquire three tons of bismuth?
How about bartering for a 200-mile oil pipeline or a train load of Bulgarian vegetables?
Perhaps you are in the market for a Russian spouse, a plane load of chicken parts or a place to park some rubles?


John Koshel; Copyright Lawyer, 64
John Koshel, a retired Manhattan lawyer who specialized in copyright and trademark law, died on March 2 at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 64.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Marysia.


Market Place; Wheelabrator is poised to be a big player in water treatment.
WHEELABRATOR TECHNOLOGIES INC. has long been associated with incinerators.
Indeed, the company currently operates 14 facilities that burn trash and produce electric power, with several more under development.
But incinerators are not often popular with their neighbors and it can be hard to find sites and get permits to operate them.
This would not appear to bode well for the company, which is 56 percent owned by WMX Technologies, the big garbage hauler.
But for the last three years Wheelabrator has been using the earnings of its incineration plants to acquire companies and technology in another field entirely: water and sewage treatment.


CHRONICLE
JACQUELINE KENNEDY ONASSIS, who was reported last month to be undergoing chemotherapy for non-Hodgkins lymphoma, has agreed to serve as the chairwoman of the American Ballet Theater's spring gala on May 9.
Mrs.
Onassis has continued to work as a book editor during her treatment for the disease, a treatable form of cancer of the lymphatic system, but has curtailed her public appearances.
She said, however, that she would be present at the gala, which will include performances of excerpts from Tchaikovsky ballets and a dinner dance in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.


Sports of The Times; Boxing's Unique Nobleman
HIS death notice requested, "in lieu of flowers, contributions may be made to Ring #8," the Veteran Boxers Association of New York-New Jersey that he helped organize to comfort old fighters, ill or indigent.
And of all the words that will be written about Ray Arcel, those few described him best.
To the end, 94-year-old Ray Arcel, a rare nobleman in an often notorious industry, was thinking of how to help boxers.


Revco D.S. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 5


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Avnet Inc., Great Neck, L.I., is selling $100 million of 6.875 percent notes due in 2004 priced at 99.77 to yield 6.907 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. and Dillon, Read &amp; Co.
The issues are noncallable and are rated A-2 by Moody's and A by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $200 million of debentures due in 1999 priced at 100 to yield 6.07 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The issue is callable in a year.


OPENNESS IS VOWED
Lloyd N. Cutler was appointed special counsel to the President today and said White House aides would testify before any Congressional inquiry into the Whitewater case.
Trying to demonstrate the openness that he had promised on the matter, Mr.
Clinton said at a news conference in which he announced the appointment that he would not try to use the powers of his office to shield himself from scrutiny.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar 4
Feb. 25
Mar 5
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
7.0
7.0
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.2
2.9
Gasoline stocks
225.8
225.5
238.1
Distillate stocks
102.7
106.2
106.2
Crude imports, daily
6.4
6.1
5.7
Product imports, daily
1.9
2.0
1.5
Crude stocks
334.2
325.7
337.4
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
85.9
87.0
84.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


The Media Is the Messenger And Keenan Is the Maestro
More than most hockey coaches, Mike Keenan of the Rangers seems to enjoy the mental and verbal sparring of post-game news conferences.
Keenan's news media briefings go longer than most.
Although he does not always appreciate the second-guessing that is implicit in many questions, Keenan rarely dodges questions and often uses reporters to send messages to Neil Smith, the team's president and general manager, and to his players.
It happened again during Monday night's session after a 6-3 loss to the Detroit Red Wings in Madison Square Garden ended a four-game unbeaten streak.
Although his Rangers were mentally and physically exhausted from playing 11 games in 18 nights, Keenan seized on his team's lack of size and toughness as one reason for the defeat.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CONDOS AND CO-OPS EXTORTING PAYOFFS
Managers of hundreds of Manhattan cooperative and condominium apartment buildings have routinely extorted payoffs from contractors for work in the buildings, a three-year investigation by the Manhattan District Attorney's office has concluded.
A1.


Food Notes
Fresher Tasting Juice
Extended shelf life is usually inimical to fresh flavor, but technological improvements are changing that.
Take orange juice.
Until recently, chilled and ready-to-serve orange juice had to be pasteurized or made from concentrate to keep for more than a few days.
These processes call for heating, which robs the juice of flavor as well as some nutrients.
Fresh-squeezed juice is also sold frozen, a form that is less convenient.


Off the Menu
A Split in the Hamptons
In early summer of 1992, the advertising executive Jerry Della Femina hired Drew Nieporent, the owner of Montrachet and co-owner of TriBeCa Grill in Manhattan, to staff and run the restaurant he was about to open in East Hampton, L.I.
"I owe him for the success of Della Femina's and I think the world of him," Mr.
Della Femina said yesterday.
The following year, they opened another successful restaurant together, East Hampton Point.
Now they are about to part company.
Mr.
Nieporent is a partner with Mr.
Della Femina and two others -- Ben Krupinski, the builder, and Larry Dunst, another adman -- in East Hampton Point.
And there seems to be some serious disagreement about money.
Mr.
Della Femina said he and his partners are buying out Mr.
Nieporent's share, but he would not give more details.
As a result of this disagreement, it appears that Mr.
Nieporent will no longer be involved with Della Femina's, either.


Pinot Gris Grape Thrives in Oregon
A BOOMLET in pinot gris has electrified Oregon wine growers seeking the next trend.
Will pinot gris, they ask, become the state's signature white wine?
Barney Watson, the wine maker at the tiny Tyee Wine Cellars, thinks so.
"Pinot gris," he said, "is the answer to life after chardonnay." An answer is needed, some wine growers say: Oregon chardonnay and riesling are not in heavy demand out of state.


Paul A. Sergios; Author, 32
Paul A. Sergios, the author of "One Boy at War: My Life in the AIDS Underground," died on Sunday at his home in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 32.
The cause was AIDS, said Robin Swados, his editor at Alfred A. Knopf.


Nagging Inflation Fears Push Bond Prices Lower
Prices of United States Treasury securities reversed early gains yesterday amid the nagging fears of inflation and concern about the timing of the Federal Reserve's next move to raise short-term interest rates.
The selloff in bonds pushed interest rates to the highest level since June.
Follow-through strength from overseas bond markets and comments by a Federal Reserve governor, Lawrence B. Lindsey, in a Baltimore speech to the Commercial Finance Association Monday night provided the market with an early lift.
But the selling began to pick up steam by midsession after Mr.
Lindsey's comments were put in context.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  ISRAEL ADMITS SECURITY FLAWS  The army commander for the West Bank told an inquiry about the massacre of Palestinians that there had been a breakdown in security arrangements that might have prevented the killings.
A1  GLOOM IN JERICHO  Jericho was brimming with plans after the agreement for Palestinian self-rule there, but as the date has been postponed and with a series of other woes, the mood there has turned to gloom.
A10


To Commute, Perchance to Sleep; A Scientist Finds the Lab of Her Dreams on the L.I.R.R.
Five years ago, Dr.
Joyce Walsleben boarded a Long Island Rail Road train in Central Islip and realized as soon as she sat down that she had bought a ride on the scientific laboratory of her dreams.
The morning rush-hour train, she discovered, was a veritable rolling bed of snoozing suburbanites, a railroad car crowded with the drowsy, the droopy and the dead-to-the-world.
Some snored.
Some snorted.
Some dozed quietly, with mouths half-opened, their heads pitched forward or wedged between the headrest and the window.


Bill Offered On Requiring AIDS Report
A bipartisan group of state lawmakers proposed legislation today that would require mothers to be notified if their newborn babies tested positive for H.I.V., rejecting the report of a state advisory panel that opposed the idea last month.
In a news conference carefully calculated to build pressure on the leadership of the Senate and the Assembly, the lawmakers flanked themselves with two children infected with H.I.V. while they starkly portrayed the issue as one that pitted the welfare of infants against the privacy of adults.


Suffolk Legislators Drop a Ban On Plastic Packaging for Foods
Six years ago, environmentalists cheered as the Suffolk County Legislature approved a bill banning a host of plastic products, from hamburger containers to polystyrene cups.
Although its champions heralded it as a measure that should be adopted nationwide, the restrictions never really took effect.
Efforts to enforce the stringent law, which permitted biodegradable food containers only, were repeatedly postponed by the 18-member Legislature as delicatessens, retail food stores and fast-food chains requested more time to find substitutes that were cost-effective and environmentally acceptable.
Recycling Instead
But today, the Legislature adopted an amendment eliminating the ban on plastics that would push for more recycling instead.


Bonn Journal; Now Breathing Down Kohl's Neck Is Big Socialist
If Germans could choose Chancellors the way Americans pick Presidents -- voting for them by name on the ballot -- a 46-year-old state Governor would beat Helmut Kohl by a landslide, all the public opinion polls indicate.
Rudolf Scharping, a Social Democrat, is giving Mr.
Kohl the most serious political challenge he has faced since he became Chancellor in 1982.


Success Takes Toll on the Pompidou Center
Imposing building projects are still springing up all over Paris.
But to judge from the newspapers and the evidence of one's eyes, the city is also falling apart, forcing the closing or at least the masking of many of its most famous tourist sites.
Already, scaffolding covers both towers of Notre-Dame Cathedral as part of a major restoration of its crumbling exterior.
Part of the Grand Palais, home to many of the city's most glamorous art exhibitions, will be closed for a couple of years.
The Palais Garnier, the opulent 19th-century opera house that is the base of the Paris Opera Ballet, is to be shut beginning next year for 18 months.
Other landmark Paris museums, theaters and concert halls are likewise set for protracted restoration: the Palais de Tokyo, the Musee Guimet, the Comedie-Francaise, the Olympia theater.


Harassment Charge Keeps Ex-U.N. Aide From Being Adviser
Citing perceptions of insensitivity, the Administrator of the United Nations Development Program has decided that his former No. 2 official, who resigned last month amid charges of sexual harassment, should not become a senior adviser, as previously planned.
In the United Nations' first such case, Luis Maria Gomez, a 59-year old Argentine, was accused of sexually harassing an American woman, Catherine Claxton, when she worked for him in 1988.


Straka Leads Penguins Past Bruins
Penguins 7, Bruins 3
Martin Straka scored three goals, including a pair 21 seconds apart in a four-goal second period last night in Pittsburgh, as the Penguins ended the Boston Bruins' six-game winning streak with a 7-3 victory.


Parisien May Quit
JULIE PARISIEN, saying the joy is gone from skiing, is leaving the World Cup circuit indefinitely and perhaps forever.
"In my mind I feel like I'm retiring," she said yesterday from in Mammoth Lakes, Calif., where women's World Cup races will be held this week.
"But for right now I'm just taking a long respite. I'll decide in August." Parisien was ranked first in the slalom only two years ago.
Parisien, 22, of Sugarloaf, Me., won three World Cup races in as many seasons before a death in the family and injuries sent her tumbling in the world standing. (AP)


Man in the News; A Rescuer Steeped in Washington's Ways: Lloyd Norton Cutler
Lloyd N. Cutler, who was named today by President Clinton to be the new special counsel to the President, has been asked to come to the rescue in much the same manner before.
Mr.
Cutler, regarded as among the most seasoned of Washington's lawyers who operate at the intersection of politics and policy, was recruited as President Jimmy Carter's White House counsel in 1979 to replace a longtime associate of the President's family.
That lawyer, Robert J. Lipshutz, was judged to be insufficiently steeped in the ways of Washington to help the President cope with a flood of politically tinged legal issues.


U.S. Showing Frustration Over China's Human Rights Policy
Days before Warren Christopher is to arrive on his first visit to China as Secretary of State, the Clinton Administration has begun to acknowledge that its policy of intensified engagement with Beijing has not yet produced the progress it has sought on human rights and nonproliferation of weapons.
Neither Mr.
Christopher nor his senior advisers admit outright that their strategy of embracing rather than isolating the Chinese has failed.
When Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs and a former Ambassador to China, was asked if that was the case, he denied it on Tuesday.


Eating Well
IN 1986, New York City was atwitter over the spectacular kitchens of its new and very classy French restaurant, Le Bernardin.
Owned by a two-star chef from France, Gilbert Le Coze, and his sister, Maguy, the kitchen was worthy of a story.
But what caught my eye was the long line of nonstick pots hanging over Le Bernardin's stoves.
They changed my mind forever about nonstick cookware.
Now, nonstick pans are commonplace in most restaurants, and a test of nine skillets and pots reinforces the industry's contention that the quality of nonstick cookware is light years removed from the early Teflon-coated skillets.


From Orthodox Jewish Education to Hebron; This Peace Threatens
To the Editor:
Michael Lerner, in his instant analysis of the massacre at Machpela ("Disarm the West Bank Settlers," Op-Ed, Feb. 26), after stating that the act was performed by someone who "was crazy," suggests that such an action was predictable because "right-wing Jews in America and Israel" are "threatened with the possibility of peace."


Muslims of Mostar Emerge, Bitterly, to a City Laid Waste
For nine months, the Muslim-controlled eastern part of Mostar suffered under ceaseless artillery and mortar bombardment, its residents huddling in dark basements while their community was destroyed and more than 2,000 of their neighbors were killed or wounded.
Now, emerging into the light and surveying the ruins, people in eastern Mostar must absorb two shocks.
The first is the scope of devastation here, an apocalypse beyond imagining even for people in other long-besieged cities like Sarajevo.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.29
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.54
3.52
2.98
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.77
3.75
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.39
6.31
5.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.86
6.79
6.73
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.69
7.61
7.68
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.95
5.96
5.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


PGA Injury Report Is as Long as a Par-5
John Daly is back, and his return to golf after a four-month suspension could not come at a more fortuitous time for the PGA Tour.
Normally, the biggest worries out here are whether the greens are too bumpy or the rough is too high or if there are enough courtesy cars for the players.
But the 1994 season has been beset by larger concerns.
Too many of the PGA Tour's top stars are on golf's version of the disabled list.
It began with the discovery of lymphoma in Paul Azinger's shoulder last December.
That was followed by Phil Mickelson's broken femur in a skiing accident last week.
Yesterday, Fred Couples withdrew from this week's Honda Classic at Weston Hills with a back injury he suffered while warming up on Sunday.


Simple Blood or Urine Tests May Soon Track Cancers
New research suggests that within the next several years, simple blood or urine tests may be used to monitor the progress of cancer treatment or to detect the first signs of malignancies.
Researchers at Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School said last week that they were able to detect elevated levels of a tumor-related protein in the urine of many patients, with virtually all types of common cancers.
And the levels were highest in patients with active, spreading cancers.


Dehere Is Fine After Surgery
Dehere, the champion colt who broke down last week on the road to the Kentucky Derby, underwent surgery for an hour and a half today to repair the cracked cannon bone in his right hind leg, and his veterinarian then reported: "I think he can race again."
The veterinarian, Dr.
Wayne McIlwraith of Colorado State University, operated on Dehere at a clinic in Pompano not far from the training center at Palm Beach where the 3-year-old colt broke down last Friday.
He came back from a workout limping, and X-rays showed cracks above the ankle.
He was withdrawn from the Florida Derby this Saturday and the Kentucky Derby on May 7, with no assurance that he would ever race again.


Meyer (Fred) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


F.C.C. Discloses Rules On Auction of Airwaves
The Federal Communications Commission adopted rules today on how it will auction off a sizable portion of the nation's airwaves, a multibillion-dollar bidding extravaganza that is expected to begin sometime in the next 12 months.
The rules will ultimately be used to award licenses for "personal communication services," a broad family of wireless technologies that includes new wireless telephones, hand-held computers and two-way paging systems.
During the next few years, the Government hopes to auction off nearly 2,500 licenses for these services, in addition to a number of smaller pieces of the radio spectrum for specialized services.


Katharine Gibbs Schools Are Sold
The K-III Communications Corporation, which publishes New York, Seventeen and other magazines and has operations in information services and educational products, said yesterday that it had acquired Katharine Gibbs School Inc., a chain of seven secretarial schools in the Northeast, from Phillips Colleges Inc.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.


Tight Race for Rostenkowski Has Nationwide Implications
Dan Rostenkowski was digging into the bacon and ham and scrambled eggs at a political breakfast on Saturday when Anthony Laurino, an ally and the dean of Chicago's City Council, gave the 39th ward precinct captains their marching orders with a rhetorical, if ungrammatical, question, "Who's going to do us the best, the money, the projects for the City of Chicago?"
A very different crowd, younger and eager to talk about issues, was on hand the next night at the garish Crobar dance hall on the city's Northwest Side, where Mr.
Rostenkowski's chief challenger in next week's primary, State Senator John Cullerton, bluntly put the case against him this way: "If he is indicted, he will lose all his power. Let's decide who has the best future."


Donald R. Lynn; Photographer, 54
Donald R. Lynn, a photographer and fashion model, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 54.
The cause of death was AIDS, said his companion, David Heeley.


Washington Talk; Well, More Than Talk: Real Votes On Health
Think of the next few weeks as the New Hampshire primary of health care reform.
The actual legislative results produced by the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, which began work today, may end up meaning little -- Paul Tsongas and President George Bush won the New Hampshire primary in 1992 -- but the fact that something is finally being produced matters a great deal.


CHRONICLE
Marie Curie, who twice won the Nobel Prize, is set to be the first woman to be accorded, on the basis of her own accomplishments, the right to be buried in the Pantheon in Paris, Reuters reported yesterday.
French President FRANCOIS MITTERAND said in a television interview marking International Women's Day that he would ask her family for approval to rebury her in the domed monument.
She died 60 years ago.


From Orthodox Jewish Education to Hebron
To the Editor:
"Mutual Sorrow, Mutual Gain" (Op-Ed, March 2), Cynthia Ozick's calculus of balancing atrocities in the Hebron mass murders, is reprehensible, and her advocacy of the redemptive powers of contrition too facile.


QVC Posts Sharp Drop In Earnings
QVC Network Inc. said yesterday that earnings for the fourth quarter fell sharply as a result of an $18.8 million charge for expenses related to its unsuccessful battle for Paramount Communications.
On a pretax basis, that figure was $34.7 million for banking, legal and public relations fees.
The chairman of QVC, Barry Diller, said yesterday in a telephone interview that the figure included all expenses related to the battle.
QVC had retained the investment banking firm of Allen &amp; Company as advisers, which, in a unusual arrangement, had agreed not to charge QVC a fee unless it won Paramount.


Evans Group Gets Papa Gino's Account
Papa Gino's Inc., a pizzeria chain, has dismissed Houston, Effler &amp; Partners in Boston, its agency for the last two years, and moved its account, estimated at $5 million to $6 million, to the Evans Group in Seattle without a review.


Reviews/Film: The Ref; A Christmas That Upends Christmas
Set on Christmas Eve, "The Ref" evokes a familiar kind of holiday feeling: the high anxiety and claustrophobia of spending a long dinner with feuding relatives.
The plot sounds hopeless, but the film is handled with gleeful irreverence, dark wit and cynicism.
Denis Leary plays a burglar who holds a bitter married couple hostage in their luxurious Connecticut house.
They were on their way back from a useless session with a marriage counselor when they were abducted, obnoxious in-laws are arriving at the house any minute and even a crook on the run wouldn't want to be trapped with this group.
Staying clear of any mean-spirited attitudes, "The Ref" is a film to warm the hearts and touch the nerves of dysfunctional families everywhere.
The smart cast is a major reason for the film's wonderfully pitched tone.
Judy Davis plays the wife, Caroline, who has been unfaithful largely out of boredom.
She is the kind of edgy, comically self-absorbed character Ms.
Davis has perfected. (Caroline could be the sister of the woman Ms. Davis played in Woody Allen's "Husbands and Wives.")


General Nutrition Cos.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 5


Trial in Killing of Journalist Goes to the Jury
A jury began deliberations yesterday in the killing of a crusading anti-drug journalist, after hearing a prosecutor declare that the teen-age defendant "calmly killed" the victim in a plot ordered by a Colombian drug-cartel leader.
"He extends the gun, he fires once, he fires twice and with rock-steady hands he blows out the brains of Manual de Dios," the prosecutor, Eric Friedberg, told a jury in Federal District Court in Brooklyn as he delivered his closing argument and with it the prosecution version of how Manual de Dios Unanue was cut down in an Elmhurst, Queens, restaurant two years ago this Friday.


Dollar General Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Polluted Soil Frozen and Vaporized
For more than 100 years, until 1978, the Public Service Electric and Gas Company and its predecessors manufactured methane gas from coal and oil here on the banks of the Passaic River.
Now, nearly 15 years after the plant was closed, the legacy of that production is 16,000 cubic yards of soil contaminated by a malodorous mixture of hydrocarbons, including benzene, a chemical suspected of causing cancer.
That much contaminated soil, if spread over a football field, would be more than 12 feet deep.
And Public Service, under orders from the state to clean up the land, is paying a contractor $27 million for the job.


In America; Cigarette Smoke and Mirrors
For years the tobacco industry, which has been unceasingly inventive in developing ways to champion its treacherous products, has tried to spread the peculiar notion that it would be bad for the economy if too many Americans wised up and kicked the cigarette habit.
The reasoning is as follows: Sharply reduced tobacco consumption, resulting in sharply decreased sales of tobacco products, would hurt not only tobacco-producing states but all other states as well.
Businesses related to the production, sale and distribution of tobacco would shut down, people would be thrown out of work, and state and Federal governments would lose the substantial revenues they realize from taxes on tobacco.


New Role for McAnuff At La Jolla Playhouse
Des McAnuff, who has been the artistic director of the La Jolla Playhouse in La Jolla, Calif., since 1983, will step down after the 1994 season, the theater announced on Monday.
His replacement will be Michael Greif, 34, a former director in residence at the Joseph Papp Public Theater in Manhattan who has directed many productions at La Jolla.


Lines Drawn in a War Over a Milk Hormone
A month after a genetically engineered dairy hormone went on sale to farmers, leaflets, labels and advertisements have proliferated in food markets here in a war of words over the hormone's usefulness and safety.
On one side are the drug's maker and dairy industry giants; on the other, a coalition of dairy processors and consumer groups.
At stake is consumer acceptance of dairy products made with milk produced by cows treated with the drug.


Wine Talk
THE late August Sebastiani had to be dragged into the business of vintage-dating his wine.
He would say: "If my '77 cabernet is thin and my '78 is too heavy and alcoholic, why shouldn't I blend them?"
Why not indeed?


From Orthodox Jewish Education to Hebron; Scripture Distorted
To the Editor:
"One million Arabs are not worth a Jewish fingernail," said Rabbi Yaacov Perrin in his eulogy of Dr.
Baruch Goldstein (news article, Feb. 28).
The original Hebraic phraseology comes from the Midrash to Deuteronomy which, typically, elaborates on the sparse biblical description of the death of Moses.


Review/Dance; Chemistry of Movement and Light
In "Necessary Weather," Dana Reitz, Sara Rudner and Jennifer Tipton have focused on the interplay of light and dance.
Their stunning new work, a full-fledged collaboration between a lighting designer and two dancers and choreographers, can be seen again tonight through Sunday at the Kitchen.
Performing in silence for an hour and dressed in white, Ms.
Reitz and Ms.
Rudner are surrounded by total blackness at one point.
The dancers glow like incandescent beacons; no conventional spotlight beams down upon them.
They seem, in fact, to radiate light, and more significantly, the viewer's perception is that light and movement are perfectly fused, that one cannot be considered without the other.


Theater in Review
Under the Kerosene Moon  The Kitchen 512 West 19th Street Chelsea Through Sunday
Loosely inspired by "The Honeymoon Killers." Book and lyrics Sebastian Stuart; music by Tony Stavick; directed by Everett Quinton; producer, Bobby Reed; stage manager, Cat Domiano; lighting by Richard Currie; costumes by Toni Nanette Thompson.
Presented by the Kitchen, in association with Donald Capoccia, Howard Kaplan, David Komar and Brian Saltzman.


Trying to Rescue a Soured Oil Bet
From an office on Madison Avenue, a former oil trader turned Italian sculpture expert is quietly unraveling what some have said is one of the biggest bad bets in the commodities business.
Since mid-December, Nancy Kropp Galdy has been working 12 to 18 hours a day, sometimes seven days a week, trying to make the most of a mountain of oil futures contracts that have already produced $1.35 billion in losses.


Drug Charges Filed
TOM McCARTHY, a wing who spent nine seasons in the National Hockey League with the Minnesota North Stars and Boston Bruins, was among 24 people accused in Minneapolis for taking part in an international drug-smuggling ring.
The indictment, returned Feb. 24 by a Federal grand jury, had been sealed pending the arrest of the suspects, who live in Minnesota and California.
The men are charged with conspiring to import and distribute about seven and a half tons of marijuana and multiple kilograms of cocaine from 1988 to 1993.
United States Attorney DAVID LILLEHAUG said the alleged smuggling operation stretched from Colombia to California to St.
Paul and Mankato, Minn.
The indictment charges McCarthy, who played for the the North Stars in the 1981 Stanley Cup finals, with conspiring to distribute cocaine and marijuana.
He was arrested Friday and released on a $10,000 personal recognizance bond.
If convicted, he faces a maximum sentence of 10 years to life in prison and a $4 million fine. (AP)


Antitrust Inquiry on Cable Gear
The Justice Department's antitrust division is investigating whether the General Instrument Corporation, a leading supplier of equipment to the cable television industry, may have a stranglehold on the delivery of advanced video services.
People familiar with the inquiry say the Justice Department has demanded a wide range of information from General Instrument, both about the company's past relationships in the cable industry and about new technologies that can be used to deliver interactive television and hundreds of channels of programming.
In a Crucial Position
The inquiry could have a broad impact because General Instrument has evolved into a technology gatekeeper in the cable television industry and is also an important contender in the emerging market for new services to be delivered over future two-way cable systems.


Canadian Media Giants to Merge
After a weekend of secret talks in which Rogers Communications Inc. sweetened its offer for the shares of Maclean Hunter Ltd., the two Canadian companies ended a five-week standoff today and signed a merger agreement that will create Canada's biggest communications company.
The value of the deal works out to a little more than $3 billion (Canadian), or about $2.5 billion (United States), most of which will be financed through bank loans.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Maine
Is a tarnished season over for the Black Bears?
Or will an appeal for an injunction against Hockey East allow the team to play in the league tournament that begins tomorrow?
The answer is expected today.


Lubavitchers' Grand Rabbi Hospitalized After Seizures
Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the grand rabbi of the Lubavitch Hasidim, was taken to the intensive care unit of a Manhattan hospital early yesterday after suffering seizures at his Brooklyn home.
The rabbi, who is 91 years old and partially paralyzed from a stroke two years ago, was listed in serious but stable condition after undergoing neurological tests under the care of a specialist in seizure disorders, said Mary Costello, a spokeswoman for the Hospital for Joint Diseases.
She said that he had arrived at the hospital at 3:30 A.M.


Giuliani Might Back Any of '94 Hopefuls
On a lobbying trip to the State Capitol today, New York City's Republican Mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, refused to rule out the possibility that he would support Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a Democrat, for re-election this year.
"The assumption should be that I'm going to support the Republican ticket for governor," Mr.
Giuliani said.
But he added that he would first have to know who the party's nominee was, what the views of the Republican ticket were, and what the nominee planned to do for New York City.


Off the Wall: Storing Art With Ever-Loving Care
DEAR DIARY:
Went to Long Island City, along shore of East River, to look at some of the best art in New York City.
All sorts of stuff is there.
More than 90,000 pieces, including Rembrandts, Van Goghs, Cezannes, Rubens, de Koonings.
Almost all of it boxed and wrapped.
Even the materials used by the artist Christo to wrap things like the coast of Australia were there in boxes.
Imagine Christo wrapped.
What a concept.


Customizing a Diet To Stop the Yo-Yo
LIKE an impassioned coach reviewing every punt, pass, tackle and block of a game just played, Cathy Nonas, the director of the Theodore B. Van Itallie Center for Nutrition and Weight Management in Manhattan, paced in front of a group of eight patients in a weight maintenance group last week and considered the food choices that each had made the previous day.
Beef instead of fish at a dinner party?
Fumbled pass.
An extra glass of wine?
Throwing an interception.
But forgoing an hors d'oeuvre tray?
Touchdown!


Music Notes
Hirshbein Leaving the Y
Omus Hirshbein, the impresario who made the 92d Street Y a vital force on the New York music scene, accepted an offer yesterday to leave the Y and become director of the music program at the National Endowment for the Arts.
Mr.
Hirshbein said he was not certain when he would take up his new duties, but Susan Clampitt, the deputy director of programs at the endowment, said she expected him to begin in about six weeks.
The position, for which Mr.
Hirshbein has a renewable two-year contract, involves overseeing an $11 million program of grants that will go to composers and performers of all kinds.
The program, which is the endowment's largest division, covers classical, jazz and multicultural music, but not opera and music theater, which are administered separately.
Last year, with a similar budget, the music program received 1,582 applications and distributed 695 grants.


Dorothy F. Leet, 99, Director of Reid Hall
Dorothy Flagg Leet, who directed the forerunner of the Reid Hall campus of Columbia University in Paris for over 30 years, died on Thursday at Meadow Lakes nursing home in Heightstown, N.J.
She was 99.
Under Miss Leet's leadership, Reid Hall became the focal point of interest in French-American cultural cooperation for many young American women students.
It drew lecturers and guests in the arts, science, literature and public affairs and was also used as a residence hall for students.


Courier at Little Rock Firm Recalls Shredding After the Inquiry Began
The law firm employee who testified before a Federal grand jury about destroying documents from the files of Vincent W. Foster Jr. now says he was told to shred the material after a special prosecutor had announced that he would look into the suicide of the White House aide.
Jeremy Hedges, a part-time courier at the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock, Ark., pinpointed the date in a telephone interview today.
Mr.
Hedges said that when he had fed the documents into the firm's shredder, he had already heard of the appointment of Robert B. Fiske Jr. as special counsel.


A Job With a View


Jets and Red Wings In Swap of Goalies
The Winnipeg Jets and the Detroit Red Wings swapped goaltenders yesterday.
BOB ESSENSA and defenseman SERGEI BAUTIN were sent to the Red Wings for TIM CHEVELDAE and center DALLAS DRAKE.
Essensa has a 19-30-6 record this season behind Winnipeg's problem-plagued defense.
He expects to be in goal in one of two games the Red Wings have this week in Calgary and Edmonton.
In exchange, Winnipeg got Cheveldae, 26, who has a record of 16-9-1 this season, but behind a better team.
Detroit wanted to strengthen its goaltending heading for the playoffs.
A trade involving Essensa and Cheveldae was rumored for weeks, but Jets Coach JOHN PADDOCK said he was looking for a player like Drake, who has 10 goals and 22 assists this season, to make the trade worthwhile. (AP)


Michael Dewell, 62, a Producer And Translator of Stage Classics
Michael Dewell, a producer, writer and translator who mounted theatrical classics on tour and on Broadway, died on Friday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 62.
The cause was lung cancer, said Mary Bryant, a friend.


Different Kind of Islam
To the Editor:
In your usually informative reporting, you should not fail to distinguish between the Nation of Islam and orthodox Sunnite or Shiite Islam.
The Nation of Islam has appropriated some Islamic theology and terminology, but the teachings of Louis Farrakhan and his ministers in no way represent Islam as that faith is practiced by the majority of Muslims the world over or by the converts (African-American, Hispanic and Caucasian) and immigrants in the United States.
MOHAMMED AHMED  Brooklyn, March 1, 1994


Review/Fashion; From 5 Designers, a Sense of Calm
Of all the major designers who have been around the track a time or two, Valentino seems to have the greatest grasp on what's going on in fashion today.
In the collection he presented at the fall and winter shows here, he kept things light and reasonably uncomplicated.
There was a touch of humor, for instance, in oversize feathery earmuffs.
The clothes seemed honestly designed to flatter the wearer and not demand too much of her.
They had a contemporary flavor.


A First for the U.N.: Condemning Anti-Semitism
For the first time, a United Nations organization condemned anti-Semitism today as a violation of human rights.
In a broad resolution condemning abuses, the Human Rights Commission expressed concern that "racism, racial discrimination, anti-Semitism, xenophobia and related intolerance, as well as acts of racial violence, persist and are even growing in magnitude, continually assuming new forms." The resolution passed unanimously.


Review/Music; Creative Combination by the Orchestre de Paris
For all the elaborate thematic programs and flashy gimmicks being trotted out in concert halls nowadays, there is still much to be said for elegant simplicity: the telling juxtaposition.
Alas, what cannot be said is that it will necessarily fill the seats, the evident motivation for all those exertions.
A slim but enthusiastic crowd turned out on Tuesday evening at Carnegie Hall for the splendid program presented by Semyon Bychkov and the Orchestre de Paris: Luciano Berio's "Sinfonia" and Hector Berlioz's "Symphonie Fantastique." Here was a rare opportunity to hear a 20th-century masterwork that crucially pointed the way to the present climate of American composition, and with it an older masterwork central to the orchestra's repertory and style.


Snow Again in Nation's Midsection


Whitewater Scandal Hunters Come Up Short; Partisan Politics
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 27 editorial inaccurately implies that I oppose a full investigation of the failure of Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan and its dealings with the Whitewater Development Company.
You also suggest that I am myopically defending the Clinton Administration.
At no time in the Senate Banking Committee's hearing on the Resolution Trust Corporation did I defend anyone's actions.
I stated several times that there are legitimate questions that need to be answered.


Starting a Fan Club For a Reluctant Star
SHE has seen him perform 52 times, Debbie Liss of San Jose, Calif., said of Michael Feinstein, formerly of Columbus, Ohio.
Fifty-two times, including his show on Sunday evening at the Cafe Carlyle in New York.
The event was the first East Coast get-together of Mr.
Feinstein's fan club, whose 500 members around the world range in age from 7 to, well, up.
Anyone deafened by the ear-bursting rock of the last few decades may have missed Mr.
Feinstein's way of joining a lovely lyric to a hummable tune.
Not so the 80 or so club members who came to see and hear the 37-year-old singer and pianist who is best known for helping to keep the Great American Song Book alive.


U.S. Judge Frees Daily News From Maxwell Case Claim
A Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday ruled invalid a claim of more than $92 million against the American corporation that owned The Daily News of New York when it was controlled by Robert Maxwell.
The claim had been filed by the Mirror Group Newspapers P.L.C. of London, one remnant of Maxwell's overseas corporate empire.
By a previous arrangement with other foreign creditors, the ruling also eliminated another $200 million in claims.


Decoraphobia: When Bare Is Better
FOR Elisabeth Ross Wingate, curtains are simply paralyzing.
"I'm blocked," said Ms. Wingate, a Manhattan film maker.


Books of The Times; How the Mind Translates Thoughts Into Words
The Language Instinct  How the Mind Creates Language  By Steven Pinker  Illustrated. 494 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.
The most arresting chapter in Steven Pinker's chatty, wide-ranging new book, "The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language," is titled "Mentalese," after what the author calls the "silent medium of the brain" in which thoughts are couched before they are "clothed in words."


Kaneb Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Haytaian Opens Campaign for Senate
With his first ad already on the air and a cross-state tour under way, the Speaker of the New Jersey Assembly, Chuck Haytaian, today opened his formal campaign for the United States Senate and his first attack on his anticipated opponent this fall, Senator Frank R. Lautenberg.
Standing outside a diner in this Trenton suburb during a light snowfall at the third of seven stops today, Mr.
Haytaian pledged to make tax cutting and crime fighting the principal themes of his campaign.


Kathryn Clarenbach, NOW Organizer, 73
Dr.
Kathryn Frederick Clarenbach, a founding member and the first chairwoman of the National Organization for Women, died on Friday at her home in Madison, Wis.
She was 73.
The cause was complications from emphysema, her family said.


Cantrex Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


The Censorship Sweepstakes
School officials in California and New York, two states with supposedly sophisticated education systems, are in a race to see which can impose the more benighted censorship.
California got off to a big lead when it removed works by two Pulitzer Prize winners from a statewide English test for 8th and 10th graders.
The students were supposed to read the literary selections, then write essays about them, in a major reform of the testing system designed to measure students' ability to think.


U.S. Says Spy Suspects Lied on Their Tax Returns
As part of an effort to continue the freeze on their assets, the Justice Department today accused Aldrich H. Ames, the Central Intelligence Agency officer accused of spying for Moscow, and his wife of lying repeatedly on their tax returns.
Federal prosecutors said the couple concealed million of dollars in espionage payments from the Internal Revenue Service.
The new assertion about Mr.
Ames and his wife, Rosario, came in legal papers filed today by Federal prosecutors seeking to extend a freeze on more than $2 million in the couple's bank accounts in the United States and overseas.
The prosecutors did not formally accuse the couple of tax evasion.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
To help the millions of Americans who own municipal bonds, the Government issued new rules intended to make it easier to track the bonds' value.  [ Page A1. ]
Stocks advanced modestly on moderate trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 1.69 points, to 3,853.41.  [ D6. ]


Social Services' Little List
After an unfavorable court ruling, New York has agreed to be more careful in releasing the names of people who end up on its list of alleged child abusers.
Too bad the state did not act before on its own, but its quick response should help correct a longstanding unfair practice.
The State Department of Social Services keeps a confidential list of suspected child abusers based on calls to a hot line.
Within 60 days, local social service departments investigate the calls.
If the complaint is unfounded, the state expunges the report.
If the investigation finds "some credible evidence" to support the complaint, then the person stays on the list unless the evidence is shown to be false.
The list, which now contains about 400,000 names, was originally designed to keep tabs on troubled families.


Loewen Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article in Business Day yesterday, about the California Public Employees Retirement System's withdrawal of a challenge to the board of the Boise Cascade Corporation, misidentified Dale Hanson.
He is chief executive of the retirement system, not of the company.


Whitman, in Office, Still Campaigns; Governor Tries to Build Support as a Fight Over Cuts Looms
After seven weeks in office, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman is showing every sign that she intends to maintain the kind of high public visibility that she displayed on the campaign trail.
While the capital has fixated on the politics of the 5 percent income tax cut signed into law on Monday, Governor Whitman has often forsaken the State House and the company of the Republican legislative majority.
Instead, she has conducted an almost daily round of public appearances in the state, showing a sunny personality and communicating a stern political message to the public.


U.S. Sees Hypocrisy On Trade
The Clinton Administration's top trade negotiator today denounced the Europeans for criticizing toughened American policies toward Japan.
He said the policy was already showing signs of progress, with word that Japan was close to agreeing to increase Motorola's access to the lucrative Japanese cellular-telephone market.
The United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, said the apparent Japanese willingness to open more of its market to Motorola "could be a portent of things to come and is a movement in the right direction" with regard to other major trade disputes with Tokyo.


Transactions
Baseball  Midwest League
ROCKFORD ROYALS -- Named Chris Gargani director of tickets and operations and Andy Williams facility supervisor.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Activated Jud Buechler, forward.
Released Todd Lichti, forward.


Foiling the Marketers
To The Home Section:
Products for adults show that irksome icons can never be outgrown ("Goo Is in the Oven, Barbie's at the Gym," Feb. 17).
When I wash dishes, well-muscled Mr.
Clean fights grease alongside my Chore Boy green scrubber.
How to cope?


U.S. TIGHTENS RULES TO HELP INVESTORS IN MUNICIPAL BONDS
In an effort to help the millions of Americans who own municipal bonds, the Federal Government issued new rules today intended to make it easier for them to keep track of the value of their bonds, which are often a major part of their life savings.
American households own $488 billion worth of municipal bonds directly and an additional $414 billion through mutual funds and other investment vehicles, making individuals by far the dominant investors in the $1.2 trillion market.
Investors increasingly choose these securities because they do not have to pay taxes on the interest they receive.
Over the last 10 years, individual ownership has jumped to nearly 75 percent of the market from less than 45 percent.


Council Democrat Backs Rent Increase in Rent-Stabilization Law
Shifting from his past position, the deputy majority leader of the City Council has called for legislation allowing a rent increase of up to 25 percent in rent-stabilized apartments once they become vacant, rather than supporting a straight extension of the rent-control and rent-stabilization laws that expire this month.
The deputy majority leader, Councilman Archie Spigner, the Queens Democrat who is also chairman of the Committee on Housing and Buildings, has proposed two bills.
One measure would allow the 25 percent increase when any stabilized building becomes vacant, and the other would allow such an increase only in buildings of 20 or fewer units.


Sarajevo Cleans Up, Trolleys Roll, But It Remains a City Under Siege
Already, United Nations engineering troops and local municipal workers have shoveled away the huge piles of garbage and washed the streets down with hoses from tank trucks.
Crews protected by armored personnel carriers are repairing electric lines.
Today, the rusted, wrecked dump trucks that provided a screen against snipers in the Serb-held Grbavica neighborhood were dragged away, providing a vista of the Brotherhood and Unity Bridge unseen for two years.


Northrop Also Made Bid In Grumman Takeover
As the Grumman Corporation discussed merging with the Martin Marietta Corporation for $55 a share last month, the Northrop Corporation, a rival weapons contractor based here, made its own bid of $50 a share, according to documents filed today with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Grumman agreed on Monday to be acquired by Martin Marietta for $55 a share, or $1.9 billion.
The S.E.C. filing suggests that the Northrop bid had set up a bidding war that Martin Marietta sought to avoid by paying cash rather than stock for the military contractor based in Bethpage, L.I.


Gooden to Get Contact Lenses
Dwight Gooden, entering his 11th season with the Mets, has been fitted for eyeglasses and contact lenses and plans to try pitching with the lenses after they arrive later this week.
But he insisted today that vision problems were not a factor in his first spring outing Sunday, when he walked 5 of the 12 batters he faced and was removed after 2 innings.


Jack Spector, 65, Disk Jockey for Over 3 Decades
Jack Spector, a disk jockey and radio personality in the New York metropolitan area for 33 years, died on Tuesday after apparently suffering a heart attack while broadcasting popular music on WHLI in Garden City, L.I.
He was 65 and lived in Brooklyn.
Jane E. Bartsch, vice president of the station, said Mr.
Spector collapsed in the studio while he was on the air and was taken by ambulance to Winthrop University Hospital in Mineola, where he was declared dead.


Corrections
A film review on Saturday about "Oscar Shorts 1993," a program of five short films at Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village, gave incomplete production credits, provided by the publicity agent, for "Blood Ties: The Life and Work of Sally Mann." The film was directed by Peter Spirer as well as Steven Cantor.


Petroleum Heat &amp; Power Co. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Viking Star reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Executive Changes
COLLECTION CLOTHING CORP., Ridgefield, Conn., named Terry R. Pillow, currently president of Armani Jeans, as its president and chief executive, as well as president of Colours by Alexander Julian.
LOCKHEED FINANCE CORP., Burbank, Calif., a unit of the Lockheed Corp., named Kathleen H. Anderson president.


After a First Wave Of Raves, 'The Piano' Slips Into a Trough
Some 2,500 years ago, Athenians went to the polls and voted to expel Aristides the Just from the city.
The reason?
As legend has it, they were sick and tired of hearing him described as Aristides the Just.
Something similar seems to be happening to "The Piano."


4,400 Jobs Will Be Cut At Raytheon
Continuing to feel the effects of a dwindling weapons business, the Raytheon Company said yesterday that it would take a one-time, $250 million charge for its fiscal first quarter and that it planned to cut 4,400 jobs, or 7 percent of its global work force.
Despite the charge, the company said it would still be profitable for the quarter, which ends March 31.
The company earned $157.5 million for the first quarter in 1993 and a company spokeswoman said it would surpass that even after the restructuring charge.


Agreement Gives Black Firefighters Benefits Denied for Years


South African Officials Open Inquiry Into a Deadly Train Wreck


Where It Might as Well Be Spring
THERE is no New York Flower Show this year, but lovers of tulips and other signs of spring need not fret.
Grand Central Terminal's main waiting room will be abloom from Monday through April 8, as it is transformed into a European-style market to start New York in Bloom, a citywide celebration sponsored by the Association for a Better New York, a promotional group.


Essay; Needed: A 'Team B'
Boris Yeltsin is in a snit.
He canceled a date with Richard Nixon in Moscow because the former President dared to visit the recently freed Aleksandr Rutskoi, as well as the Communist Party chief and a motley assortment of Russian politicians, reformers, putschists and shovists, all lusting after Mr.
Yeltsin's job.
"I am glad President Clinton supports this position," huffed the Russian President, apparently over-interpreting a sympathetic cluck from Mr.
Clinton over the phone.
To American reporters, Mr.
Clinton mildly indicated otherwise.


Auction of Swatches Past
BITS and pieces of silk, ribbon, lace, paisley prints, upholstery and other fabrics fill 200 swatch books to be auctioned on Tuesday at the Metropolitan Arts and Antiques Pavilion in Chelsea.
What some may consider old scrapbooks are coveted by collectors as well as fashion, textile and home furnishing designers in search of ideas.
"They're incredible," said Claudia Strauss, vice president of the pavilion, which promotes antiques and art shows.
"These have been accumulated over a number of years."


Let's Stop Looking for Out-of-State Landfills
To the Editor:
You report March 4 that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is looking out of state for landfills to take some of New York City's garbage.


Movie Is Bridge to U.S. For Haitian Pop Group
Richard Morse is clearly on a roll.
After a year of winning radio contests in Haiti for his first album, "Aibobo," the selection of one of his songs for the soundtrack of the film "Philadelphia" has given him his first big international exposure, and a small taste of platinum.
"My whole idea in coming to Haiti was to mix popular music with voodoo rhythms," said Mr.
Morse, whose mother, Emerante de Pradine, is a well-known Haitian musician and dancer.
His father, Richard Morse, is a retired dean of Latin American studies at Yale whose career has focused extensively on this country's political culture.


Hebron Is Thick With Soldiers as Panel Visits Site
Walking past coiled firemen's hoses that had been used to wash away rivulets of blood, members of an Israeli inquiry board went into the Cave of the Patriarchs today and traced the path of the Jewish settler who had massacred Muslim worshipers there.
An extraordinary security cordon was thrown around Hebron during their visit, deepening the sense of siege for Arab residents who have been under curfew almost nonstop since the settler, Dr.
Baruch Goldstein, went on his rampage on Feb. 25.


Pactel Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about Edward Goodell, a New York lawyer and former Civil Court judge, omitted a survivor.
He is Mr.
Goodell's son, Edward C. Goodell of La Mesa, Calif.


U.S. Aides Report Compromise on Sea Mining
After more than a decade of opposing the Law of the Sea treaty as hostile to free enterprise, United States officials said today that Washington would probably sign the treaty this summer, now that they have negotiated major changes.
Washington's backing would greatly strengthen the treaty, which governs the world's oceans.
It is scheduled to take effect this November, having been ratified by the required 60 nations among the 159 that signed it.


After 20 Years of False Identities, Man Admits to 3 Killings
Telling a tale of multiple personalities, serial murder, repressed memories and nearly 20 years on the run, a man turned himself in to the New York State Police yesterday and admitted to killing women in Yonkers, Mexico City and San Francisco in the 1970's, his lawyer said.
In 1974, Ricardo S. Caputo, now 45 years old, escaped from a state mental hospital -- where he had been committed after being found incompetent to stand trial for the 1971 murder of a Long Island woman -- and a few days later Judith Becker, a psychologist who had treated him, was killed in her Yonkers apartment.


Girl Swapped at Birth Now Switches Parents
Barely six months after a judge allowed a Florida teen-ager to remain with the man who had reared her after she had been switched at birth, the girl has suddenly moved in with her biological parents, with whom she had severed all ties.
After a meeting on Tuesday attended by both sets of parents, their lawyers and state-appointed guardians, the girl, 15-year-old Kimberly Mays, left the Sarasota Y.M.C.A. shelter where she had been living for the last week and joined the family of Ernest and Regina Twigg in Sebring, about 70 miles away.


Corrections
An article on March 2 about a dive by an unmanned Japanese submersible in the Marianas Trench of the Pacific Ocean referred imprecisely, in some editions, to the record depth reached by a manmade vehicle.
It is 35,800 feet.


Leo Burnett Wins An Ameritech Job
The Ameritech Corporation, the Baby Bell telephone company in the Midwest, said yesterday that it had selected the latest agency entry in a review, Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago, to handle the creative portion of its consumer telephone services account, which had been at Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago since 1989.
Billings were estimated at $40 million.
Burnett, which has been considered a dark horse, was awarded the account after entering the review five weeks after the three other contenders, which are based in Chicago.
The other finalists were the incumbent, Tatham Euro RSCG, which also handles Ameritech's print media buying; Bayer Bess Vanderwarder, which handles the company's broadcast media buying, and Ogilvy &amp; Mather.


Van Survivors Look Back in Sadness
Levi Wilhelm, a cane across his lap, sat at the center in a wheelchair.
Baruch, his father, and Sara, his mother, stood on either side of their wounded 18-year-old son, blinking into the flashing cameras in the lobby of Brooklyn Hospital yesterday afternoon.
Shalom Wilhelm, 22, the brother who had driven the van of Hasidic students through bursts of deadly gunfire a week earlier, awkwardly held the strings of several balloons as the cameras clicked again.
It was not a family portrait that the Wilhelms ever would have wished for, although there was reason enough to treasure it, too.
Their sons, unlike Aaron Halberstam and Nachum Sasonkin, had survived last week's shooting into a van of Hasidic students on the Brooklyn Bridge without being seriously harmed.


Banister Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Insider for Outsiders
Lloyd Cutler's arrival as White House special counsel marks the third time that President Clinton has reached for an outsider to repair damage inflicted by his inner circle of Arkansas cronies and campaign loyalists.
David Gergen, a Republican who has largely disappeared during the Whitewater crisis, arrived last summer to reshape Mr.
Clinton's public relations strategy; Harold Ickes, a New Yorker, came to rescue the health care plan only to be subpoenaed in the Whitewater mess.
Mr.
Cutler has now been called upon to help clean up that mess.
The 76-year-old Washington insider is no stranger to official quagmires.
He advised Jimmy Carter when Mr.
Carter's Administration had ethical problems, and served on President Bush's Commission on Federal Ethics Reform.
He publicly chided the Clinton staff "for personal ambition and excessive zeal" during the uproar over the White House travel office.


Life Re Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cost-Minded Lawmakers Are Challenging a 2-War Doctrine
Lawmakers from both parties are mounting the first serious Congressional challenge to the Pentagon's reshaping of the military, criticizing underlying assumptions about the new war-fighting strategy and the budget to pay for it.
Republicans and conservative Democrats say the Clinton Administration is cutting spending too quickly.
They dispute the Pentagon's contention that the equipment and troop levels in the plan are sufficient to carry out the military's doctrine of being able to fight two regional wars nearly simultaneously.


Review/Dance; Very Much Cunningham, Now Renewed
Great artists have a recognizable signature; lesser artists merely repeat themselves.
Merce Cunningham, very much in the first category, teaches us this invaluable lesson again in "Crwdspcr," the effervescent and wonderful new work that opened the Merce Cunningham Dance Company's two-week season on Tuesday night.
In this New York premiere at the City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan), Mr.
Cunningham's choreography remains true to his basic esthetics and also suffuses them with a sense of renewal.
Colorful in every way, extraordinarily vivid in its dancing by a 13-member cast, the piece erupts onstage like a welcome attack of spring fever.
Here is Cunningham at his best, exploring movement for its own sake and making his discoveries vibrantly theatrical for his audience.


Bill to Ban Club Bias Is Gaining in Albany
Fourteen years after it was first introduced, a bill to ban discrimination by many private clubs in New York seems headed for passage this year, Senate and Assembly leaders said today.
The bill has been passed seven times in the Democratic-led Assembly since 1980, only to die each year in the Republican-majority Senate.
But it has been given new life by an amendment that would state explicitly that clubs can still use whatever selective criteria they choose in evaluating applicants for membership and determining who can use their facilities, as long as those criteria do not constitute illegal discrimination.


He's No Gretzky But Pretty Good Gartner Passes Hull
To put things in perspective: Wayne Gretzky remains three goals behind Gordie Howe's National Hockey League record of 801.
That's the chase everyone is watching.
But four time zones to the east, after tonight's 7-5 Ranger victory over Washington at this neutral site, Mike Gartner was nipping at their heels, a mere 190 behind Howe's record.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  COUNCIL DEMOCRAT BACKS RENT INCREASE The deputy majority leader of the City Council has called for a rent increase of up to 25 percent in rent-stabilized apartments once they become vacant, rather than supporting a straight extension of the rent-control and rent-stabilization laws that expire this month.
B2.
MAYOR ACCUSED OF SABOTAGING BOARD In a heated hearing about the civilian board that reviews complaints of police misconduct, several City Council members complained that the Giuliani administration was trying to cripple the board by leaving positions unfilled.
B2.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Thinking Fellers Union Local 282  CBGB
The weird and wonderful Thinking Fellers Union Local 282 might be the brightest light on the San Francisco indie-rock scene.
In a post-punk culture that likes to grab things from all over, these expatriate Iowans obsessively collect everything in their path: remnants of psychedelia, Captain Beefheart's otherworldly blues, unadulterated California punk, various species of lounge and country music, bursts of static from either end of the radio dial.
The results are something like musical junk sculpture, neatly welded at improbable joints.
Beneath the delirious, near-lunatic exterior is a sharp and savvy sense of craftsmanship.


The Pop Life
Washington Job for Taylor
Billy Taylor is adding one more hat to the many he already wears.
The jazz pianist, composer, arranger, conductor, teacher, lecturer, author, historian and television and radio personality has been named the artistic adviser and spokesman on jazz for the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington.


What Schindler Did After World War II
To the Editor:
Your report of the German premiere of "Schindler's List" (arts pages, March 2) notes Steven Spielberg's concern that right-wing extremists and neo-Nazis would try to spoil the German opening of his movie about a German who saved Jewish lives in World War II and that he asked for and got tight security.
In October 1945, while I was aiding Holocaust survivors for the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee in Linz, Austria, Oskar Schindler asked for and received our help, based on documents that he had saved hundreds of Jews by giving them employment in his factory in Cracow -- verified to me by survivors.
Schindler expressed to me his fear of the revenge of the Nazis, and therefore wanted help to obtain work in Bavaria, where he thought it would be safer because United States occupation troops would be there for some time to come.
"Schindler's List," Thomas Keneally's book, refers to what happened in 1963, when Schindler was hissed on the streets of Frankfurt and even had to pay damages to a German worker he punched for calling him a "Jew kisser." Bitter irony that in 1994, as you point out, fear of Nazi revenge has not been eradicated.
Mr.
Keneally's book accurately reports that in 1949 the Joint Distribution Committee gave Schindler financial aid for his nutria farm in Argentina, which failed, and in 1959 for his cement factory in Frankfurt, which also failed.
These modest gestures of support were by no means compensation for Schindler's heroic achievements, but, long before Mr.
Keneally and Mr.
Spielberg made Oskar Schindler's name an international byword, the American Jewish community demonstrated its gratitude to this unusual man.
JAMES P. RICE  Chicago, March 2, 1994 The writer is retired executive vice president of the Jewish Federation of Metropolitan Chicago.


Review/Music; A Pianist Both Strict and Flexible
At times during Maurizio Pollini's concert at Carnegie Hall on Monday night, it seemed that two different pianists were playing.
There was the strict constructionist who, in Chopin's First Ballade and parts of Beethoven's Sonata in C minor (Op. 10, No. 1), performed so cleanly and objectively that one could almost take dictation.
And then there was the subtly lyrical musician who could turn the Introduction to the final movement of Beethoven's "Waldstein" Sonata into a flexible, nuanced series of musical breaths.
There was the pianist who could display fine musical applications of technique -- sterling trills in the "Waldstein," thrusting sweeps in the Chopin -- and there was the pianist who seemed almost casual about omitting an extraordinary amount of detail, muddying bass lines in Schumann's "Kreisleriana" and ignoring radical changes in harmony and texture in the development sections of the Beethoven sonatas.


Bond Prices Are Lifted By the Fed's Beige Book
The Federal Reserve's "beige book" report painted a portrait yesterday of a moderately expanding economy, not the robust one that many market participants had feared.
As a result, bond prices bounced off their lows of the day.
Traders said the market, which has been concerned about further Fed moves to force up rates, has been jittery since the last rate increase.
Yesterday was no exception, as investors and traders were prepared to read the report for signs of price pressures and possibly building inflation that could prompt the central bank to push short-term interest rates higher.


Rutgers and West Virginia Are Invited to Join Big East
The Big East invited Rutgers and West Virginia to become full-time members yesterday in a compromise that expanded the basketball conference to 12 schools and averted a split that had threatened its future.
After voting down proposals of expansion to 13 or 14 members, which could have added Temple and Virginia Tech to the basketball league, the presidents of the 10 Big East schools approved the two-team expansion by a vote of 7-3, the minimum required under conference regulations.


Reclaiming Black History Via Memorabilia
WHEN Lowery Sims started collecting golliwogs and other black memorabilia in the 70's, some people told her that she was being irresponsible.
They saw the objects as painful reminders of slavery and segregation.
Ms.
Sims, associate curator of 20th century art at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, disagreed: "It's part of my history and is a past I want to embrace and understand as much as the future."


High Cost of Putting Police on the Beat
To the Editor:
President Clinton aspires to fight crime by putting 100,000 more police officers on the streets, beginning with 50,000, at a cost of $1.7 billion.
One assumes these 50,000 officers will be spread throughout the country because crime is no longer concentrated in the large urban centers.


Harassment-Free Schools
To The Home Section:
The Parent &amp; Child column of Feb. 24 that dealt with sexual harassment in schools was insightful.


Treasury Deputy in Clinton Inquiry Asked White House Official's Advice
Roger C. Altman, the Deputy Treasury Secretary, spoke with at least one senior White House official last month about whether Mr.
Altman should recuse himself from a Resolution Trust Corporation inquiry into an Arkansas savings and loan with ties to the Clintons, Administration officials said today.
The officials said Mr. Altman had not been given any specific advice.


Discover's Chief Is Hired Away
Michael Rooney, publisher of Discover magazine, has joined Times Mirror Magazines to become publisher of Field &amp; Stream and Outdoor Life.
He has also been named senior vice president of the Outdoor Company, a new division of Times Mirror Magazines.
Mr.
Rooney, 40, was the founding publisher in 1986 of Men's Health, a Rodale Press publication, which is considered one of the most successful magazine introductions in recent years, recognizing men's emerging preoccupation with health and fitness and convincing advertisers that this represented a trend.


Hirsch Says He's Ready for Rangers
It would be an exaggeration to say that goalie Corey Hirsch has given the Rangers a "play-me-or-trade-me" ultimatum.
He's much too agreeable a fellow for such a thing, fresh from the Canadian Olympic team, just glad to be here, and all that.
At the age of 21, the slender, red-haired rookie from Medicine Hat, Alberta, doesn't show the cynicism or speak with the bitterness sometimes found in frustrated veterans.
Nevertheless, having joined the Rangers for their game here tonight -- a 7-5 victory over Washington -- Hirsch is blunt about the skill and confidence he showed in Norway, where he helped the Canadian team take the silver medal.


Whitewater Scandal Hunters Come Up Short
To the Editor:
"Slovenly White House Ethics," your Feb. 27 editorial on the Whitewater matter, proves it is possible to hyperventilate on no oxygen at all.
The Clinton Administration hardly needs to be "educated" on "the normal protocols of governance." It is rather you who need a crash course on journalistic ethics.
In a Jan. 11 editorial, you simultaneously acknowledged that there was "no specific charge against the President and Mrs. Clinton," yet called for the appointment of a special counsel nevertheless.
You accused this Administration of ethical lapses -- the same Administration that imposed the toughest set of government ethics regulations in a generation.
The accusations against the President and the First Lady are ludicrous and almost beneath response.
Almost.


Hilfiger Is Shuffling Its Management Ranks
The Tommy Hilfiger Corporation, the men's sportswear company, said yesterday that it was shuffling its top management ranks to position itself for its next stage of growth, which will eventually include a foray into the women's apparel market.
Tommy Hilfiger, the vice chairman and founder of the company, will become "honorary chairman," a title used in many Hong Kong companies to designate respect for a senior executive.
Apparel International Holdings Ltd., a Hong Kong-based investment group, holds a 54 percent stake in Hilfiger.


A War Hero Fights Corporate Foes
It was the January board meeting of a private shipping company.
The directors were holding it by phone, and when the topic of whether the company should pursue a merger came up, the chief executive quickly dismissed the idea.
The company had too many financial problems, period.
But one director dug in his heels.


AT HOME WITH: Yeou-Cheng Ma; The Hidden Melody
IN the kitchen, on the telephone, there was a nasty stretch of trouble.
Trouble with the trumpeters.
Trouble with the tickets.
Tempers rising.
Two kids tumbling (being kids -- always trouble), eating marigold-yellow macaroni and peeking into the wildly unkempt living room to peer at their mother, Dr.
Yeou-Cheng Ma, who kept pushing aside her round, clear glasses, rubbing her face with one hand and trying not to tune in too much.
C-day minus four.


Trilon Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G.M. Signs Electric Car Battery Deal
The General Motors Corporation said yesterday that it had signed a partnership agreement with the Ovonic Battery Company to advance the commercialization of a relatively new kind of battery for electric vehicles.
The venture with Ovonic, a subsidiary of Energy Conversion Devices, will explore the application of nickel metal hydride batteries for electric vehicles.
General Motors would not discuss how much money would be involved.


A Corporate Hybrid of New Cereals
The Kellogg Company, the nation's largest maker of breakfast cereal, said yesterday that it had agreed to produce a new line under the Healthy Choice brand name in a licensing deal with Conagra Inc.
The arrangement is a first for both companies.
Kellogg has never licensed a cereal brand from another company, nor has Conagra let another company use its Healthy Choice name.
Financial terms of the joint venture were not disclosed.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Tuesday, about a business combination involving American Consumer Products Inc. and Curtis Industries, described the relationship incorrectly.
The entity remaining after the combination will be called American Consumer Products Inc., but controlling ownership will by held by large shareholders of Curtis.
The companies did not disclose the total value for the complicated transaction; it will exceed $23.5 million.


Philip Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CLINTON PLAN SEES WELFARE COSTING $6 BILLION A YEAR
A draft of the Administration's welfare plan offers the first cost estimates of President Clinton's pledge to "end welfare as we know it," outlining significant new expenditures on child care, training and work programs.
The projections are preliminary and could undergo major changes as Mr.
Clinton and his aides resolve several policy issues.
But the cost of the programs, which the Administration projects at $6 billion in 1999, and the means of financing it, are likely to be central points in the debate when Congress takes up the issue this year.


Youth Guilty In the Slaying Of an Editor
A teen-ager from Colombia was convicted yesterday of killing Manuel de Dios Unanue, a journalist who crusaded against drugs, in a plot that prosecutors said was tied to a powerful Colombian drug cartel that was angered by Mr. de Dios's writings.
A Federal District Court jury in Brooklyn found that the teen-ager, Wilson Alejandro Mejia Velez, 19, was the gunman who fired two bullets into Mr.
Dios's head as he chatted at the bar in an Elmhurst, Queens, restaurant two years ago.


Corrections
A report in the Off the Menu column in The Living Section yesterday, about restaurants' Passover plans, referred incorrectly to the menu that will be served for a week starting March 26 at Lattanzi in Manhattan.
It is not kosher, and it is $40 a person, not $35.


Perez Provides An Early Show
The organ player was not yet in his customary seat, the concession booths were closed and the stands were barren when Melido Perez ambled to the mound this morning.
It was that early.
There were about 20 scouts and a dozen fans parked behind home plate to watch Perez in this spring training "B" game.
At least two baseball officials snoozed.
In this placid setting, three hours before the real Yankees opposed the real Montreal Expos, Perez made his spring debut against a lineup filled with minor leaguers.
General Manager Gene Michael was there, scribbling notes and looking stern.
Manager Buck Showalter checked Perez's radar-gun numbers between innings.
Catcher Mike Stanley was brought to handle Perez and was the only regular who received the early wakeup call.
To the Yankees, this trivial game was important.


Rescuing Early PC's
To The Home Section:
I was amused to read that early I.B.M.
PC's are considered collector's items ("What's Gleaming in Collector's Eyes," Feb. 24).
The model described in the article was the very one that I bought in 1983.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  SIEGE PERSISTS IN SARAJEVO  For all the welcome relief of the cease-fire, which marked its first month on Wednesday, war-shattered Sarajevo is still under siege.
All normal commerce and communication is cut off and nearly all of the food comes on U.N. aid flights.
A1


S.&amp; P. Electronics
The Standard &amp; Poor's electronics index, which measures the performance of semiconductor stocks, surpassed its 1993 full-year peak yesterday, after the release of a strong book-to-bill ratio that implied rising future sales.
The index of five stocks includes those of Motorola Inc. and the Intel Corporation.


Texas Vote: It'll Be Richards vs. a Bush
The state primary elections here on Tuesday did not transform the political landscape of Texas.
But they did yield one stunning upset of an incumbent Congressman, and they forced an April run-off between two Democratic aspirants for the Senate that has already turned into a verbal slugfest.
Perhaps most important, the primaries amounted to formal coronations for Gov.
Ann W. Richards and George W. Bush, now the nominees in a race for governor that is expected to have crucial implications for the balance of power between the two major parties in Texas.


Judge Blocks Hearing; Harding Can Compete
A Federal judge yesterday blocked the United States Figure Skating Association from calling Tonya Harding before a disciplinary hearing today, leaving her eligible to compete in the world championships this month in Japan.
In issuing a temporary restraining order in Portland, Ore., United States District Judge Owen Panner ruled that Harding lacked sufficient time to prepare an adequate defense for the hearing, which had been scheduled in Colorado Springs.


Mr. Stark's Race Backward
Representative Pete Stark, a California Democrat, heads the House subcommittee in charge of Medicare.
So it comes as no surprise that his idea of health-care reform is to shove as many Americans as possible into Medicare, making him czar over an industry almost as large as the Italian economy.
But while Medicare-for-all might be the right prescription for Mr.
Stark, it is the wrong reform for the rest of us.
Medicare has demonstrably failed to control costs and provide first-rate care.
Building reform on the Medicare model would send health care careering in the wrong direction.


Messages in a Legacy of Craft Art
LIKE the griots who roamed African villages telling tall tales and recounting tribal histories, today's black artists and designers are also sending cultural messages, with clay, iron, wood and textiles.
"Much of our past is embodied in what we create," said Bing Davis, the chairman of the art department at Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio, and curator of "Uncommon Beauty in Common Objects: The Legacy of African-American Craft Art," which opens on March 17 at the American Craft Museum.


Maine Allowed to Return to Tournament
Maine's national champion hockey team will be able to defend its Hockey East title because of a judge's ruling yesterday that forced the league to let the Black Bears into its tournament.
Within hours of a ruling from Superior Court Justice ROBERT BROWNE, Hockey East scheduled tournament games between Maine and Boston University for tomorrow and Saturday nights, university officials said.
Hockey East athletic directors had voted last week to bar Maine from the tournament.
The vote came after a team member, PATRICE TARDIF, was found to have been academically ineligible for much of the 1993-1994 season. (AP)


Magazine Executives Shift at Conde Nast
Steven T. Florio, who will become president of Conde Nast Publications on April 4, announced yesterday that Jack Kliger, publisher of Glamour, and Anne Sutherland Fuchs, publisher of Vogue, would join his executive management team.
Ronald A. Galotti, who resigned as publishing director of Esquire on Tuesday, will succeed Ms.
Fuchs as publisher of Vogue.
A new publisher for Glamour will be announced early next week, Mr.
Florio said.


Jays Try Major League Three-Ring Circus
When the Toronto Blue Jays receive their 1993 World Series rings on opening day next month, Gene Tenace will slip off his 1992 World Series ring, put on the new one, with its 45 diamonds and diamond solitaire stone, and place the old one in the safe deposit box with the other four World Series rings he owns.
"I'd like to get another one this year," Tenace said today. "I like jewelry."


Jaeger Honored for Charity Work
ANDREA JAEGER, once the teen-age phenomenon in tennis, is now helping young people who are terminally ill.
That is why Family Circle and Hormel Foods Corporation named her the recipient of the annual "Player Who Makes a Difference" award and gave her a $20,000 grant to aid her cause.
Jaeger was among six finalists, all former or current Women's Tennis Association players.
Four years ago, she started Kids Stuff Foundation, which supports the Silver Lining Ranch in Aspen, Colo., where children from around the country leave hospitals and treatment rooms for a week of camping and fishing.


Where to Find It
VISITORS to New York Carved Arts, John Claude Fevrier's workshop in downtown Manhattan, inevitably ask the same question: How is all that stuff made?
The "stuff" is carved glass, decorative windows, panels, mirrors and other glass surfaces patterned with frosty-looking images.
Though usually associated with the Victorian and Art Deco eras -- think of the frosted windows in London pubs or the etched naiads on old movie-hall mirrors -- carved glass can look thoroughly contemporary.
For a client who has a dining room with a prominent Oriental rug, Mr.
Fevrier carved the rug's pattern onto a glass table top.
For a desk top for another client, Mr.
Fevrier carved Manhattan's street grid onto thick glass shaped like the island.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.24
2.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.51
3.54
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.75
3.77
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.35
6.39
5.96
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.83
6.86
6.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.66
7.69
7.69
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.97
5.95
5.84
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bridge
Some 3,000 enthusiasts are converging on Cincinnati today, ready to compete in the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals beginning tomorrow.
Ten days of play will decide the prestigious Vanderbilt Knockout Teams, seven other national titles and a host of minor events.
Among the contestants from New York City will be Eva Nacht and Win Allegaert, who won a regional Imp pairs title two weeks ago in Ronkonkoma, L.I.
Study the diagram and try to determine the par contract, the one that would be reached if all the players could see all the hands.


Pittway Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Transatlantic Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


After Eating Lunch, Bronx Pupils Fall Ill
Twenty-four pupils at an elementary school in the Bronx became ill yesterday after eating lunch, and eight were taken to hospitals for treatment for possible food poisoning, the police said.
The pupils, third and fourth graders at Public School 46 at 279 East 196th Street in the Bedford Park section, took ill about 1:40 P.M., said a police spokesman, Detective Joseph K. McConville.
Five students were treated at Montefiore Hospital, two at North Central Bronx Hospital and one at Jacobi Hospital.


Keds Trims Review To Four Agencies
The Keds Corporation in Cambridge, Mass., said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its estimated $20 million account to four agencies from six.
The sneaker and casual footwear maker's account was previously handled by Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly of Providence, R.I., which declined to participate in the review.


JUDGE TURNS DOWN MENENDEZ REQUEST
Unmoved by a passionate plea from Erik Menendez, a judge today refused to have the government pay his private lawyer, Leslie Abramson, to defend him in a second murder trial, saying Ms.
Abramson must live with her own "bad business decision."
Looking pale and thin as he stood in court, Mr.
Menendez, 23, said: "I am begging this court to compensate my attorney to represent me. There is no way I'd want to go to trial without her representation."


Free Agents Visit Giants
The Giants continue to look at free agents, and yesterday was no exception as four players made a visit to the team's complex.
Interestingly enough, three of them were defensive backs -- New Orleans safety Keith Taylor, Minnesota safety Vencie Glenn, and Miami safety Jarvis Williams.
The other player was Phoenix guard Lance Smith.
Having three safeties in for workouts and talks is no coincidence, and it is smart.
Giants coaches think there is a good chance that safety Greg Jackson could be lost to free agency.
They have already lost safety Myron Guyton to the New England Patriots.
Cornerback Mark Collins is also a free agent and there is a chance he could also leave.
So this is a way for the team to cover itself just in case it loses one or more players.


With Boss Besieged, Gergen Minds Himself
David R. Gergen was hired to salvage President Clinton's reputation.
Now he is trying to salvage his own.
Mr.
Gergen, a former Republican aide who basked in accolades, perhaps overblown at times, for turning the Democratic President's fortunes around last summer, has become the man most mistrusted by the most fervent Clinton loyalists in the White House.
As he went underground during the heat of the Whitewater affair, apparently forsaking his role as chief White House spin doctor, the President's counselor also became the target of a whispering campaign unusual for a Presidential team that is fairly collegial by Washington standards.


Lawmaker's Partnership in a Consulting Firm Is Queried
Assemblyman Clarence Norman Jr. sponsored legislation that allowed the city hospital system to require contractors to hire minority-owned companies in rebuilding Kings County Hospital Center, just two months before he became a business partner of a man who had a contract worth hundreds of thousands of dollars to recruit minority contractors for the project.
The bill, which was signed into law in July 1990, made the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation subject to state regulations that require a proportion of subcontracts to go to minority- and women-owned companies.
Without the amendment, the corporation could not require prime contractors to employ minority businesses.


HEINZ (H.J.) CO. (N)
The H. J. Heinz Company said yesterday that its third-quarter profits fell by more than 20 percent, compared with the comparable period a year ago, mostly because of disappointing results at its Weight Watchers business, which was affected by the severe winter weather and the Los Angeles earthquake.
Attendance at Weight Watchers classes fell 25 percent during the quarter, Lawrence Adelman, a food analyst for Dean Witter, said.
Consumer concerns about a Federal Trade Commission inquiry into the weight-loss industry's marketing practices might also have affected sales, he said.


Teen-Ager Is Guilty In Slaying of Editor
A teen-ager from Colombia was convicted yesterday of killing Manuel de Dios Unanue, a journalist who crusaded against drugs.
Prosecutors said his death was tied to a plot by a powerful Colombian drug cartel that was angered by Mr. de Dios's writings.
A Federal jury in Brooklyn found that Wilson Alejandro Mejia Velez killed Mr. de Dios two years ago.
But the authorities said the leader of the murder conspiracy is believed to be at large in Colombia
Article, page B1.


Powerful Computer Chip Is Offered by Texas Instruments
Texas Instruments Inc. introduced a powerful new computer chip today that will process video, images and audio on a single chip.
Analysts and industry officials said that the multimedia video processor, or M.V.P., could speed the development of a range of multimedia devices that combine video, images, audio and data.


America's Cup: At Last, an All-Female Crew
One hundred and forty-two years after the schooner America left the best of the British fleet in her wake in a race around the Isle of Wight, the America's Cup competition became a full-fledged sport yesterday.
Bill Koch, who successfully defended the cup off San Diego in 1992, announced that his entry in the 1995 competition would be entirely manned by women.


Rally in Capital Protests a Rise In Smoking Tax
Granted, this sounds peculiar.
But to protest President Clinton's plans for financing his proposed overhaul of the health care system, some of the nation's biggest tobacco companies virtually stopped making cigarettes today.
Instead, they shuttered their factories and bused their employees -- and tobacco farmers, leaf processors, cigarette-carton makers and a throng of other industry workers -- to Washington and the biggest pro-cigarette rally in political annals.


No Headline
"My father couldn't believe I would have any trouble getting a job when I graduated. He thought there would be all kinds of people recruiting me. But there weren't." -- REESE ISBELL, who has two part-time jobs and works seven days a week to make ends meet.  [ B12:2. ]


Inflexible Structure Hinders the Power Authority
More than 50 years ago, Gov.
Alfred E. Smith envisioned a state power authority that would harness the energy of Niagara Falls and the St.
Lawrence River and bring the blessings of electricity to homes, farms and small factories around the state, no matter how remote.
It worked well for a long time, but not lately.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED BANKSHARES INC., Thomson, Ga., a bank holding company, said it had agreed to acquire Citizens Bank and Trust, Evans, Ga., for $17.5 million in cash and stock.
R.
R.
DONNELLEY &amp; SONS CO., Chicago, said it planned to acquire a 51 percent interest in Editorial Lord Cochrane S.A., a printing company in Chile, for $58.7 million.


CHRONICLE
THOMAS KENEALLY, who wrote the book "Schindler's List," on which the movie is based, had planned to take next Thursday night off from the party-lecture-premiere circuit, but then he got an invitation he couldn't turn down.
"I deliberately left that evening free, and then I was invited to the White House for dinner with Albert Reynolds, Prime Minister of Ireland, and Bill and Hillary Clinton," he said yesterday from Irvine, Calif.
Mr.
Keneally has been traveling to film premieres in places like Washington, London, Vienna and Australia, teaching two courses at the University of California at Irvine and giving speeches.
On March 24, he will deliver a lecture, "The Holocaust: a Gentile Experience," at Baruch College in Manhattan.


Lawrence E. Spivak, 93, Is Dead; The Originator of 'Meet the Press'
Lawrence E. Spivak, originator of the NBC News program "Meet the Press" and one of the first broadcasters to use panels of reporters to interview national and international leaders, died yesterday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 93.
Betty Dukert, the program's senior producer, said the cause of death was congestive heart failure.


Virgin Records, a Harmonious Part of Thorn EMI
When Richard Branson sold Virgin Records to Thorn EMI two years ago for $960 million, he walked away with a huge profit on a company that he had founded in 1973 and built into one of the music industry's largest independent labels.
But the shaggy-haired entrepreneur left behind questions about whether EMI had overpaid and whether Virgin's freewheeling culture, which had helped attract to its roster rock and pop performers like Phil Collins, Steve Winwood, Boy George and Paula Abdul, would work within the button-downed atmosphere of its new corporate parent.


G-I Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Fannie Mae Seeks to Ease Home Buying
The organization that stands behind many of the nation's mortgages is taking broad steps to make home ownership easier for lower-income Americans, particularly recent immigrants and minorities, people involved in the effort said today.
Under the new rules, banks would have more flexibility in lending to people who already owe a considerable amount of money or who cannot afford a down payment equal to 20 percent of the price of a home, the people said.
Tuesday Announcement
The change is to be announced on Tuesday by the Federal National Mortgage Association, popularly known as Fannie Mae.
Officials at Fannie Mae would not comment on the plan.


Pentagon Offers New Way to Verify Disarmament
The United States has devised a novel means to verify the dismantling of American and Russian warheads and the Pentagon wants to propose it to Moscow, Pentagon officials said today.
The monitoring would be intended to fill a gap in American and Russian arms control agreements.
While the two sides have extensive procedures to monitor the number of missiles and bombers they have deployed, they have not allowed each other to observe the dismantling of warheads or measure the fissionable material that has been extracted.


A Contractor Speaks Out on Extortion
Richard E. Nolte is not looking for partners in his plumbing business, but, he says, he gets plenty of offers.
There he is, bidding for a job in a Manhattan or Bronx apartment building when he is invited to drop in at the managing agent's office for a chat.
The purpose soon becomes clear, he says: the agent wants a cut of the contract.


At Last, Secaucus Picks Its Mayor


FPI Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Drexel Clinches N.C.A.A.
Berth  In Philadelphia, Drexel scored the last 11 points last night to defeat Maine, 86-78, to clinch the North Atlantic Conference championship and an automatic berth in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Malik Rose had 19 points and 15 rebounds and Mike Wisler added 18 points for the Dragons (25-4), whose only other appearance in the N.C.A.A. tournament was during the 1985-86 season. (AP) Michigan State 94, Indiana 78: Shawn Respert scored 40 points to help Michigan State improve its N.C.A.A. tournament chances with a victory over No. 18 Indiana in East Lansing, Mich.
The Spartans (19-10 over all, 10-7 Big Ten), who overcame a career-high 41 points from Alan Henderson, won their fifth straight. (AP)


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Witches' Broom
Q.
I've heard gardeners discuss witches' brooms.
What are these things? -- John Keeny, Brooklyn.


For One Night, Knicks Own Hawks' Home Court
Faced with a playoff-type game, the Knicks responded with a playoff-type defensive effort tonight.
The Knicks owned the fourth quarter.
They controlled the tempo and frustrated the Atlanta Hawks on their home court.


Mentally Ill, Addicted And Alone on the Street
To the Editor:
I am writing about the use of methadone maintenance for psychiatrically ill people with substance abuse problems, and the lack of integrated resources for them.
As an inpatient social worker in a psychiatric unit in New York City, I have frequently had to plan discharge follow-up for such patients, many of whom have been on methadone for years, and for whom withdrawal is considered dangerous.


Calendar: Crafts Sale, Design Shows, Lectures
TriBeCa Crafts  P.S. 234, 292 Greenwich Street (near Chambers Street); (212) 475-8324.
Thirty artists will sell handmade crafts like gold jewelry, woven clothing, decorative blown glass and wooden furniture this weekend, starting with a preview party tomorrow from 6 to 9 P.M.
Admission to the preview, in advance, is $20; at the door, $25.


Catalonia's Bill Comes Due for Madrid: It's More Autonomy
After losing its parliamentary majority in elections last summer, Spain's Socialist Party was still able to form a new, minority Government thanks to the support of Catalonia's main nationalist party.
Now the price of this support is becoming apparent.
Last month, the Catalan leader, Jordi Pujol, who also heads the regional government, told Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez that he had until the summer to grant greater self-government to Catalonia or face the risk of being voted out of his job during the crucial budget debate this fall.


Economic Scene; On Macho Trade Issues, Economists Turn Chauvinist
IT'S still war out there, only the terms of battle have changed.
A decade ago the object was to get the Russians out of Afghanistan and keep them out of Europe.
Now the enemy is Japan and a dozen mini-Japan's ready to suck us dry of advanced technology and good jobs. . . .


Pop and Jazz in Review
David Wilcox  Bottom Line
Although today's pop marketplace has ample room for female singers and songwriters who carry on the introspective tradition of Laura Nyro and Joni Mitchell, the male descendants of James Taylor and Jackson Browne are having a much harder time of it.
If anyone could transcend what seems to be a commercial double standard that rejects the sensitive man, it is probably David Wilcox, the North Carolina singer and songwriter who performed on Monday evening.


Review/Rock; A 20-Year-Old Band With Some New Tricks
In many ways, Rush is a classic cult band.
Its albums zoom up the charts immediately upon release; its tours, including its two nights this week at Madison Square Garden, sell out fast.
At concerts, large numbers of fans can be counted on to sing along with every song.
Like most arena bands, Rush provides spectacle.
On Tuesday night, the three-man band played its two-hour set amid film clips, smoke, psychedelic-patterned lights and showers of sparks.
There was even a prototypical heavy-metal drum solo by Neil Peart, complete with rotating platform and a final gong.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Bank of China is selling $400 million of 6 3/4 percent notes due in 1999 and priced at 99.71 to yield 6.819 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated A3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp., Louisville, Ky., is selling $175 million of 6.5 percent senior notes due in 1999 and priced at 99.928 to yield 6.517 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The noncallable issue is rated A3 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


Military Women Say Complaints Of Sex Harassment Go Unheeded
Despite promises of Pentagon reforms after the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal, four women serving in the military told a House committee today that the armed forces often punished women who complain of harassment rather than the offenders.
Since the 1991 Tailhook Association convention, at which naval aviators assaulted scores of women in a hotel in Las Vegas, Nev., all branches of the military have issued stronger rules against harassment, ordered sensitivity training and expanded job opportunities for women.
Commanders have hailed a new era in relations between men and women in the military.


Chinese Dissident Appears; May Meet Christopher
China's most prominent dissident appeared today in the port city of Tianjin, near Beijing, fueling speculation that he is preparing to meet Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who arrives Friday.
United States diplomats sought to keep any plans inconspicuous in advance of Mr.
Christopher's arrival, in part because of their shaken confidence in the Chinese leadership after a week of detentions and harassment of dissidents in Beijing and Shanghai.


For Florida Derby Field, Handle With Care
They have a horse named Mr.
Angel training here for the Florida Derby, and he is no angel.
He has thrown five riders in the last month, including his regular jockey, Herb McCauley.
His trainer, Marty Wolfson, said, "Every day is an ordeal."
Another horse training for the big race is Halo's Image, who got into a speed duel with Holy Bull in the Fountain of Youth Stakes two weeks ago.
Then, turning into the homestretch, he bolted to his right all the way to the outside railing, where he meandered home in fifth place in a field of six.
His trainer, Happy Alter, said: "He lost interest. He made a right turn to go home with the stable ponies."


St. John's Sees Light At Start Of Tunnel
St.
John's is approaching the end of its first losing season in 31 years without despair.
Yes, the Redmen finished with a disappointing 11-16 record (5-13 in the conference) that left them ninth in the 10-team Big East Conference.
They lost their best player, Shawnelle Scott, to a season-ending thumb injury in mid-February.
They are long shots in the conference tournament that they open tonight against Pitt in the first game of a doubleheader at Madison Square Garden.
But for Coach Brian Mahoney's team, there is always next season.
Or the one after that.
This institution, a longtime titan of the sport, is not going to run out of good basketball players.


Low Pay and Closed Doors Confront Young Job Seekers
Andrew Flenoy has ironed his white shirt until there are sharp creases down the sleeves.
His hands are folded in his lap, his back is ramrod straight, and his feet jiggle nervously as he begins his fifth job interview in as many weeks -- this one at Sprint, the long-distance telephone company that is Kansas City's largest private employer.
Mr.
Flenoy, 21, comes across as nervous and sweetly sincere as he tells the interviewer how much he wants the $17,274-a-year job selling long-distance service.


Mayor Accused Of Sabotaging Civilian Board
In a heated hearing about the board that reviews complaints of police misconduct, several City Council members complained bitterly last night that the Giuliani administration was trying to cripple the board by leaving positions unfilled.
"You're undermining the credibility of this agency," Sheldon S. Leffler, a Democratic Councilman from Queens, told administration budget officials, complaining that the positions were already budgeted for the current fiscal year.


Toys 'R' Us Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Hospital Mix-Up Puts Medical Waste in Garbage
A hospital in East Orange dumped 11,000 pounds of garbage containing hazardous medical waste into its open-air loading area for several hours earlier this week after the garbage was rejected by an incinerator because it was contaminated, officials said.
The incident began on Tuesday morning after workers at the American Ref-Fuel incinerator in nearby Newark noticed that garbage from the 238-bed East Orange General Hospital included syringes, bloody bandages, vials and other wastes that must be burned at a special incinerator, said Curt Hurst, plant manager at the incinerator.


Agency Faults a U.C.L.A. Study For Suffering of Mental Patients
A Federal agency has ruled that the University of California at Los Angeles failed to get proper consent from schizophrenic patients in an experiment in which they were taken off their medication and allowed to suffer severe relapses.
Experts on medical ethics said the study and others like it raised fundamental questions about the system for protecting patients in medical experiments.
The system depends heavily on ethical review committees at individual institutions, which currently make decisions ad hoc.


In Queens, Verdict Brings Gratitude and Concern
Along the streets of Jackson Heights, Queens, where Manuel de Dios Unanue hoped his antidrug message would change lives, the guilty verdict against the young man who shot the crusading editor to death was measured yesterday with deep appreciation for Mr. de Dios's sacrifice, relief that the system had worked, concern for stereotypes about Colombians and, in at least one case, skepticism.
Some residents said the guilty verdict against Wilson Alejandro Mejia Velez, the 19-year-old gunman whom the prosecution had contended was hired by the Cali cartel, would inspire renewed courage to combat the drug plague.
Others were afraid to talk.
Above the intermittent roar of the No. 7 train on the tracks above Roosevelt Avenue, Dario Gomez, 35, a Colombian immigrant, said: "This was an important case because he was an important man. It's good that the authorities showed so much interest in this case."


Lear's Magazine Is Expected to Be Closed
Frances Lear, the founder and owner of Lear's magazine, has called a meeting of all Lear's staff members this morning, and many of them expect her to announce that six-year-old Lear's is closing.
There has been widespread speculation within the industry that the magazine is on the verge of closing in the wake of published reports in The Wall Street Journal and elsewhere that the magazine is in trouble, that many staff members have left and that Lear's has failed in recent months to pay many writers and photographers.
A staff member said yesterday, however, that writers had begun receiving checks in the mail this week.


Thermo Instrument Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Hope, not despair, is the United Negro College Fund's new message.
THROUGH more than 20 years of public service announcements, the United Negro College Fund has reminded people, "A mind is a terrible thing to waste." Many who agreed have contributed mightily to the organization, keeping it high on the list of American philanthropic benefactors.
Until this year, the message has generally shone through announcements showing the forlorn and frustrated families unable to finance their children's continuing education.
As the backdrops varied from one year to the next, two themes remained constant: the poignancy of the message and the pain of despair.
The 1983 announcement was a good example, concluding, "When bright young minds can't afford college, America pays the price."


Sports of The Times; The Coach Who Phoned Himself In
THE telephone rang in Stephen Vest's home on a Friday night in mid-February.
A familiar voice said, "Get your pen, I've got a few things to say."
The sports editor of The Myrtle Beach Sun News felt his heart begin to race.
This was a journalist's dream, an exclusive that had dialed him.
He reached for a notebook as the coach said, "I just came back from seeing this movie, 'Blue Chips,' and. . . ."


Redskins' Bostic Plans to Retire
Center JEFF BOSTIC, one of the original "Hogs" whose blocking took the Washington Redskins to four Super Bowls in 10 years, is retiring after 15 years in the National Football League.
Bostic, 35, who has had five knee operations, said his physician told him that continuing to play was a threat to his health.
That and the league's new salary cap that might have forced a cut in the $850,000 salary under his contract prompted the decision to retire, he said.
Also yesterday, the veterans CARL BANKS and TIM McGEE were released by the Redskins so the team could remain under the salary cap after signing KEN HARVEY.
Banks is a former Pro Bowl linebacker with the Giants. (AP)


Fernando Rey, 76, Spanish Actor Known for Roles in Bunuel Films
Fernando Rey, the Spanish movie actor known for his roles as the French drug lord in "The French Connection" and as the corrupt ambassador in Luis Bunuel's "Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie," died yesterday in Madrid.
He was 76.
The Associated Press reported that his son, Fernando, gave the cause of death as bladder cancer.


Look, Ludwig, Cordless Music
THINK of earphones, and you naturally think of music on the go, roaming about with a Walkman on your belt.
But there is also much to be said for listening with headphones at home.
You can have Schubert all to yourself without bothering anyone who is not ready for "Death and the Maiden" at the moment.
And you can listen at full concert volume after everyone has gone to bed, avoiding complaints from the neighbors.


Barkley Acquitted of Assault Charge
Phoenix Suns forward CHARLES BARKLEY was acquitted yesterday of charges that he hit a patron in the face during a game last season at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in East Rutherford, N.J.
Barkley was not in court; his lawyer said he couldn't be there because he was between games.
A New York City firefighter, DENNIS McKEEVER, charged that Barkley knocked him out on Dec. 8, 1992.
Barkley's lawyer, THOMAS SULLIVAN, contended that Barkley was deflecting what he believed was on oncoming blow. (AP)


Gloucester Journal; On a Quiet English Street, a Deed of Dreadful Note
A crowd of 50 or 60 stood in the drizzle today across the road from a pale yellow stucco house, cracking tasteless jokes or staring in almost reverential silence while waiting for more news in a case that has shocked and horrifed Britain.
And sure enough, at 10:15 A.M., at the police station some blocks away, the police announced that yet another body -- the ninth -- had been unearthed, this one underneath the concrete floor of a bathroom.
The building at 25 Cromwell Street, called the House of Horror in the press, continued to exert its ghoulish spell.


No Surprise at Charges of Co-op Payoffs
If the reaction at last night's annual meeting of the Council of New York Cooperatives is a reliable barometer, a prosecutor's charges that some building property managers have been supplementing their pay with kickbacks from contractors and suppliers comes as no surprise.
"Everybody knows it has been going on," said Debbie Hiller, the president of a condominium on Ocean Parkway in Brooklyn, echoing the comments of others among the 100 or so co-op and condominium board members who attended the meeting.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
HOW should you respond when a child brings home a failing grade on a report card or a note from a teacher warning of academic problems?
It isn't easy.
Unplugging the television set, hiring a tutor or arranging for summer school can help in some cases but can be ineffective or even counterproductive in others.
"The most important thing is to identify the reasons your child is failing," said Dr.
Marian Fish, a professor of school psychology at Queens College.
"First, ask your child. Then, ask the teacher. Only rarely will they tell you exactly the same thing."


Journal; The Silent Partner
Amazingly, Tuesday was the second anniversary of the New York Times article that broke the Whitewater mess -- as Whitewatergate is known to those of us who have not yet convicted the President.
But it was just last weekend that the 16-year-old collision of a failed land deal and a failed S.&amp;L., a story comprehensible only with Rube Goldbergesque flow charts, became a national craze.
What changed?
In substance Whitewater may have little in common with Watergate -- an abuse of power by a President in office -- but in form Whitewater has now started to mimic Watergate as cheesily as "Pretty Woman" replays "Pygmalion."


Creature of Apartheid Struggles to Stave Off Doom
Scampering before a volley of tear gas and rubber bullets this afternoon, a University of Bophuthatswana student shouted encouragement to his friends.
"This is the kick of a dying horse," the student scoffed, and even while gagging on the smoke the students managed to hoot with delight.


Atco Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Gibbs Goes Full Time With NBC
JOE GIBBS will take up full-time residence at NBC's "The N.F.L. Live" pre-game studio show next season, teaming with MIKE DITKA as a co-analyst.
Gibbs, the former Washington Redskins coach, was a game analyst last season but showed a flair for studio work during NBC's post-season games.
He will paid approximately $250,000 a season, about double his first year's salary, in a multiyear deal that would let him leave to return to coaching.


To 3 R's, Some Add Emotions
ANGER, disgust, fear, joy -- a kaleidoscope of feelings washes over the faces of a class of fifth graders at the Troup Middle School in New Haven.
Locked in concentration, they are mimicking the expressions on faces pictured on a handout about the specific facial-muscle recipes for each emotion.
It's an exercise in empathy: they practice the expressions and talk about the feelings that go with the face.


Howard Still Mr. Big Any Way Mets See It
Frank Howard does not like to be described as intimidating.
It hurts his feelings.
He doesn't mind having been nicknamed the Capital Punisher -- a moniker several Mets players have picked up on and use frequently.
And it doesn't bother him that visitors to the Mets' spring training center frequently make comments about his imposing size.
He just doesn't want to be considered a scary man.
"Never use the word 'intimidate' about me," Howard said today, while puffing on his usual pre-practice cigarette in the Mets' clubhouse.
"I don't deal with that kind of stuff and never have. Intimidation is something I don't believe in. I let people know up front what I expect, and that's all."


Weapons Conviction Reinstated for 7 Davidians
Prompting cries of outrage from defense lawyers, the Federal judge in the Branch Davidian trial reinstated guilty verdicts today against seven defendants on a weapons charge.
The judge's reversal of an earlier ruling could add several years to their sentences.
One defendant, Ruth Ottman Riddle, was pronounced free of all counts last month against her after the trial in San Antonio and was expected to be deported soon to her native Canada.
But she could now face as many as 30 years in prison because of the judge's ruling, her lawyer said today.


A break from excess


From Backcourt, Dumars Goes Front and Center
It was obvious that the Nets missed the offensive punch of Chris Morris tonight.
And that was one reason they also missed an opportunity to go three games over .500 again, losing by 114-97 to the Detroit Pistons, who snapped a seven-game losing streak and put a kink in the Nets' playoff hopes.
But even Morris, who is out for at least two weeks with a broken right thumb suffered Sunday night, might not have been enough to offset Joe Dumars tonight.
The Pistons guard was 16 of 23 from the floor, including 3 of 4 3-pointers, and 9 of 10 from the free-throw line to finish with a season-best 44 points, including 22 in the fourth quarter.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Joe Lovano  Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at 11th Street) Greenwich Village Through Sunday
The saxophonist Joe Lovano has spent the last decade or so becoming one of jazz's more distinctive improvisers, and on Tuesday night he showed off his wares.


Ex-Dinkins Official Goes From Daily Crises to Duck Watching
Many New Yorkers no doubt dream of shedding the pressure and bustle of New York City for the calm and solitude of a pastoral village.
But few act on the impulse.
One of those who did is Suzanne Trazoff, who for nearly all of the last dozen years was as close to the anxiety-provoking heart of the city as any New Yorker.
As the chief spokeswoman for the Human Resources Administration, the vast city agency that oversees social services for the poor, and, most recently, for the Police Department, she survived more than a decade of daily crises.


Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Health Systems Int'l reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Accord Gives Black Firefighters Injury Benefits
It took a court order in 1968 to force the volunteer fire department in this once all-white community to start admitting blacks.
But for another 26 years, an association affiliated with the department -- and unknown to black firefighters until 1980 -- continued to bar black firefighters, denying them the state-financed death and injury benefits to which they were entitled.


U.S. Remarks Over Kashmir Anger Indians
India has reacted with anger to recent statements by the Clinton Administration over possible abuses of human rights in the Government's efforts to put down a rebellion in Kashmir.
American officials say there has been no change in United States policy on the issue, which calls for India and Pakistan to settle their long dispute over Kashmir in talks.
Nevertheless, Indian officials charge that the Administration statements amount to a shift toward support for Pakistan's claim to the territory.


Scientists Report Way to Predict Volcanic Blasts
The battered survivor of one of history's worst scientific calamities reports today that he and his colleagues have discovered a way to help predict volcanic outbursts, characterizing it as a major step in the art of forecasting eruptions.
The team analyzed data from an eruption last year that crippled the survivor and killed six other scientists.


CHRONICLE
A downtown boy: SUSANNE BARTSCH, whose name is always followed by a tag like party promoter, party giver or partygoer, and her fiance, DAVID BARTON, owner of the Chelsea gym that bears his name, have a son, BAILEY BARTSCH BARTON, born last Wednesday.


A Tough Sell: Sending G.I.'s to Bosnia
The top United States military officer today reaffirmed Washington's commitment to send as many as 25,000 troops to help enforce a peace settlement in Bosnia, but he acknowledged that the Administration lacks public support to do so.
The officer, Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said he was guardedly optimistic that the warring parties would reach a three-sided agreement.
But he warned that the Administration still had "an awful lot of explaining to do" to gain public approval for sending troops as part of a multinational peacekeeping force.


YELTSIN CANCELS TALKS WITH NIXON
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia today angrily and abruptly canceled a meeting scheduled next week with Richard M. Nixon, saying he was "deeply, personally offended" by the former American President's visits this week with top leaders of the opposition.
Mr.
Nixon, who arrived in Moscow on Sunday on a private visit, met on Monday with former Vice President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, who led an armed uprising against Mr.
Yeltsin last October and was released from prison only 10 days ago.
Mr.
Nixon also met with Gennadi Zyuganov, head of the Russian Communist Party, among others.


G.O.P. Dismisses Qualms About Whitewater Hearing
Republicans in Congress today dismissed the concerns of the Whitewater special prosecutor that public hearings on the affair could disrupt his investigation.
But the Republicans promised the prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr., that if such hearings were held, Congress would not grant witnesses immunity from prosecution.
Still, after an hourlong meeting with two Republican Senators, Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York and William S. Cohen of Maine, Mr.
Fiske said, "I would prefer that there be no Congressional hearings."


INSIDE
Quarrel Over Public Hearings
Republicans dismissed the concerns of the Whitewater special counsel that Congressional hearings could disrupt his investigation.
Page A20.
Predicting Volcanic Blasts
A scientist who was badly injured in a deadly volcanic explosion last year says data from the blast show a way to predict eruptions.
Page B11.
Confession in 70's Slayings
A man surrendered in Manhattan, saying he killed three women, in Yonkers, Mexico City and San Francisco, his lawyer said.
Page B1.


Stocks Advance on Fed Economic Report
Probably surprising even itself, the stock market chose to believe the Federal Reserve Board yesterday when the central bank reported that in January and February the American economy was moderately robust, yet showed no signs of inflation.
The Fed's message cheered the bond markets and thus helped the stock market to rally, but just barely and in only moderate trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 1.69 points, to 3,853.41.
Still, the rise was significant since stocks seemed to be heading downward after lackluster sessions Monday and Tuesday.
And today's session may build on yesterday's small rally if traders continue to take good news on inflation at face value.


CHRONICLE
It was reunion time for ALICIA DE LARROCHA and two old friends, VAN CLIBURN and VICTORIA DE LOS ANGELES, at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday evening after Miss de Larrocha's performance of the Ravel Piano Concerto with the New York Philharmonic.
Mr.
Cliburn had sent flowers to Miss de Larrocha, but Hans Boon, a publicist who accompanied her into the hall, removed the card so as to keep Mr.
Cliburn's presence in the audience a surprise.


Gallego, a Cancer Survivor, Empathizes With Kruk
It was a flashback that Mike Gallego was not seeking about an incident he did not want to remember, but that ugly word, that dreaded disease, was there for him to ponder again.
He discovered Wednesday that John Kruk of the Phillies had testicular cancer and it immediately transported Gallego back 11 years to Phoenix when he received the same diagnosis and thought he might die.
Gallego vividly recounted the details of his ordeal as a 22-year-old minor league second baseman wondering whether his life would continue -- forget his baseball career -- when those words were uttered to him during spring training.
Mike, you have cancer.
Nothing else mattered.
Only the word that millions fear.
Gallego knows what Kruk is going through.
Teammates in Mexico
"It's easy and it's not easy to think about," Gallego said, speaking deliberately.
"It's amazing how quickly a human forgets and takes the out-of-sight, out-of-mind attitude. But it doesn't take long to bring you back to reality and how lucky you are not only to be playing baseball but to be alive. It puts things in perspective. What's baseball? Life and family. That's what it's all about."


LDDS Communications Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reviews/Film; The Old-West Adventures Of a Very Odd Couple
"Lightning Jack," a comic western produced and written by its star, Paul Hogan, sinks under the weight of a disastrous, if innocent, miscalculation.
This takeoff on an Old West buddy movie mismatches the sardonic Australian star of the "Crocodile Dundee" films with Cuba Gooding Jr., who made such an impressive debut in John Singleton's "Boyz N the Hood."
Mr.
Gooding plays Ben Doyle, a literate but mute store clerk who runs away from his abusive boss to be the sidekick of a notorious bank robber.
Ben, who communicates by scribbling notes on a pad he carries around, comes uncomfortably close to the old-fashioned movie stereotype of a bowing and smiling Negro servant.
Even though race is never mentioned in the movie, audiences are likely to wince in scenes where Ben, patronized as "boy," reacts by rolling his eyes in discomfort.


Reviews/Film; Sniffing Out the Truth About Instant Success
"The Hudsucker Proxy" begins with a lush, romantic image of a New York City that never was.
Heavy snow falls as the camera moves in among a crush of skyscrapers that stand as symbols of progress and glamour.
On a ledge, ready to jump, is Norville Barnes (Tim Robbins).
Like the cityscape around him, like everything else in the visually stunning and funny new film by Joel and Ethan Coen, Norville is a pop-culture myth straight out of old movies.
Although the story is set in 1958, the look and the dialogue and the plot evoke films of the 30's and 40's.
Historical accuracy means nothing when you're fondly retelling legends built by Frank Capra, Preston Sturges and Howard Hawks.
As the film flashes back, it is instantly clear that Norville is the Capraesque little guy.
An innocent from Muncie, Ind., he arrives in New York and gets a job in the mail room of giant, heartless Hudsucker Industries.
The next day, he is its president.


U.S. Shoe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Inquiry Faults Weicker On Auto-Emissions Pact
Lobbyists for a company seeking a $150 million state contract influenced the Governor's office, winning the company a second chance after a state commissioner had selected its competitor, Attorney General Richard Blumenthal said today.
Mr.
Blumenthal, reporting on his inquiry into the hotly disputed selection of a contractor to operate Connecticut's auto-emissions testing program, said the result was "at the very least, an appearance of unfairness and partiality to the public and to the participants in the process."


Review/Film; A Bumbler Not Quite Making Ends Meet
"Raining Stones" was shown as part of the 1993 New York Film Festival.
Here are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 2.
The film opens today at Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
Ken Loach, the English film maker, is on a new roll.


Hoax Calls Reported
A man has called a dozen Long Island women, claiming to have kidnapped their husbands and demanding sex with the women as the ransom, the Nassau County police said yesterday.
The caller appears well-informed about his victims, Inspector George Morrish said, calling each woman collect at home and using the husband's name.
The police said they know of about 12 of the calls to women throughout Nassau County so far this year.
Investigators do not believe that any women have been fooled by the ruse, a police officer said.
The police asked anyone with information on the case to call (516) 573-6252 or (516) 573-6752.


TVWeekend; On an Anarchic Journey Into Darkness's Heart
Joseph Conrad's 1902 novella "Heart of Darkness" has finally been made into a movie.
The director Nicolas Roeg ("Performance," "The Man Who Fell to Earth") has translated the story into a film starring Tim Roth as Marlow and John Malkovich as Kurtz.
Well, sort of.
Mr.
Roeg's "Heart of Darkness," characteristically loopy, begins a run Sunday on TNT.
In the late 1930's, Orson Welles worked feverishly on a "Heart of Darkness" movie project that was eventually abandoned, forcing the theatrical wunderkind to switch to a film called "Citizen Kane." In the late 1970's, Francis Ford Coppola used the Conrad story as a structural underpinning for his Vietnam movie, "Apocalypse Now." Obviously, the novella's theme of alienation, greed, corruption and exploitation have struck some of this century's more dominant chords.


Greece Bids Farewell to a Favorite


Disney Can Make American History Fun
To the Editor:
For the first time in a long time, I disagree with the premise of one of your editorials -- "Virginia, Say No to the Mouse" (Feb. 24), on the proposed Disney theme park in Virginia's Prince William County, "a region of natural beauty and historical importance, flanked by the Blue Ridge Mountains and the Civil War shrines of Manassas."


&gt;Albany Says Killer's Escape Would Be Tougher Today
New York State mental health officials said today that rules have stiffened against suspects found mentally incompetent to stand trial and that it would be nearly impossible now for a suspect like Ricardo S. Caputo to escape a psychiatric institution.
Until the early 1980's the State Mental Health Commissioner had virtually unchecked discretion to decide whether patients suspected of crimes could be transferred to a minimum-security hospital or allowed furloughs off hospital grounds.


Why Marilyn and Bogie Still Need a Lawyer
Hollywood movies that depict the raising of the dead are standard genre fare, but what if the dead are the Hollywood stars themselves?
What if W. C. Fields, say, is brought back to perform on screen with Billy Crystal, not through spliced footage from a 1930's comedy but instead in an entirely new performance?
Imagine "The Piano" with Bette Davis instead of Holly Hunter, or "Schindler's List" with Clark Gable instead of Liam Neeson.
Wow, you say.
Can they do that?
Well, yes.
Computer animation, which has already resurrected dinosaurs for "Jurassic Park," is now capable of transforming raw data into images that look like, sound like and behave on screen like recognizable people.


Natalie Hall, 89, Dies; A Star of 20's Musicals
Natalie Hall Rowe, a musical-comedy star and opera singer in New York and London in the 1920's and 30's, died last Friday at her home in Edgecomb, Me.
She was 89.
The cause was heart failure, said her daughter, Betty Gruendel of Edgecomb.


West in Deal On Russian Oil Refinery
The Chevron Corporation and ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd. plan to announce an agreement today to license technology and help upgrade a major oil refinery in Russia.
Chevron would supply the Russians with the licensing and engineering support to build the first hydro-cracker facility using Western technology.
ABB Asea Brown Boveri, based in Zurich, is one of the leading builders of refineries.
The project, an upgrade of a refinery in Kirishi, about 70 miles southeast of St.
Petersburg, is estimated to cost $500 million; the fees awarded to Chevron and Asea Brown Boveri were not disclosed.


Motorola Gaining Access to Japanese Market
Motorola Inc. and a Japanese company have reached a basic agreement that would expand Motorola's access to Japan's cellular telephone market, a Motorola executive said today, in a move that should avert threatened American sanctions against Japan.
The agreement would remove a serious dispute marring trade relations between the United States and Japan.
But the cellular telephone issue is separate from a broader dispute over comprehensive trade talks that broke down last month.


Disney Can Make American History Fun; 'We Cannot Consecrate'
To the Editor:
I agree with you on the potential "Disneyfication" of Prince William County (editorial, Feb. 24).
Disney hopes to reconstruct the grave events of our Civil War with a cheerful and superficial backdrop, complete with roller coasters and cotton candy.
This goal is destructive to our history.


WTA Leader to Step Down
Four and a half years into a five-year term as head of the WTA Tour Players Association, GERARD SMITH has decided to step down a bit early.
The move, he said yesterday, would allow him to stay in one place for a change while giving the association, which is based in St.
Petersburg, Fla., plenty of time to find a successor.
Under plans advanced by Smith as the association's executive director, many of the group's tour management duties will be merged into a revamped Women's Tennis Council, which is being restructured to streamline tour management and marketing and to give the tour's women a greater say in tour affairs.


American Israeli Paper Mills Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hebron Police Chief Says Troops Cannot Shoot Jews, Even Killers
The Israeli border police commander in Hebron told a Government commission today that all Israeli forces in the West Bank area have standing orders never to fire at Jewish settlers, even if the Jews are shooting at people.
Instead, he said, they are supposed to take cover and wait for a chance to overpower the settlers.
The commander, Chief Inspector Meir Tayar, said the orders were in force on Feb. 25, when a Jewish settler walked into a Hebron mosque and massacred Palestinians at prayer, an incident that has upended peace talks.


Hospital Project Lag in Brooklyn Linked to Minority-Contract Issue
The rebuilding of Kings County Hospital, the major medical center serving the largely minority communities of central Brooklyn, foundered in large part because of an effort to give more construction work to companies run by women and minorities, an investigator for the city's hospitals agency said yesterday.
The reconstruction of the city's largest public hospital is now 32 months behind schedule.


Lear's Magazine Is Closed
Lear's, a monthly magazine aimed at women 35 and older, closed yesterday after six years of publication.
The decision to shut down the magazine was made by its owner, Frances Lear, who said that she felt the future lay in "direct marketing products to women through advanced telecommunications."
Ms.
Lear said she planned to produce a series of home videotapes for women, beginning this summer.
She told her staff yesterday that she had wanted to turn Lear's into a personal finance magazine for women but decided at the last moment that it was not feasible.


Girl, 4, Dies of Drug Dose; Father Is Charged in Death
Leah O'Doherty's father was a drug addict who kept methadone in the refrigerator in a Gatorade bottle, the police say.
Somehow, Wednesday night, the 4-year-old girl consumed three times the dose of the drug that would have killed an adult, and yesterday morning she was dead.
Her father, Kevin O'Doherty, 26, has been charged with second-degree murder, though investigators have not determined whether the death was accidental or whether Leah was given the drug.
Leah's mother, Kelli, 25 -- who the police said was also a drug addict -- has been charged with criminally negligent homicide.


Westchester's Top Republican Endorses London
In another sign of a growing rift within the state's Republican Party, the party chairman in Westchester County said today that he would support Herbert London as the party's gubernatorial nominee, rejecting the candidate endorsed by United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
The endorsement by Anthony J. Colavita provides an important lift to Mr.
London by handing him a potentially large block of convention votes.
It is also a blow to one of his leading rivals: state Senator George E. Pataki, a former Peekskill mayor who represents parts of Westchester in the Legislature.


In a Letter, Robb Admits to Marital Indiscretions
Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia sent backers of his re-election campaign an extraordinary six-page letter today in which he acknowledged committing marital indiscretions, but insistently denied other accusations that have hobbled his political prospects.
The letter amounted to a pre-emptive strike by Mr.
Robb, a Democrat, in what is likely to be a brutal struggle for a second term in office against Oliver L. North, the probable Republican candidate who gained national prominence for his role in the Iran-contra affair.


California Race For Senate Seen As Costly Battle
Two years ago, Michael Huffington, a wealthy Republican oil man just up from Texas, put $5 million of his fortune into the race for a Congressional seat in the Santa Barbara district, setting a national spending record for a House contest.
He won going away.
Three months later, and only a month after being sworn in as a House freshman, he began talking about running for the Senate in 1994.


International Paper
Shares of the International Paper Company slumped for a second day when the company said, after the market closed Wednesday, that its first-quarter earnings would be below analysts' expectations of 75 cents a share.
The company is scheduled to report its results on April 12.


On Stage, and Off
Women's Work. Yes!
One irritating paradox of the entertainment world is that when its members get together to celebrate themselves, the results are rarely entertaining. (Witness the Oscars or the Tonys.) An exception, however, took place yesterday, when the League of American Theaters and Producers and Playbill magazine held a luncheon at the Regency Hotel in Manhattan to honor the women of the theater.
The event drew some 150 women, including performers (among them two generations of Lolas: Gwen Verdon and Bebe Neuwirth), directors, choreographers, producers, writers, press agents and even Capt.
Kathy Ryan, who is in charge of the Times Square mounted police.
As Elizabeth I. McCann, a producer who served as master of ceremonies, said, "Some of you have had achievements more publicly recognized than others, but there's no one in this room who doesn't deserve a free lunch."


Rice and St. Raymond Earn a Rematch in Final
They have already met three times this season.
Last night at St.
John's University's Alumni Hall, Rice and St.
Raymond guaranteed themselves a fourth.
The two schools, both 22-4, won convincingly in the Catholic High School Athletic Association boys' basketball semifinals and will meet on Sunday in the championship game at Fordham's Rose Hill Gymnasium in the Bronx.
Top-seeded St.
Raymond of the Bronx, the defending C.H.S.A.A. champion, which has defeated Rice of Harlem in two of the three meetings, beat LaSalle Academy of Manhattan last night by 70-48.


I.R.A RAID CALLED NO BAR TO TALKS
British and Irish leaders said today that the search for peace in Northern Ireland would go on despite the I.R.A. attack at Heathrow Airport on Wednesday evening in which four mortar shells were fired at a runway but did not explode.
Though it did not cause any casualties, the assault upon the world's busiest airport was dramatic.
It was the I.R.A.'s first use of mortars on the mainland since a round crashed down on the Prime Minister's office in February 1991, and it broke a relative lull in bombings and assassinations since Britain and Ireland started a joint peace initiative on Dec. 15.


Women's Accounts Dismay Navy Chief
Navy Secretary John H. Dalton said today that it made his "blood boil" to hear testimony that sexual harassment goes unpunished in the military and that the Pentagon makes shoddy responses to women's complaints.
Mr.
Dalton's comments before the Senate Appropriations Defense Subcommittee came a day after four women, representing each of the military services, told lawmakers that they had been sexually harassed and then punished for reporting the offenses.


Weather's Misery: Only the Elements Have Changed


Review/Photography; 'Cocaine True': Art or Sensationalism?
By now the terrible destruction inflicted on American society by cocaine, and particularly the cheap, smokable form of the drug known as crack, is old, bad news.
But Eugene Richards's wrenching photographic study of the culture of cocaine in three inner-city neighborhoods, now at the International Center of Photography, gives faces to some of the victims of addiction.
It provides a shocking and heart-rending picture of the damage inflicted by the drug.


Whitewater Impasse in the House
Senators Alfonse D'Amato and William Cohen have agreed to give the Whitewater special counsel, Robert Fiske, an undefined number of weeks or months to prepare his cases before the Senate undertakes its own inquiries.
That shows welcome recognition of the need to give Mr.
Fiske a head start on his investigation without surrendering Congress's clear right to provide oversight.
But Mr.
Fiske has yet to achieve detente with Republicans in the House.
Jim Leach, the ranking Republican on the House Banking Committee, plans to explore Whitewater in hearings on March 24 on the status of the Resolution Trust Corporation's savings and loan rescue operation.
He has asked some 40 witnesses, including White House and Treasury Department officials, to appear.


Corrections
A brief report by Reuters in the Company News column of Business Day on Tuesday about job cuts by Inco Ltd. misstated the company's output of nickel last year.
It was 370 million pounds, not 170 million.


Senate Is Told That Cigarettes Are 'Entry' Into Hard Drugs
Adolescents use cigarettes as the "drug of entry into the world of hard drugs," and to discourage them Congress should increase the tobacco tax even more than President Clinton proposes, Joseph A. Califano Jr. told the Senate Finance Committee today.
Mr.
Califano, who was Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare in the Carter Administration, now heads the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University.
He released a study by the center showing that among youths 12 to 17 years of age, smokers were more than 50 times as likely as nonsmokers to use cocaine and 12 times more likely to use heroin.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $126 million of notes divided in two parts: $75 million of notes due 1999 priced at 100 to yield 5.92 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. and $51 million of notes due 1997 priced at 100 to yield 5.38 percent through Lehman Brothers.
Both issues are noncallable. *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., or Freddie Mac, is selling $200 million of debentures due 2001 priced at 100 to yield 6.54 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The issue is callable in three years.


Hornets' Johnson Is Ready
Charlotte Hornets forward LARRY JOHNSON was activated yesterday after missing more than two months because of a sprained lower back.
The Hornets were 9-22 with Johnson out.
After a workout before last Friday night's road game against Minnesota, Johnson said his back felt better than his lungs.


Smucker's Account Is Placed in Review
The J. M. Smucker Company, the maker of jams, jellies and condiments in Orville, Ohio, said that it had placed in review its estimated $15 million account, after 35 years at Wyse Advertising of New York and Cleveland.


Study Finds Risk in Making Plants Virus Resistant
Eight years after researchers discovered that they could protect plants against disease by inserting genes from plant viruses into them, scientists at Michigan State University have found that the practice may pose more risks to the environment than previously known.
Dr.
Richard F. Allison, a plant molecular virologist, and Ann E. Greene, a graduate student, are reporting today in the journal Science that pieces of virus that have been inserted through genetic engineering can combine with a newly introduced virus to make a new virus.


Prayers for the Lubavitch Rebbe as His Condition Worsens


Labatt (John) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Two Who Revel in the Madness
The annual CBS pre-March Madness conclave of college basketball crews usually devolves into the Al McGuire-Billy Packer Witfest, with other announcers, such as Bill Raftery, playing minuscule supporting roles.
Oh sure, there is discussion of the best teams, the smartest coaches and the top players heading into the N.C.A.A. men's tournament, but the chatter heads frequently into odd directions.


Art in Review
Janine Antoni  Sandra Gering Gallery 476 Broome Street SoHo  Through tomorrow
"Licking and Lathering," Janine Antoni's entry last summer in the Venice Biennale's Aperto section (an "open" exhibition devoted to the work of young artists) is now her second one-woman show at Gering.
The piece consists of 14 portrait busts of the artist mounted on classical pedestals.
Seven are cast in white soap, seven in brown chocolate: all are reshaped by the methods of the work's title.


A Clear Path for Harding
Tonya Harding cleared another legal hurdle yesterday when the United States Figure Skating Association decided not to immediately appeal a court order delaying a disciplinary hearing for the skater.
In effect, the skating association will not challenge Harding's participation in the world championships in Japan, beginning on March 20.


Future Now Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chic By H.I.S. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 5


Corrections
A brief front-page summary in some editions yesterday about Richard S. Caputo, who has confessed to four killings, misused the term "schizophrenic" in describing his behavior.
Mr.
Caputo's lawyer has said that his client has a multiple-personality disorder.
Schizophrenia, by contrast, is typified by profound delusions that interrupt the ability to perceive reality and conduct the tasks of daily life.


For Children
'The Barber of Seville'
John Jay Theater  899 10th Avenue (at 59th Street)  Manhattan  (212) 769-7008  Recommended ages: 5 and up  Tomorrow
Rossini's comic opera is a bit like a circus, with much confusion and histrionics at important moments.
This is one reason many children enjoy this show, part of the Metropolitan Opera Guild's Growing Up With Opera series.
At a performance last weekend, I observed one ponytailed girl swinging her head like a metronome for the full 105 minutes, undoubtedly pleasing her mother. (I was surprised, also, by the high number of smiling father-son pairs.) With Rossini, anything is possible.
But as one father commented, "Next week, 'Lohengrin'?"


Drifter's Tale of Serial Death: Remorse Prompts Confession
They remembered him along his deadly way as handsome and terribly charming, a dark-haired young Argentine with a dimpled chin and solemn eyes, a flair for languages and for sketching faces in a bar, too traveled and too proud for the cheap rooms and the busboy's dirty apron.
Ricardo Silvio Caputo had come to New York and was going places.
He sought out accomplished women who sympathized with his frustrations and were taken in by the smooth charm, at least at first, women who would later try to break off with him -- and could hardly have foreseen the knife or the brutal knuckles or the nylon stocking at the throat.
The Predator Behind the Mask
But behind the charming mask, the authorities say, lay a cunning predator who may have had multiple personalities and who killed at least four women in an odyssey that took him from New York to California and Mexico, leaving a trail of death, grieving families and detectives who never closed their files.


Market Place; Clear Channel profits by buying stations and improving them.
BUYING radio and television stations and improving their operations is a strategy that is working well for Clear Channel Communications Inc. and its investors.
The company's broadcast revenues for 1993 jumped almost 44 percent, to more than $118 million, and after-tax cash flow increased 55 percent, to about $26.6 million.
The stock, which closed yesterday at 38 3/8, unchanged, was among the top-performing issues on the American Stock Exchange last year.
Even with that growth, several Wall Street professionals remain bullish on the prospects of the business and the stock.


Cuomo Sees No Obstacle To S.I. Vote
In a move that might bolster his political standing on Staten Island, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo issued a legal opinion today that the Legislature could vote on the borough's plan to secede from New York City without a request from the city.
Mr.
Cuomo's opinion differs pointedly from that of Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Manhattan Democrat who raised a new obstacle to secession last week in one of his first major acts as Speaker.
Mr.
Silver said the Assembly majority's lawyers had concluded that the State Constitution would prohibit the Assembly from voting on secession without a "home rule message" from the New York City Council and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.


A Fugitive Judge's Unusual Emergence
On the day a year ago when he was to surrender to begin serving a state prison sentence of two to five years for official corruption, Judge Joseph F. O'Kicki of western Pennsylvania's Cambria County Court of Common Pleas was nowhere to be found.
He had fled to Slovenia, his father's birthplace, where he had secretly obtained citizenship.
The Pennsylvania authorities' efforts to get him back have proved futile, largely because Slovenia, a republic within the former Yugoslavia, has no extradition treaty with the United States.


Review/Fashion; Chanel's Jacket, Spritely At 60
It's not wise to challenge Karl Lagerfeld.
He manages to get his way.
For the Fendi collection that he presented last week in Milan, Italy, he had wanted to use only fake furs.
The Fendis thought otherwise.
So he pouted and then today did what he wanted to do in the first place: He showed only fakes in his collection for Chanel.
It was the last major show here and it helped redeem the fall and winter season.
Spirited, young and inventive, it made fashion seem an adventure, and certainly drew a line between vigorous young designs and clothes that have been with us for decades.


Bowne &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


WIDER GROUP KNEW ABOUT S.&amp; L. TALKS IN THE WHITE HOUSE
A 1,000-page stack of documents surrendered to a special prosecutor today showed that more White House officials than the six already subpoenaed knew of internal discussions about a Federal investigation into an Arkansas savings and loan tied to the Clintons.
The documents, which came from the offices of as many as 40 White House officials, were turned over by the White House in response to a sweeping subpoena by the special prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr.


UMass Pulls Out a Hat Trick Over Temple
Once more, for an unprecedented third time this season, Mike Williams broke Temple's heart.
The difference in this game was that he did not wait until the very end.
"I didn't want any last-second shots," said Williams, the Massachusetts guard whose shooting was the difference in the two 1-point victories over the Owls this season.
"I had enough of them. I just wanted to be up 10 points with 30 seconds to go."


Donald Cohodes, 44, Expert on Health Care
Donald R. Cohodes, the administrator of Federal programs for the Chicago-based Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, died on Wednesday at Evanston Hospital in Evanston, Ill.
He was 44 and lived in Wilmette, Ill.
He died of cancer, said the national association of independent Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans.


A.L. Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baptists Dismiss Seminary Head In Surprise Move
The president of the nation's largest Southern Baptist seminary was ousted on Wednesday, becoming the latest official removed by the conservative forces who control the Southern Baptist Convention.
Trustees of Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary in Fort Worth voted 26 to 7 to dismiss the Rev.
Russell H. Dilday, the institution's president for 16 years, when he refused to take early retirement.


Brooklyn Health Center Delivers Services to the Urban Poor
To the Editor:
The State University of New York Health Science Center at Brooklyn and its University Hospital of Brooklyn were the subject of criticism in a Feb. 28 article, specifically allegations that they have not properly served their local community and that they have favored "well-insured" patients over the poor.
These charges are without merit.


Mining Law Change Reduces Tax Revenue
To the Editor:
"The Gold in Our Hills" by Robert Redford (Op-Ed, Feb. 21) left a misinformed impression that mining has "savaged" the West and that Congressional efforts to rid mining from public lands would create jobs in a region where good jobs are few and far between.


Doctors Doubt Multiple Personalities Can Hide Killings From One Another
Delving into the lexicon of modern psychiatry, Richard S. Caputo's lawyer yesterday described his client as a man with at least three personalities, one of which is psychotic and drove him to commit serial murder.
But that explanation was greeted with skepticism by some psychiatrists.
While they agreed that multiple-personality disorder exists, most said they knew of no cases combining truly psychotic and rational selves.


Rates Soar On Selloff In Treasuries
Prices of Treasury securities plunged yesterday, pushing up the yield on the 30-year bond to 6.95 percent, its highest level in more than nine months.
Long-term interest rates, which move in the opposite direction of bond prices, are now more than a percentage point above the 25-year low reached on Oct. 15 and nearly three-quarters of a point higher than in early February.
For the Clinton Administration, which has based its hope for steady economic growth on the lift from low long-term interest rates, the selloff in the bond market must be raising concerns.





P.L.O. Sees No New Talks Until Israelis Curb Settlers
Senior Palestine Liberation Organization officials stressed today that the P.L.O. wanted to resume peace talks with Israel despite the Hebron massacre last week, but that it could not do so without tangible measures from the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin to insure "palpable" physical protection for Palestinians in the occupied territories from armed Jewish settlers.
Two senior P.L.O. officials, as well as top Egyptian diplomats, said senior Palestinian leaders, including the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, still believed that resuming peace talks is the only viable option for Palestinians.
But they also said demands for restrictions on Jewish settlers, including stripping the violent among them of weapons and restraining their movements in heavily populated Palestinian regions, are so overwhelming that any leader who ignores them will be stripped of all credibility and support.


Paperwork Seized In Shooting Inquiry
For the second time, the police last night searched the Brooklyn car service that employed the man charged with last week's fatal shooting on the Brooklyn Bridge, taking confidential files as well as other paperwork.
Investigators also brought Hazim Abuhakmeh, a dispatcher at the car service, in for questioning.
Officers in charge of the special task force set up to investigate the shooting, which left one Hasidic student dead and three others injured, told Mr.
Abuhakmeh's lawyer that the dispatcher was not a suspect in the investigation.


Critic's Notebook; A Brash Outsider Inside Hollywood
NO one who has seen "Kiss Me Deadly," the director Robert Aldrich's nasty little film-noir masterpiece, is likely to forget its vision of a Southern California so spiritually parched that a single match struck at the wrong moment could unleash the fires of hell.
In Aldrich's scorching 1955 film adaptation of Mickey Spillane's hard-boiled detective novel, Los Angeles, photographed in angular black-and-white, looks terminally irradiated.
A burly, crew-cut Ralph Meeker plays Mike Hammer, Spillane's tough-guy alter ego, with a blank muscularity that suggests the young Marlon Brando with his soul burned out of him.
In "Kiss Me Deadly," assorted thugs, molls and law officers chase each other around the city, casually knocking each other off in a frantic search that makes "The Maltese Falcon" seem like a genteel scavenger hunt.
The object of their quest turns out to be the radioactive equivalent of Pandora's box.
When Mike locates the sinister black container and opens its lid just the tiniest crack, it emits a searing ray of light that leaves an ugly blister on his cheek.


Value City Department Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


One Week In March: Knicks Get Serious
The Knicks' situation looks much brighter than it did a week ago.
They have won four consecutive games.
They have closed to within one game of the Eastern Conference lead.
And after six weeks of playing mostly on the road, their coming schedule is much less demanding.


Thermo Electron reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Giants Consider Patriots Receiver
Except for the defensive backfield, the Giants' biggest concern this season could be at wide receiver.
So for the next several days, the Giants will be bringing in a group of receivers to work out.
One of them is Michael Timpson, the New England Patriots' highly regarded free agent.
Mike Sherrard is coming off a serious hip injury.
Chris Calloway had surgery to repair a herniated disk in his neck.
Both players were starters last season.
The Giants think both will be fine, but want to protect themselves.


Maple Leaf Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Theater; Seeking Bits of Identity In History's Vast Abyss
Surrealistic sideshow, troubled dream, poetic riff on black identity: "The America Play," by Suzan-Lori Parks, defies easy categorization.
It also defies easy explanations.


Bramalea Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Reynolds's Award Appealed
A Federal appeals court will decide whether the United States courts have the authority to award the sprinter BUTCH REYNOLDS $27.3 million.
The International Amateur Athletic Federation says it shouldn't have to pay the money to Reynolds, who has been fighting the federation since it suspended him in 1990 for testing positive for a performance-enhancing anabolic steroid after a meet in Monte Carlo.


Art in Review
Jed Devine
Bonni Benrubi Gallery  52 East 76th Street  Manhattan  Through April 30
The pleasures of summer take on an elegiac cast in Jed Devine's black-and-white photographs of the area around Friendship, Me.
Mr.
Devine depicts the casual delights of the season, from gardening to swimming to lounging, in quietly elegant pictures taken with a large-format camera and printed in the tea-colored hues of the palladium process.


Inside Art
A Landmark's Changing Face
The Guggenheim Museum's name game, which has both amused and horrified the art world, has a new participant: the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.
The commission's involvement is not by invitation, however.
Because the museum is a designated landmark, the museum needs the commission's approval of its plan to place the names of large donors like Samuel J. and Ethel LeFrak on the exterior of the original Frank Lloyd Wright building and the new tower.


Hudson's Bay Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Haitian Exile Figure Shot to Death In the 3d Such Attack Since 1991
Two gunmen opened fire on three leaders of the Haitian exile community here on Wednesday night, killing one in what a spokesman for the Haitian Refugee Center called a political assassination.
The police in Miami declined to speculate on the killers' motives.


Lands' End Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Daly Draws a Crowd and Puts on a Display
On a windy South Florida day, in front of huge galleries that were as warm as the weather, John Daly showed the golf world exactly what it has been missing for the past four months.
He came to the 18th hole of the Honda Classic at Weston Hills today in his first competitive round since being suspended from the PGA Tour.
He stood at one under par, and, coming off a bogey, was slightly annoyed.
In front of him was a par 5 of 585 yards, with a green that had never been reached in two shots during tournament play.


Art in Review
'Works on Paper' 'Old Master to Contemporary'
Seventh Regiment Armory  643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street  Through Sunday
"Works on Paper" seems like a sleepy enough title for an exhibition, but not if results are as imaginative as those found in this year's "Works on Paper" show at the Seventh Regiment Armory.
Following hot on the heels of an impressive "Art Show," it proves almost as solid in quality of material and even greater in range.
Range in this case means 95 dealers offering everything from Old Master drawings to contemporary prints and generous helpings of photography.
The bounty is further swelled by an unusually high proportion of works in painterly media like pastel (lovely Joan Mitchells), watercolor (landscapes by the 19th-century French artist Paul Huet), gouache (a sweet little Milton Avery pig, among others) and even a thickly painted oil-on-paper by Edwin Dickinson.
One can get the clearest sense of paper's versatility simply by taking a rubbernecking walk through this huge, diverse show.
Spanierman Gallery is a good place to start, with a beautiful selection of American late-19th-century work.
Two 1916 etchings at Sylvan Cole nearby -- Childe Hassam's stately skyscrapers and John Marin's tipsy, punched-in Woolworth Building -- show the generational divide as American art got the message of modernism.
There are some smart one-artist installations -- notably of Hans Bellmer's mid-1930's photographs at Adam J. Boxer and of Man Ray's Dada photographs at One Bond Masterworks -- and a good mix of Old Master work, with concentrations on mid-18th-to-19th-century European artists still under known on these shores.
Given the sheer variety at hand, though, viewers can write their own tickets as to what they want to see.
One can approach the show looking for humor, in the subtle caricatures of artists by Francois Andre Vincent (1746-1816), for example; or for inspiration: an 18th-century chalk drawing of the nude muse of poetry might do.
And it is possible to customize any number of esoteric theme tours: of things that grow in the ground, say (botanical prints and Emil Nolde's "Red Poppies"), or of things that fly (Audubon engravings and children's book illustrations with more fairies and angels than you can count).
Most memorable, though, are individual images that hold the eye just that extra second or two: the red chalk head of a sleepy child by Jakob Mathias Schmutzer (1733-1811) at Nocolas Joly/Yves Mikaeloff, a Daubigny pencil landscape at Stoppenbach and Delestre, and a mysterious little drawing at Hill-Stone by Battista Franco (circa 1510-56) in which skulls, human and animal, form a pattern as intricate and threadlike as a textile design.
One might wish for work by young contemporary artists and a little cultural diversity (one gallery has Japanese prints, another Indian miniatures; otherwise, it is Euro-North American all the way), but this is a fascinating and unusually lively show: a paper trail, in short, definitely worth following. (Admission: $10; or $20 for a three-day pass. Information: 212-777-5218) HOLLAND COTTER


Kariya Decides to Turn Pro
PAUL KARIYA, the 1993 Hobey Baker Award winner as the best player in college, has relinquished his National Collegiate Athletic Association eligibility and will not return to Maine to play hockey, the school announced yesterday.
Kariya, picked by the Anaheim Mighty Ducks as the No. 4 selection over all in the National Hockey League's draft last June, is now free to turn pro.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BUDD CO., Troy, Mich., a supplier to the automotive industry and a unit of the German manufacturer Thyssen A. G., said it would invest $24 million to install press and assembly equipment at its automotive stamping plant in Detroit.
CPC INTERNATIONAL INC., Englewood Cliffs, N.J., a food company, said it had exercised an option to buy a 50 percent stake in Tongaat Consumer Foods Ltd., from the South African conglomerate Tongaat-Hulett Group Ltd., for $20 million.


Advanced Micro Gains A Victory in Intel Case
In a verdict potentially worth billions of dollars, a Federal court jury in San Jose, Calif., ruled today for Advanced Micro Devices Inc. in its long-running litigation with the Intel Corporation.
Intel said it would appeal.
The jury found that a 1976 copyright agreement between Advanced Micro Devices and Intel granted Advanced Micro rights to sell microchips containing Intel microcode, which is software embedded in the chip.
Today's verdict came in the second jury trial in this case; in July 1992, a jury ruled in Intel's favor, but in April 1993, Federal District Judge William A. Ingram granted Advanced Micro a new trial on the ground that Intel had withheld documents that could have influenced the verdict.


Corrections
An article last Friday about Christie's March 3 auction of items from Barbra Streisand's art collection misstated the difference between the original purchase price and the auction price of a Tiffany cobweb lamp.
The auction price was 10 times what Ms.
Streisand originally paid, not 100 times.


G.I.'s to Relieve Scandinavians for Bosnian Duty
The Clinton Administration is planning to roughly double the number of American soldiers in Macedonia so that the Scandinavian troops now in that former Yugoslav republic can reinforce the United Nations peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, senior Administration officials said today.
United Nations officials have said that thousands of troops are urgently needed to police the cease-fire around Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, and to carry out other duties in Bosnia such as serving as a buffer force between Bosnian Croats and Muslims and insuring that food reaches besieged towns.


Interactive Network Picks Kobs &amp; Draft
Interactive Network Inc., which provides a subscription-based interactive television service, said yesterday that it had selected Kobs &amp; Draft in Chicago to handle its consolidated account, previously divided among various agencies on a project basis including Goldberg Moser O'Neill of San Francisco and A. Eicoff &amp; Company in Chicago.
Billings were estimated at $8 million to $12 million.


'Climbing a Tree to Catch a Fish'
Following is the text of a petition to the Government issued today by a group of Chinese intellectuals, as translated by The New York Times:
Lately there have been many incidents in which people have been arrested or detained in Beijing and Shanghai for interrogation because of their ideas and their exercise of free speech.
World public opinion has reacted strongly.
People of insight who are concerned with the fate of the nation and who are dedicated to the cause of our country's modernization are shocked, upset and worried.


Power Agency Is Undergoing An Overhaul
The new head of the New York Power Authority said yesterday that there was no point in his agency's continued existence if all it did was churn out electricity.
And so, in his 10th day on the job, S. David Freeman began a major shakeup, both philosophically and practically, of the largest public power agency outside the Federal Government.
Mr.
Freeman said the agency should be pioneering new technologies like the development of electricity from the wind and the sun and leading the nation toward the electrification of its transportation systems.


Review/Opera; Adultery, Murder and the Consequences
Stephen Paulus's 1982 opera, "The Postman Always Rings Twice," has had an unusually healthy life since it received its premiere at the Opera Theater of St.
Louis.
It has been performed in Edinburgh, Washington, Miami, Fort Worth and Minnesota.
And now, directed by Colin Graham, who wrote the libretto and encouraged Mr.
Paulus to take on the project in the first place, a new production has come to the Boston Lyric Opera, where it can be seen until March 20.
Part of the opera's appeal is its source, James M. Cain's 1934 novel.
That book's sharply etched plot and hard-boiled, flat-voiced irony has spawned a small entertainment industry, inspiring at least four filmed versions (two of them American) and a classic French novel (Camus said it was a model for "The Stranger").
The melodramatic story of a ne'er-do-well drifter, Frank Chambers, who stops in at a roadside diner run by Nick, a good-natured Greek immigrant, and ends up plotting his murder with Cora, Nick's lusty hellcat wife, sizzles with menace, eroticism and brutality.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Monday about the recipients of the Four Freedoms Medals referred incorrectly to the German publication Die Zeit, where one recipient, Marion Countess Donhoff, was formerly editor in chief and publisher.
It is a newspaper, not a magazine.


**** Dining In a Hotel (Review, C24)


Homeland Leader in South Africa Flees His Capital
The ruler of the apartheid homeland of Bophuthatswana retreated from his capital on Thursday as his police force crumbled before a popular uprising, witnesses and officials said.
Overnight, armed white extremists moved into the area, and South African army troops took up positions today in Mmabatho, the homeland capital, in an effort to restore order.


It's Business Almost as Usual for Clinton as He Visits New York
President Clinton's plan yesterday was to get on with business as usual, even though White House business has been anything but normal recently as officials there prepared to testify before a grand jury.
The trappings seemed the same as on most Presidential trips, as Mr.
Clinton spent hours at Brooklyn College in a forum on public safety and volunteer service.
Students greeted him with a raucous standing ovation.


AIDS Cases Increase Among Heterosexuals
In a development that reflects the changing demographic face of the AIDS epidemic in this country, heterosexual transmission accounted for the largest proportionate increase in AIDS cases reported last year, Federal health officials said yesterday.
In a related report, the officials also said that the number of new cases of AIDS more than doubled in 1993, largely because of a new and broader definition of the disease that took effect on Jan. 1, 1993.


Sculley and Spectrum Make Peace on Lawsuits
One month after he resigned with a roar as chairman and chief executive of Spectrum Information Technologies Inc., John Sculley walked away yesterday with barely a whimper.
Mr.
Sculley agreed to withdraw the lawsuit he had filed against Peter T. Caserta, Spectrum's president, and Spectrum agreed to drop the countersuit it had filed against Mr.
Sculley.


Diner's Journal
Debut at Alison
When the chef at Alison on Dominick Street, Tom Valenti, decided to move on, the restaurant's fans were crushed.
Alison was an unpretentious place to eat terrific, robust food (and drink terrific, moderately priced wine).
It seemed like the end of a very good thing.
The new chef, Scott Bryan, made his debut last weekend.
He has an impressive resume: he has worked at Mondrian, Le Bernardin, Bouley and the Gotham Bar and Grill in Manhattan; Square One in San Francisco, and 21 Federal in Washington.
His last restaurant was Soleil.
Mr.
Bryan seemed unperturbed by a packed house, turning out very impressive food.
I particularly liked a gentle oyster stew with riesling, leeks and fingerling potatoes and seared foie gras with apple puree, hazelnuts and balsamic vinegar.
Seared salmon with pea shoots was lovely.
A nice sirloin came with an appealing potato napoleon.


John Bobbitt Takes to the Road And Finds It Strewn With Cash
Both of the Bobbitts may have been through hell, but their lawyers are working hard to find them rewards after the traumas of the bedroom and the courtroom.
No sooner had Lorena L. Bobbitt been freed last week from a month's observation at a psychiatric hospital than her California agent, Alan Hauge, began inviting offers for rights to her story.
Her lawyer, Lisa B. Kemler of Alexandria, Va., said today that although no deal had yet been signed, Mrs.
Bobbitt was "marketing her authorized story for a movie or book, or both."


Rangers Scramble Back To Get Tie With Bruins
Though the goaltenders seemed ill-matched, they took equal responsibility for the 2-2 tie the visiting Rangers achieved with comeback theatrics tonight at Boston Garden.
But what was certainly a rote evening for Boston's Jon Casey was nothing less than a minor personal triumph for Glenn Healy.
The Bruins played a much-used goalie who boasted a 13-game unbeaten streak.
Casey had no reason not to feel poised against the National Hockey League's first-place team.


Eagle Hardware &amp; Garden (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Dayton Hudson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Restaurants
Pow!
The food at Lespinasse comes out shooting.
With your first bite you know that you are in for an exciting adventure.
These are flavors you have never tasted before.


Newcombe Sues Over Beer Ad
Former Brooklyn Dodgers pitcher DON NEWCOMBE, a recovering alcoholic who has crusaded against substance abuse for years, filed a lawsuit yesterday against Adolf Coors Brewing Co., claiming his likeness was used without his permission in one of the company's magazine ads.
The 67-year-old Newcombe, winner of the first Cy Young Award in 1956, alleges in a $100 million suit, filed in Los Angeles County Superior Court, that an ad for Killian's Red Beer in the Feb. 14 edition of Sports Illustrated resembles a photograph taken of him in the 1950's.


Accounts
*
Coldwell Banker Schlott, Short Hills, N.J., to C &amp; M Advertising, Woodbridge, N.J., to handle the realtor's account, previously at Pace Advertising, New York.
Billings were estimated at $6 million to $8 million. *
New Jersey Lottery Commission, Lawrenceville, N.J., to Rosanio, Bailet &amp; Talamo, Cherry Hill, N.J., to handle the advertising and promotion for its account, previously at CHC &amp; MED Inc., North Woodbridge, N.J., and Gilbert, Whitney &amp; Johns, Whippany, N.J.
Rosanio, Bailet was awarded a two-year contract with billings of $7 million.


D'Amato Takes the Ethical High Ground; No Stranger to Inquiries, the Senator Seeks the Grand Inquisitor Role in Whitewater
It is high noon on Capitol Hill and the nation's newest ethicist, his finger aloft and his countenance grave, is hearkening to the pundit of a Periclean age.
"Walter Lippmann reminds us that a central function of democracy is to allow a free people to drag realities out into the sunlight and demand a full accounting from those who are permitted to hold and exercise power," Senator Alfonse Marcello D'Amato reads aloud in his office, his voice lingering lovingly on the word "drag."


Devils End Their Waltz Inside 10 Minutes
The ineptness of Hartford's defense, particularly goaltender Frank Pietrangelo, in the first nine minutes robbed tonight's game between the Devils and the Whalers of any suspense.
The Devils danced through Hartford's defense and Pietrangelo offered no resistance as New Jersey scored three times on its first five shots to pave the way to a 4-0 victory.
The victory increased the Devils' unbeaten streak to seven games (5-0-2) and extended the franchise record of victories over .500 at 37-20-10.
New Jersey is 7-1-3 in its last 11 games.


Errors Found but No Misconduct in Study on Lead
The scientist who first demonstrated that low levels of lead exposure might cause mental impairment in children has been cleared of misconduct in his research by Federal investigators.
But they said his work contained numerous errors and misstatements.
The Office of Research Integrity, which reviews cases of possible misconduct in research for the Department of Health and Human Services, said in letters dated March 3 that the errors and misstatement did not necessarily alter the conclusion of the influential 1979 paper.


15 Is One Too Many For the Florida Derby
The road to the Kentucky Derby churned into a stampede today when 15 colts were entered in the $500,000 Florida Derby, And, since that's one over the maximum allowed, the unbeaten but lightly raced Canaveral became the extra horse, and he won't get to start unless somebody drops out before post time on Saturday.
The stampede was caused when injuries forced two of the season's stars to withdraw from the Triple Crown series.
Dehere, the juvenile champion of last year, fractured the cannon bone in his right hind leg during a workout and underwent surgery last Tuesday to repair the damage.
And Patton, a speed horse who ran in the money in all five of his starts, dropped out with bone chips in both front knees.


People
*
Darryl Lindberg, managing director of DDB Needham Sydney, was named to the new position of managing director and chief operating officer at Tracy-Locke, a DDB Needham Agency, Dallas. *
Craig Campbell was named chief executive of the Evans Group, Los Angeles, assuming responsibilities temporarily held by Chuck Bartholomew, who continues as chairman and chief executive of the Evans Group's Denver office and will assume additional corporate responsibilities at the Evans Group.
Mr.
Campbell was previously president of Campbell &amp; Wagman, Los Angeles, which closed.


Lubavitch Leader Has Stroke And Is in Critical Condition
Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the Grand Rabbi of the Lubavitch Hasidim, suffered what one of his doctors described as a "massive stroke" early yesterday.
The rabbi, who is 91 years old and partly paralyzed from a stroke two years ago, was listed in critical condition at Beth Israel Medical Center.
Dr.
Matthew Fink, the director of neurology at Beth Israel, said the rabbi was not fully conscious and was breathing with aid from a respirator.


Schools Chief Names Panel To Evaluate Maintenance
New York City Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday appointed an independent panel of real-estate executives, property managers and others to recommend changes for the Board of Education's troubled school maintenance system and to marshal new funds for renovation.
Mr.
Cortines named Harold Levy, a vice president of Salomon Brothers Inc. to head the nine-member panel, which is to issue a report by March 1995.


Counting Knows
In Peter Ustinov's rarely performed but unforgotten comedy "Romanoff and Juliet," the leader of a fictional European nation alerts the Soviet Ambassador that the U.S. knows about a certain Soviet intelligence operation.
"We know they know," says the Russian.
The intermediary tells the U.S.
Ambassador, "They know you know," to which the diplomat replies, "We know they know we know."
Back goes the go-between to Moscow's envoy, who expands: "We know they know we know they know." To which the American, after counting the knows, gasps in astonishment, "They know that!"


Chip Makers' Competing Creeds
RISC or CISC?
This seemingly esoteric computer industry debate, on which every techie will opine, has boiled over into a theological dispute that has turned Silicon into a Valley divided.
Intel, whose chips are the dominant standard in personal computers, is high priest of a chip technology known as CISC.
But Apple Computer, long computing's heretic, is converting to the RISC creed with the new generation of Macintosh computers it will introduce on Monday.
Each approach has its technical merits, but customers and software developers must ultimately make a leap of faith.


Corrections
A front-page article on Monday about New York City's commercial real estate recovery referred incorrectly to a transaction involving 383 Madison Avenue.
A developer, Howard Ronson, has announced an agreement to buy the property, but has not done so yet.
He expects to assume ownership in September.


U.S. and P.L.O. at Loggerheads Over U.N. Resolution on Massacre
The United States and the Palestine Liberation Organization appeared deadlocked here today over a proposed Security Council resolution condemning the massacre in Hebron on Feb. 25.
The United States, a high American official here said, does not want the resolution adopted unless the P.L.O. agrees beforehand to return to peace talks with Israel.
The talks, being held in Washington, were broken off after the killings at Hebron.


Abu Dhabi in New Plan To Pay B.C.C.I. Claims
The liquidator of the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce International said today that it had agreed to a deal under which Abu Dhabi, the bank's majority shareholder, would pay $1.8 billion to help settle claims from hundreds of thousands of depositors and other creditors around the world.
The deal, which is still subject to court approval in a number of nations as well as approval by a creditors' committee, replaces a similar agreement reached last year.
That agreement was rejected by a Luxembourg court in October after being approved by creditors and courts in Britain and the Cayman Islands, where divisions of the institution were based.


After Skipping President's Talk, Giuliani Meets Clinton in Private
After several days of suspense over whether Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York would manage to clear his schedule for a meeting with President Clinton, the two met yesterday at the Sheraton New York Hotel and talked mainly about law enforcement and the President's crime bill.
Speaking to reporters after the meeting, Mr.
Giuliani said he never had any intention of slighting the President by declining an invitation to attend a talk-show-style get-together on community policing and national service at Brooklyn College earlier in the day.


Review/Dance; Painterly Contemplation In Cunningham's 'Breakers'
Remember those children's books about animals where the pages are cut horizontally in half?
As you turn them you can match a frog's body with a giraffe's head and neck.
"Breakers," Merce Cunningham's latest dance work, reveals its dancers in a similar way.
Torso and especially arms go one way while feet follow their own course.
Like those children's books, "Breakers" is a fanciful exercise in variety and permutation, but it is also out to entertain.
The Merce Cunningham Dance Company's premiere of "Breakers" on Wednesday night at the City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan) suggested strongly that it was a sequel to "Crwdspcr," the stunning new piece that had been given its premiere the night before.


Larson, B.Y.U. Prove A Point
Western Athletic  Brigham Young 96, Utah 65: After two late-regular season losses, Russell Larson thought that he and his Brigham Young teammates had something to prove.
The 6-foot-11-inch Cougar made his point against Utah yesterday, scoring 28 points in Salt Lake City as B.Y.U. earned a spot against Fresno State in today's W.A.C. semifinals.


No Headline
"To talk about modernization without mentioning human rights is the same as climbing a tree to catch a fish." SEVEN CHINESE INTELLECTUALS, in a petition to the Beijing Government.  [ A1:1. ]


Don't Make a Federal Case of It
A heightened fear of crime is rampant in the United States today.
In response, the House and Senate will soon consider final action on major crime legislation.
It includes an extraordinary number of provisions, including one that would make many offenses -- for example, virtually any offense involving a firearm -- a Federal crime.
If enacted, the bill could swamp the Federal courts with cases they are not properly equipped to handle.
Before this happens, Congress should look long and hard at the effect it will have if so many crimes now prosecuted by the states are federalized.


CHRONICLE
Despite the numerous museums and galleries in New York, CHRISTINA COX has long believed there is room for one more, one dedicated to Roman Catholic religious art.
Two years ago, Ms.
Cox, formerly a sales representative with the Dyansen galleries in Manhattan, approached officials at the Vatican Museum about creating such a museum in the United States.


On My Mind; The First Ladyship
Bill Clinton's wife has the education, experience and drive to carry out the enormously important job she has -- the First Ladyship of the United States.
But it is a job that should not exist.
It is philosophically twisted in concept and it is politically outrageous in practice.
In concept, the First Ladyship is an affront to American democracy -- and to American feminism.
In practice, it skews the administration of government, evades anti-nepotism law and avoids the responsibility that should go with authority.


7 Chinese Intellectuals Appeal For End to Political Repression
Challenging the Government's latest crackdown on dissidents, seven leading scientists and intellectuals appealed in writing today to President Jiang Zemin for an end to repression of free speech and for the release of all political prisoners.
The appeal, which coincided with the opening session of the National People's Congress, was made available to Western journalists a day before Secretary of State Warren Christopher is to begin an official visit.
It is believed to be the first petition to the Chinese Government on human rights from a group of eminent intellectuals since the crackdown on the Tiananmen Square demonstrations in 1989.
Arrests Are Protested
The group said it was protesting the arrests and intimidation of dissidents during the last week in advance of Mr.
Christopher's visit and the opening of the Chinese congress.


Offer by Northrop For Grumman Tops Martin Marietta Bid
In what appeared to set off a bidding war, the Northrop Corporation offered late yesterday to purchase the Grumman Corporation, the Long Island warplane manufacturer, for $60 a share, or $2.04 billion.
The Northrop offer came three days after the Martin Marietta Corporation announced that it would purchase Grumman for $55 a share.
The battle for Grumman underscores two aspects of weapons making in the post-cold war era.
One is that Pentagon spending for weapons and research, projected at $88 billion this year, is still a very good business for the half-dozen or so manufacturers that survive as major military contractors.
The other is that no matter which company -- Northrop or Martin Marietta -- wins Grumman, the new, merged concern will close plants and cut staff.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Olajuwon Helps Stop Sonics  Hakeem Olajuwon had 23 points and Sam Cassell, a rookie, sank four pressure free throws in the final seconds last night as the Rockets overcame an early 14-point deficit to beat the Seattle SuperSonics, 87-82, at Houston.
The victory gave Houston a .002 percentage point lead in the Midwest Division over idle San Antonio.
The loss for Seattle snapped a six-game winning streak.
Houston trailed much of the game but held the Sonics to just 29 points in the second half, including only 4 points in the final 6:27.  (AP)
N.H.L  Leafs' Andreychuk Ties Mark  Dave Andreychuk scored a historic goal for Toronto as the Maple Leafs beat Pittsburgh, 4-2, last night at Pittsburgh, ending the Penguins' five-game home unbeaten streak.
Andreychuk tied Frank Mahovlich's 1960-61 Maple Leafs record for goals by a left wing with his 48th.
He scored on a power play in the last minute.
Mike Eastwood had scored midway through the third period to give the Maple Leafs a 3-2 lead.
Glenn Anderson scored twice for Toronto.
The Maple Leafs improved their road record to 18-10-7, fourth-best in the National Hockey League.
Pittsburgh's power play failed on all five of its chances and has now scored on just two of its last 3 opportunities.  (AP) Flyers 8, Senators 2: Eric Lindros had a goal and five assists as the Flyers defeated Ottawa at Philadelphia.
Rod Brind'Amour and Andre Faust each scored twice as the Flyers improved their record to 3-0-1 against Ottawa this season and moved a point ahead of idle Florida for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference. (AP) Nordiques 4, Canadiens 4: Bob Bassen capped a three-goal Quebec rally by scoring at 3:43 of the third period, giving the Nordiques a 4-4 tie with the Montreal Canadiens at Quebec.  (AP) BASKETBALL  U.C.L.A.
Draws Closer to Top  Center George Zidek had 18 points and 14 rebounds as 15th-ranked U.C.L.A. held off Oregon State, 78-67.
The visiting Bruins (21-5, 13-4) moved within one game of first-place Arizona in the Pac-10 heading into tomorrow's regular-season finale against Oregon.
Brent Barry scored a career-high 31 points for Oregon State (6-20, 2-15), which lost its seventh in a row and 20th over all for the first time ever. (AP) California 62, Washington 56: Lamond Murray scored 20 of his 22 points in the second half and No. 16 California broke open a close game in the final three minutes.
Jason Kidd scored just 12 points on 2-for-12 shooting, including 1 of 7 from 3-point range.
Cal (13-4, 22-6) will wind up its regular season at Washington State. (AP) YACHT RACING  Intrum Justitia's Lead Is Cut  Light winds caused Intrum Justitia to lose all except two miles of its lead yesterday in the closing stages of the fourth leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race.
Only 24 hours earlier, Intrum Justitia, a European Whitbread 60 Class yacht, had a lead of 56 nautical miles over New Zealand Endeavour, the leading Maxi Class entry.
Four other boats were closing in on Intrum Justitia as the fleet approached the finish of the 5,900-mile leg at Punta del Este, Uruguay.
Intrum, skippered by Britain's Lawrie Smith, was reported 472 miles from the finish.
Grant Dalton's New Zealand Endeavour was 474 miles from the finish.
Tokio holds the overall lead of almost 20 hours after three legs. (AP) SKIING Schneider Wins 50th Cup Title  Vreni Schneider of Switzerland set the pace with a blistering first run on the slalom, then backed it up on the second run and won her 50th World Cup skiing title yesterday at Mammoth Mountain, Calif.
The victory moved her ahead of Penilla Wiberg of Sweden in the overall World Cup standing with only races at Vail, Colo., next week left on the tour.
Schneider had a combined time of 1 minute 18.52 seconds, more than a full second ahead of Katja Koren of Solvenia, who was second in 1:19.55.
Martina Ertl of Germany was third in 1:20.18.
Carrie Sheinberg of Port Washington, L.I., was the top American at 11th, posting a personal best despite starting 37th on the first run and finishing 14th.  (AP)  Junior Super-G Is Postponed: The world junior Alpine championships were scheduled to resume today after event organizers postponed the boys' super-G yesterday on Whiteface Mountain in Lake Placid, N.Y., because of poor weather conditions.
In the opening downhills Wednesday, Kevin Wert of British Columbia took the gold medal and Jason Rosener of Colorado the bronze in the boys' event, and Melanie Suchet of France won the girls'.
The competition is for racers ages 16-18.
BOWLING  Duke Regains Petraglia Lead  Norm Duke had a 236 average over 18 games, and reclaimed the lead yesterday after three rounds of the Professional Bowlers Association's $170,000 Brunswick Johnny Petraglia Open at North Brunswick, N.J.
Duke, who led after the first qualifying round, had a pinfall of 4,264 and entered the first round of match play with a 77-pin lead.
David Ozio was second, 24 pins ahead of Bob Benoit.
Parker Bohn 3d and Chris Warren rounded the top five, tied at 4,143 pins.  (AP)


China Tries to Hide Rights Problems
To the Editor:
I am sure Beijing's showing of videotapes of four key dissidents (news article, March 2) is a Chinese Government propaganda exercise to conceal human rights problems.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  CHINESE INTELLECTUALS SPEAK OUT  Seven leading scientists and intellectuals made an appeal for the release of all political prisoners and an end to repression of free speech.
They made their statement a day before Secretary of State Christopher is to begin an official visit.
A1  BLANKET IMMUNITY FOR SETTLERS?
Israeli forces in Hebron have standing orders never to fire at Jewish settlers, even if they are shooting at people, a police official told a commission investigating the massacre of Palestinians in a mosque.
An army official said, however, that such rules applied only to routine confrontations.
A1


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; At No. 34 in sales, Empire Kosher Poultry turns to a new pinup star: a roasted chicken.
SELLING chickens is a lot like selling cars.
Because you can't always tell them apart at first glance, a gimmick helps.
Frank Perdue is the perfect example.
He sells chicken, but put a Frank Perdue chicken beside a Joe Blow chicken and try to tell the difference.
So Frank Perdue made himself the difference.
He became an advertising character, telling people why his chickens are better than anyone else's.
Maybe they are, but a lot of people don't think so.


C.I.A. Director Plans to Review Spying Policies
The Director of Central Intelligence said today that he would appoint a panel of outside experts to review weaknesses in the agency's counterintelligence and internal security departments exposed by the case of Aldrich H. Ames, the C.I.A. officer accused of spying for Moscow.
But the head of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence said he doubted that such a panel would change the "culture and mentality" within those departments that had allowed Mr.
Ames to spy undetected for nearly nine years, as the Federal Bureau of Investigation has asserted.


Circle Line Opens Its 49th Season With Pipe and Drizzle


Girl Who Said She Killed at 3 Is No Longer Facing Charges
In an unusual juvenile justice case, Cincinnati prosecutors yesterday dropped murder charges against a 12-year-old girl who confessed to drowning her infant cousin 10 years ago in a bucket of bleach and water.
The girl, whose identity was withheld, was 3 when her 13-month-old cousin, Lamar Howell, died in what was ruled an accidental drowning.
Last month she told the police that she had killed the boy, and the police filed charges against her, on the advice of the Hamilton County Prosecutor's office.


Fees in the Marketplace
To the Editor:
Stephan H. Peskin, president of the New York State Trial Lawyers Association, implies in "Lobby for Insurers" (letter, Feb. 25) that the Manhattan Institute's proposal to revamp contingency fees has the support of insurers.
Why do plaintiffs' lawyers persist in seeing a large insurance company behind every idea they don't like?


METRO DIGEST
A DRIFTER'S TALE OF SERIAL DEATH
Behind Ricardo Silvio Caputo's charming mask, the authorities say, lay a cunning predator who may have had multiple personalities and who killed at least four women in an odyssey that took him from New York to Mexico.
A1.
Some psychiatrists were skeptical that Mr.
Caputo had both psychotic and rational selves.
B4.
Mental health officials said an escape like that of Mr.
Caputo's is now nearly impossible.
B4.
NEW BIDDER FOR GRUMMAN APPEARS
The Northrop Corporation offered to purchase the Grumman Corporation, the Long Island warplane manufacturer, in what appeared to set off a bidding war with the Martin Marietta Corporation.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  HOSPITAL DELAYS ARE DETAILED
The rebuilding of Kings County Hospital foundered in large part because of an effort by the Health and Hospitals Corporation to give more construction work to women and minority companies, an investigator said.
A1.
Top officials were told a year ago of the widespread problems with the reconstruction.
B2.
CORTINES NAMES PANEL ON MAINTENANCE
New York City Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines appointed a panel to recommend changes for the troubled school maintenance system and to marshal funds for renovation.
B2.
CUOMO SEES NO BAR TO STATEN ISLAND VOTE
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo issued a legal opinion that the Legislature could vote on Staten Island's plan to secede from New York City without a request from the city.
B2. 4-YEAR-OLD GIRL DIES OF DRUG OVERDOSE
Leah O'Doherty's father was an addict who kept methodone in a Gatorade bottle, the police say.
Somehow, the 4-year-old girl consumed three times the dose that would kill an adult.
B3.
TRADE CENTER MAKES PLANS TO REFURBISH
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey agreed to spend $10 million to prepare a proposal to redevelop the World Trade Center's dreary public spaces.
B3.
MAN IS SHOT WITH OFFICER'S GUN
Two men apparently grabbed a police officer's gun, followed a third man out of a bar and shot him to death, the police said.
B3.
THE PRESIDENT COMES TO NEW YORK
The trappings seemed the same as on most Presidential trips, as President Clinton spent hours at Brooklyn College in a forum on public safety and volunteer service.
A20.
Mayor Giuliani met with the President on law-enforcement issues.
A20.
REGION  INQUIRY ON PACT FAULTS WEICKER
Lobbyists for a company seeking a $150 million contract from the state of Connecticut influenced the Governor's office after a state commissioner had selected its competitor, Attorney General Richard Blumenthal said.
B5.
D'AMATO'S PICK IS REBUFFED
The Republican Party chairman in Westchester County rejected the gubernatorial nominee endorsed by United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
B5.
Chronicle B6


Sounds Around Town
Bradley's at 25
Kenny Barron and Mulgrew Miller, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Two of jazz's best pianists go piano to piano for a set of duets.
Both are extraordinarily gifted, harmonically subtle and rhythmically powerful.
Their appearance celebrates the 25th anniversary of the club, which just happens to be the best place in the city to hear pianists.
Shows tonight through Sunday night are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 P.M.; there is a $15 music charge and an $8 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Notes of Humor
Ernie K. Doe, Tramps Cafe, 45 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Flaunting one of the great New Orleans voices, and dripping with humor, Ernie K. Doe is a fine performer.
This weekend, he will be backed by an excellent band, including the guitarist Bobby Radcliff, Tony Garnier on bass, Ricky Sebastian on drums and Brian Mitchell on keyboards.
He'll sing his hits, including "Mother-in-Law." It's American regional weirdness at its best, funny and with a mind to make Saturday night the best Saturday night possible.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M. and 12:30 A.M.; there is a $10 cover and a two-drink minimum.
P.
W.


Review/Film; Unnoticed, a Triangle Forms
"Calendar" was shown as part of the 1993 New York Film Festival.
Here are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 16.
The film opens today at the Quad Cinema, on 13th Street, west of Fifth Avenue, Greenwich Village.
The emotional twists and turns of Atom Egoyan's "Calendar" are so thoroughly intertwined with communications gadgetry that the movie might almost as well have been called "Sex, Lies, Videotape, Film, Telephone and Answering Machine."


The Spoken Word
DRAMATIC READING, Westbeth Theater Center, 151 Bank Street, West Village.
Eleven actors and a narrator take part in a reading of "A Scarlet Letter," a play about AIDS from a woman's perspective, written and directed by Susan Karrie Braun.
Today at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 691-2272.
"HOLLYWOOD AND THE FRENCH NEW WAVE," Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
A series of film screenings and discussions on the relationship between classic Hollywood films and French New Wave films.
Today at 12:30 P.M., the films will be Ernst Lubitsch's "To Be or Not to Be" (1942) and Francois Truffaut's "Last Metro" (1981); the speaker is to be Serge Gavronsky, the chairman of the film department at Barnard College.
Tomorrow at 12:30 P.M., the films are Howard Hawks's "Scarface" and Jean-Luc Godard's "Breathless"; the speaker is to be Bob Swain, a director.
Fee: $6, which includes museum admission.
Information: (718) 638-5000.


Clinton Plans Meeting of Hemisphere Chiefs
President Clinton will invite all of the Western Hemisphere's 35 heads of state except Fidel Castro of Cuba to a summit meeting in Miami in December that will focus on consolidating democracy and liberalizing trade throughout the Americas, Administration officials said today.
President Clinton is scheduled to announce details of the meeting on Friday.
The meeting is part of an effort to pay more attention to Latin America after complaints by many countries in the hemisphere that they have been eclipsed by the attention paid to Russia, Asia and Bosnia.


Marshall Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Sports of The Times; The Mets' Most Vital 'Player'
NEXT to the door of the Mets' clubhouse here, a small sign proclaims, "This Is a Smoke-Free Building." That's the problem.
Only a small puff of smoke rises from Doc Gooden's fastball now.
Only a few wisps of smoke curl from the bats.
Only the ashes remain from last season's last-place 59-103 record, 5 games behind the expansion Florida Marlins, 38 games behind the first-place Phillies.
And now the Braves are in the realigned National League East.


Review/Art; Horror Unforgotten: Where Politics ad Memory Meet
THE writer Primo Levi wondered whether, should he survive Auschwitz, he would know how to describe what had happened, because "daily language is for the description of daily experience, but here it is another world, here one would need a language 'of this other world.' "
And what is that language for the visual artist?
There have been realist sculptures and abstract ones memorializing the Holocaust.
Realist sculptures of the dead and dying have often seemed woefully inadequate, yet survivors point out that they and their families weren't tortured and murdered in the abstract.
Nathan Rapoport, the sculptor of the Warsaw Ghetto Monument, once asked, "Could I have made a rock with a hole in it and said: 'Voila! The heroism of the Jewish people' ?" Obviously not, he reasoned.


Inquiry on S.A.T. Focuses on Rights of Disabled
The Clinton Administration is investigating whether the company that administers the Scholastic Assessment Test is violating Federal law by giving disabled students only one opportunity this school year to take the revised test, officials said.
The investigation, being carried out by the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division, is to determine whether the New Jersey-based Educational Testing Service is in violation of the Americans With Disabilities Act.
The S.A.T., which measures mathematical and verbal skills, is given to 1.8 million high school students every year and is used by colleges and universities in deciding whom to admit.


Ragan (Brad) Inc.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Film: Germinal; From Claude Berri, A Zola Classic
"GERMINAL," Claude Berri's epic, reverential screen version of the classic Emile Zola novel about striking coal miners, is as brutally honest as a $30 million movie can be.
The poverty seen here is not pretty, but neither is it without a certain bleak appeal.
Muted gray-brown tableaux are eloquent in their composition.
A comely female miner wears off-the-shoulder rags and mines topless when the temperature gets high.
Circumstances force this same miner to bathe in a kitchen washtub as her father and brothers devour their meager dinner.
Naturally, being concerned with oppression and survival, the men are too busy to notice.
Who says romance is a matter of love songs and long strolls in the moonlight?
Surely "Germinal," which opens today at the Paris Theater, is one of the most desperately romantic films ever made.
It harks back fervently to the simpler world that was roused to outrage by the vividness of Zola's social realism.
In that world, the rich are parasites, the poor are ennobled by their suffering and the solution is distant but within view.
The film yearns passionately for such clarity, to the point where the black and white polarities of its politics are not compromised by subtler shadings.


A Presidential Change of Pace


A Rare Break for Low-Paid Workers
Almost 20 million workers are eligible for Federal tax credits -- refundable in cash for families too poor to owe much tax -- to beef up their low wages.
But more than two million of those do not collect because they do not know about it.
Tens of millions more low-paid workers could receive the tax refund as part of their monthly paycheck, rather than waiting for a lump-sum payment at the end of the year, but do not know to apply for this "advanced payment" option.
The Clinton Administration took an important step this week when it instructed Cabinet secretaries and agency heads to notify Federal employees about the option.
Private employers must also make sure their low-paid workers know about the credit.
The earned income tax credit is a nearly ideal anti-poverty weapon.
It lifts families above poverty, and rewards work because the credit is tied to earnings.
Workers earning less than $23,755 are eligible for a credit that reaches a maximum of $2,500 a year.
Under the advanced payment option, as much as $100 a month is added to a worker's paychecks.
To get advanced payment, workers need only fill out form W-5 from the Internal Revenue Service, which requires answering four straightforward yes-or-no questions.
The Clinton Administration fought hard to raise the tax credit during last year's bruising budget battle.
It was the first of a series of steps to eliminate poverty in families with full-time workers.
Congress obliged.
But many go without money they are due.
It is up to employers everywhere to notify workers about Congress's good deed.


Dalai Lama Reassesses China Talks
The Dalai Lama warned today that pressures from Tibetans who are tiring of his efforts to negotiate with China for broader rights for Tibet may force him instead to seek international backing for an independent Tibet.
In a statement to mark the 35th anniversary of the Tibetan uprising against the Chinese occupiers in 1959, the exiled spiritual leader said he was reassessing his approach to the Chinese Government.
His plan envisions extensive autonomy within China, including the right of Tibetans to choose their own government, with China retaining control of foreign relations and defense.


St. John's Triumphs, But UConn Awaits
St.
John's extended its troubled season by one more game last night.
The Redmen defeated Pittsburgh, 80-72, in the Big East tournament, and their reward is a quarterfinal game today against Connecticut, the No. 2 team in the nation according to the polls.
For the first time since 1989, St.
John's was playing in the Thursday night doubleheader that opens the tournament at Madison Square Garden, the one matching the seventh through 10th teams in the final standing.


Christopher Unlikely to Meet Dissidents
Despite wide anticipation among Chinese dissidents that Secretary of State Warren Christopher would meet with them during his three-day visit to Beijing, he said today that he had no plan at the moment to do so.
Mr.
Christopher gave no reason for his decision, which he disclosed at a briefing after meeting with Japanese Government leaders today.
Asked by a reporter whether he would meet with political dissidents during the visit, his first to China as Secretary of State, he replied, "I don't have any plans to do so at the present time."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on March 3 about a change in leadership at the National Gypsum Company referred incorrectly to the disclosure of severance terms for the previous chief executive and chief financial officer.
Details of the executives' departures were indeed disclosed in Federal filings, in March and November 1993; the executives received no severance pay, as their departures were voluntary.
The article also referred incorrectly to a business plan submitted by the previous management.
National Gypsum said the plan was not intentionally pessimistic.


Keep Vows, Christopher Tells Tokyo
Secretary of State Warren Christopher accused Tokyo of failing to live up to its promises to President Clinton on opening markets.
He reminded them that "great nations keep their commitments."
Mr.
Christopher's uncharacteristically strong words, delivered at a tense meeting on Thursday with Japanese leaders, were followed today by further tough remarks prepared for delivery to a senior business group.


Dow Falls 22.79 Points on Slump in Bonds
With no good news on inflation to slow or stop its descent, the stock market dropped sharply yesterday.
The decline hurt many different kinds of stocks, from Wal-Mart Stores to Ford Motor to Walt Disney, in moderately heavy trading.
Stock traders fumbled for explanations: weak aluminum prices that affected stocks in leading indexes, strong gold prices that exacerbated inflation fears, even a Whitewater rumor that appeared intended to undermine President Clinton.


Clinton Offers Plan on Merchant Ships
President Clinton today sent Congress a proposal for a 10-year, $1 billion program intended halt the decline of America's merchant fleet.
Administration officials said the money was needed to prevent the extinction of the merchant fleet, which has steadily declined in the last decade because of high labor costs, Government regulations and high taxes.


Judith Schwartz, 51, An Interior Designer
Judith Schwartz, a designer of commercial and residential interiors in New York, died last Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
She was 51 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Don't Flinch on Tibet
President Clinton has taken a tougher line than his predecessors on Chinese oppression in Tibet.
In an executive order last May, he became the first American President to list improvement of human rights in Tibet as a condition for renewal of China's most-favored-nation trading status.
This was followed in November by a direct appeal to Beijing to begin substantive negotiations with the Dalai Lama or his appointed representatives.
But with the trade decision deadline looming in June, many Tibetans fear the President will flub his own test.
Billions of dollars in U.S.-Chinese commerce are at stake.
Furthermore, Beijing's defenders argue, Tibet has been nominally part of China for centuries.
They also say that in recent years Beijing has tried to make amends for past behavior by improving roads and living conditions.


From Coast to Coast, From Affluent to Poor, Poll Shows Anxiety Over Jobs
While Americans perceive that the economy has improved in recent months, their sense of insecurity about their own jobs is substantial and pervasive, with anxiety spread across all geographic regions and through all occupational levels, according to the latest New York Times Poll.
Two-fifths (39 percent) of workers interviewed in the nationwide poll expressed "worry," either a lot or some, that during the next two years they might be laid off, required to work reduced hours or forced to take pay cuts.


CHRONICLE
When JOHN C. WHITEHEAD, a former chairman of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and a Deputy Secretary of State in the Reagan Administration, graduated from Haverford College in 1943, the director of admissions, Archibald MacIntosh, offered him a job as his assistant.
"It was the middle of World War II and I went into the Navy thinking I was lucky to have a job when I got out," Mr.
Whitehead said the other day.


Art in Review
Robert Rauschenberg  Leo Castelli Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo 65 Thompson Street SoHo Both through April 2


CHRONICLE
Family life in a New Age religion: ELIZABETH CLARE PROPHET, 54, the president and spiritual leader of the Church Universal and Triumphant, who is known to some of her followers as Guru Ma, announced this week that she is pregnant.
It will be the first child for Mrs.
Prophet and her husband, EDWARD L. FRANCIS, 43, who is vice president of the church.
The church they head has long been at loggerheads with the Government, with its neighbors near the northern border of Yellowstone Park in Montana and with environmentalists over its construction of underground bunkers.
The bunkers were to protect church members against nuclear destruction, which church leaders have often said is imminent.


Review at Minolta Is Narrowed to Six
The Minolta Corporation said on Tuesday that it had narrowed the review on its consolidated account to six agencies from nine.
The account, estimated at $7 million to $10 million, was divided among Bozell New York, which handled the business and imaging equipment accounts, and Campbell Mithun Esty in New York, which handled the advertising for the photography division.


Fleet Financial to Eliminate 5,500 Jobs in the Next Year
In one of the most Draconian cutbacks ever at a healthy banking company, the Fleet Financial Group said yesterday that it would eliminate 5,500 jobs, more than a quarter of its banking staff, over the next year.
Fleet, the nation's 15th-largest banking company, said the sweeping reorganization should cut its annual costs by about $300 million and increase revenue by $50 million.


Review/Art; Steely Faces of a New Democracy
It's more than just a metaphor to say that the itinerate portraitist Ammi Phillips, who plied the towns of eastern New York and western Massachusetts and Connecticut during the first half of the 19th century, painted the geometry of the soul.
The idea has an explicit, often moving reality at the Museum of American Folk Art, where 50 of Phillips's stiffly elegant paintings create an early American portrait gallery.
Again and again, Phillips's flattened, hard-edged, meticulously detailed style, developed without benefit of academic training, seems to get to the heart of the matter, to capture the essence of his subjects and their lives with quietly joyous artifice, freezing them in an almost Egyptian stillness.
In the plain dress and plainer backgrounds, one senses the honesty and unpretentiousness of a new democracy, as well as its isolation from the northern European culture that spawned it.
In the calm, dignified faces that shine forth from the dark brown or black, dramatized by collars or fine lace bonnets of radiant white, one encounters an unsettling mixture of tensed charm and steely will.


Clothestime Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


McEnroe at 35 To Try Seniors
John McEnroe turned 35 last month, and as far as tennis goes, he's now a senior citizen.
Next month, he's going to prove it by headlining a five-stop semi-senior circuit, in which each player is, like him, a former No. 1.
McEnroe announced yesterday at the Manhattan headquarters of his representatives, the International Management Group, that he will anchor the $425,000 Advanta Tour, which starts April 21 in Denver.
McEnroe's competition is familiar and unprecedented in this or any format: Jimmy Connors, Bjorn Borg, Mats Wilander, Ivan Lendl and McEnroe will make up a field that holds 50 Grand Slam titles and 488 major titles over all.


At the Bar; Wouldn't anyone want to be a law school dean? Not really, as some current searches confirm.
The University of Chicago Law School went through a long and public flirtation, only to be left at the altar.
The University of Michigan Law School may place a his-and-her team at its helm.
At Yale Law School, the succession seems simpler but the act much tougher to follow.
According to The National Law Journal, a record number of law schools (42 of the 176 institutions with the American Bar Association's seal of approval) are now looking for deans.
Those include three of the elites -- Yale, Michigan and Chicago -- and the travails at two of them threaten to make President Clinton's search for an Attorney General look easy.


Gooden Gets In Licks; Then Expos Get Theirs
The first three innings were exactly what Dwight Gooden wanted them to be.
He had control of his pitches.
He had a more effective delivery.
And he wasn't giving up any more of those dreadful walks.
After a rocky spring training debut last Sunday, Gooden started against the Montreal Expos this afternoon at Thomas J. White Stadium and gave up two hits, no runs and no walks in his scheduled three innings of work.
Then he got greedy.


Edison Brothers Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Jim Thome, third baseman, on a four-year contract.


In a Mistake, Officer's Attacker Is Briefly Freed
Shavod Jones has been in prison since 1986, when he shot a police officer in Central Park at the age of 15.
On Wednesday, Mr.
Jones was told that the day of his freedom had come.
He was released from Southport Correctional Facility in upstate New York at 8:30 A.M., and caught a bus for New York City.


Payless Cashways Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


National Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Home Video
Olympics Redux
This week various video promotions were staking out tactical positions.
In the case of the opportune "1994 Winter Olympics Figure-Skating Competition Highlights Video," one of three Olympics tapes to be released on April 6 by CBS Video, the imperatives aren't hard to figure out.
The entire affair, CBS was quick to announce, will have moved from tube to tape in only 38 days from the closing ceremony.


Review/Film; A Crotchety MacLaine As a Former First Lady
Doug Chesnic (Nicolas Cage) would love to quit his job, but there's a little problem: every time he tries to leave he gets a threatening phone call from the President of the United States.
Doug is a Secret Service man assigned to guard Tess Carlisle (Shirley MacLaine), a widowed former First Lady whose favorite pursuits are wearing pillbox hats that match her umbrellas and torturing members of her staff.
Tess is one tough customer.
She scares Doug and she scares the President, too.
This promising setup introduces "Guarding Tess" as a tug of war between a grande dame and her resentful young aide, and as such it has lively potential.
Ms.
MacLaine does wonderfully with flinty-old-broad roles, and here she has a chance to peer balefully out over her eyeglasses while making sneaky, impossible demands.
She can be royally condescending whether forcing the Secret Service to watch her play golf in blustery weather or merely ordering up Secret Service-delivered snacks.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that close soon: Closing This Weekend  "A BODY OF WATER" and "ESCAPE FROM PARADISE," Circle Repertory Company, 99 Seventh Avenue South, at West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village.
Two plays in repertory: "A Body of Water," written by Jenna Zark and directed by Caroline Kava, about Jewish women who use ancient rituals to reclaim their spiritual and sexual lives (through Sunday); and "Escape From Paradise," a one-woman drama about escapism, written and performed by Regina Taylor, and directed by Anne Bogart (through Sunday).
Tickets: $28 to $35.
Performance schedule: (212) 924-7100.
"THREE TALL WOMEN," Vineyard Theater, 108 East 15th Street, East Village.
Edward Albee drama about a wealthy woman looking back on her life.
Marian Seldes, Jordan Baker and Myra Carter; directed by Lawrence Sacharow.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 353-3874.
Reopens with the same cast April 5 at the Promenade Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, Manhattan.
"UNFINISHED STORIES," New York Theater Workshop, 79 East Fourth Street, East Village.
A drama by Sybille Pearson about the effects of prewar Nazi Germany on the lives of a Jewish family in Manhattan; directed by Gordon Davidson.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $22 and $25.
Information: (212) 302-6989.
"THE SACRIFICE OF MMBATHO (DAUGHTER OF NEBO)," Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
A musical theater piece based on a true story about a South African man who kills his young daughter as a ritual sacrifice; written and directed by Hilary Blecher.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $40.
Information: (718) 636-4100.
Closing Next Weekend  "NO MAN'S LAND," Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway at 45th Street.
A revival of Harold Pinter's drama about two elderly poets, starring Christopher Plummer and Jason Robards; directed by David Jones.
Through March 20.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $50.
Information: (212) 719-9393.


Trade Center Makes Plans To Refurbish Public Areas
The board of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey agreed yesterday to spend $10 million to prepare a detailed proposal to redevelop the World Trade Center's dreary public spaces.
The Port Authority, which owns the trade center, wants to make the plaza and the underground concourse, which connects the 110-story twin towers with mass transit and nearby buildings, a sunlit place where the 150,000 daily passers-by will want to linger.


Yangon Journal; AIDS Onslaught Breaches the Burmese Citadel
In a ward of Yangon's Infectious Diseases Hospital, Myo Tun tried to shake hands with a visitor, but he was so weakened by AIDS that the muscles of his hand and arms had all but disappeared.
He barely had enough strength to hold the prayer beads that are his final comfort.
"I used heroin with my friends, and we always shared the needles," said Mr.
Myo Tun, 24 years old, as he drew a green cotton blanket beneath his bare feet.
"Even today my friends do not worry about AIDS. They are not sick yet."


Books of The Times; Stranger Than Fiction and No Less Compelling
Lost Love
A True Story of Passion, Murder and Justice in Old New York
By George Cooper
Illustrated. 272 pages. Pantheon Books. $23.
The narrative form that George Cooper employs in "Lost Love" is as unusual as the lively story he creates with authority about one of the most sensational courtroom trials in post-Civil War America.
The book resembles historical fiction but it is indisputable historical fact, using the voices of the past in such a way that it reads like a novel.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.22
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.48
3.51
2.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.77
3.75
3.05
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.48
6.35
5.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.95
6.83
6.76
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.77
7.66
7.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.01
5.97
5.85
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bar Dispute Ends in Fatal Shooting With Police Officer's Gun
A dispute in a bar in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, ended early yesterday morning when two men apparently grabbed a police officer's gun, followed a third man outside and shot him to death in his car, the police said.
The officer was suspended and arrested last evening on a misdemeanor charge of official misconduct.


At Home Abroad; Ripples Of Freedom
Thirty years ago this week the Supreme Court of the United States found that libel suits could threaten the freedom of speech and press guaranteed by the First Amendment.
In the case of New York Times v.
Sullivan, it put limits on libel to make sure that Americans could criticize public officials without fear.
The High Court of Australia, the equivalent of the U.S.
Supreme Court, is now considering the same issue.
It is deciding whether to apply something like the reasoning of the Sullivan case to prevent libel suits from dampening criticism of politicians.


Let's Bring Russia Into the Club
To the Editor:
Re "Not Red, But Still a Bear" (front page, Feb. 28): The only surprise about Russia's behaving independently -- on the issue of Bosnia, for example -- is that so many Washington Beltway officials and other mavens express surprise.


Family Struggles to Make Do After Fall From Middle Class
With two cars in the garage and a swing set in the backyard, Craig Miller and his family fell easily into the suburban rhythms of Johnson County.
He was a sheet-metal worker for T.W.A.
His middle-class status was stamped on the pay stub: $15.65 an hour.
And the shopping mall clerks didn't care if the paying customer wore steel-toe boots or tasseled loafers.


Agency Memo Shows Officials Were Told of Hospital Problems
An internal Health and Hospitals Corporation memorandum shows that top officials of the agency were told a year ago of the widespread problems with the reconstruction of Kings County Hospital, including allegations of misconduct and strife over whether officials were being told the hospital's true costs.
The 26-page chronology of the project by Inspector General Barbara Dixon and Frank J. Cirillo, the corporate director internal audits, was ordered by Dr.
Billy E. Jones, then the president of the Health and Hospitals Corporation, in January 1993 and was dated March 12, 1993.
The document shows that a copy was also sent to Dr.
James R. Dumpson, then the chairman and still a Health and Hospitals Corporation board member.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Clinton Administration said it would let companies market spy-satellite technology to commercial customers around the world.
The decision is a big change from comparatively strict limits that are now imposed on satellite-imaging systems, and caps more than a year of intense debate among the Commerce Department, Pentagon and the Government's intelligence agencies.  [ Page A1. ]


U.S. TO ALLOW SALE OF THE TECHNOLOGY FOR SPY SATELLITES
The Clinton Administration announced today that it would allow companies to market sophisticated spy satellite technology to commercial customers around the world.
The decision marks a big change from the comparatively strict limits now imposed on satellite-imaging systems, and it caps more than a year of intense debate among the Commerce Department, the Pentagon and Government intelligence agencies.


Charles Bukowski Is Dead at 73; Poet Whose Subject Was Excess
Charles Bukowski, a poet, novelist and screenwriter whose heavy drinking and hard living were brought to the screen in the 1987 film "Barfly," died on Wednesday in San Pedro Peninsula Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 73 and lived in San Pedro, the Los Angeles port neighborhood.
The cause was leukemia, said Harvey Klinger, the agent for Black Sparrow Press, Mr.
Bukowski's publisher.


Review/Fashion; A la 90's, Costume Drama Continues
In the depths of the Paris subway, artisans can be found who collect used Metro tickets and fold and weave them into elaborate objects -- anything from keychains to fruit bowls -- as audiences waiting for trains look on with fascination.
It is the same sort of fascination that rivets fashion audiences to Herve Leger's runway shows.
Mr.
Leger has devoted his career to making dresses out of stretchy elastic bandages, fitted snugly around models, who burst from the dresses' every opening.
Anyone questioning the appeal of Mr.
Leger's asset-enhancing dresses needed only to have looked at David Copperfield, the magician, who was at the show on Wednesday to see his new fiancee, Claudia Schiffer, walk the runway.


Sounds Around Town
Home, for a Change
Marlene VerPlanck, B. Smith's, 771 Eighth Avenue, at 47th Street, Clinton, (212) 247-2222.
Marlene VerPlanck spends so much time singing in Europe and the far reaches of the United States that she is rarely heard in New York even though she lives just across the Hudson River in Clifton, N.J.
But this weekend and next, she is settling down at B. Smith's for her longest New York run since 1988.
She's bringing with her a rarely heard song that is a collaboration between Gerry Mulligan and Judy Holliday, "What's The Rush?," and an early Cole Porter gem, "It's Bad for Me." She performs tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and 11:15, with Tex Arnold at the piano tonight and Tony Monte tomorrow night.
On both nights, Jeff Fuller will be the bassist and Joe Cocuzzo the drummer.
There is a $20 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.
JOHN S. WILSON Heavenly Jazz
Bob Kindred Quartet, Church of the Heavenly Rest, Fifth Avenue at 90th Street, (212) 752-1428.
The tenor saxophonist Bob Kindred projects a strong personal style that comes out of the swing era but is not dependent on any of the individual stars of those days.
In this concert, the last in the season's Heavenly Jazz series, his quartet includes the guitarist Gene Bertoncini and the bassist Michael Moore, a magnificent duo on their own with a subtle style that balances Mr.
Kindred's strong, full-bodied attack.
The group, filled out by the percussionist John Kay, plays at 5 P.M. on Sunday as a benefit for the Day School of the Church of the Heavenly Rest.
Tickets are $15 ($10 for students and the elderly) and can be purchased at the door.
J.
S.
W.
Well-Rounded Tones
Benny Golson Quartet, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7900.
Benny Golson is a saxophonist with an unusually well-rounded career.
He was a sideman in Dizzy Gillespie's big band of the 1950's and Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers.
With the trumpeter Art Farmer, he formed a celebrated small jazz group, the Jazztet.
He has composed such jazz standards as "Whisper Not," "Blues March" and "I Remember Clifford," and for more than a decade he devoted himself to composing television scores.
All these elements contribute to his current quartet, in which Kevin Hays plays piano, Peter Washington is on bass and Tony Reedus is at the drums.
They play tonight and tomorrow night at 8, 10 and midnight and on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
There is a music charge of $20 and a $10 minimum.
J.
S.
W.


INSIDE
African Leader Forced to Flee
An uprising in the South African homeland of Bophuthatswana forced its President to flee the capital as his police force disintegrated.
Page A3.
Anger Over Sex Harassment
Navy Secretary John H. Dalton said allegations that sexual harassment went unpunished in the military made his "blood boil." Page A22.
New Goals for Power Agency
The new head of the New York Power Authority said his agency must cut costs and be more aggressive in pursuing new technologies.
Page B1.
New Data on AIDS Epidemic
In a demographic shift, heterosexual transmission accounted for the largest percentage increase in new AIDS cases last year.
Page A12.
Motorola Accord in Japan
Motorola and a Japanese company have agreed to widen Motorola's access to Japan's cellular phone market, a Motorola official said.
Page D1.


Defiant Leader of Homeland Accedes to a Nonracial Vote
The leader of the apartheid homeland of Bophuthatswana today bowed to a popular uprising and agreed to let his ostensibly independent domain take part in the first nonracial elections in South Africa.
After the homeland leader, Lucas Mangope, ended his defiance, President F. W. de Klerk sent the South African Army into Bophuthatswana tonight to subdue rioting and to drive out thousands of gun-slinging whites who had come to defend this bastion of apartheid.


New Jersey Beach Restoration Is a Herculean Task, and Expense


Mexico Mediator Hints at Renegade Bid for President
The Government's negotiator for peace in the troubled southern state of Chiapas, Manuel Camacho Solis, raised the possibility today that he might split from the governing party and run for President in a candidacy that could break Mexican politics wide open.
Mr.
Camacho, who was passed over for the party's nomination 15 weeks ago in favor of one of his former aides, Luis Donaldo Colosio, did not say explicitly that he might compete in the presidential election scheduled for next August.
He never even mentioned the office that has long been the central goal of his political career.


Bridge
The Spring National Championships of the American Contract Bridge League began here this afternoon, with 10 days of play impending, but one major title had already been decided.
The North American Open Pairs, popularly known as the Grand National Pairs, ended Thursday night in a victory for Jim Griffin and Ken Schutze of Austin, Tex., who became the first pair ever to win this title twice.
They won a year ago in Kansas City, Mo., and if they had not won the first they would not have won the second time.
They had not qualified at the local level, but played thanks to a new regulation giving a place to the defending champions.


Insurance on a Loan Can Be a Costly Item
AFTER falling out of favor with banks and borrowers in the 1980's, private mortgage insurance has more than tripled in the last three years, spurred by a surge of first-time home buyers.
Borrowers are often required to buy the insurance, which protects the lender in case of a default, if they make a mortgage down payment of less than 20 percent.
But home buyers may not realize how much they are paying for the insurance.


Trenton Aide Says Economy Will Stay Flat for Next Year
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman will not be able to rely on a growing state economy to help close a $2.4 billion gap and to pay for the next installment of her promised income-tax cuts, the State Treasurer said today.
At a briefing on projected revenue for the 1995 fiscal year, Brian W. Clymer, the treasurer, said he had expected better economic news.
Instead, he said, the state's economy will remain flat in the coming year, with revenues expected to fall slightly below the $14.8 billion the state expects to receive this year.


Saberhagen Hates Being In Mets' Store Window
Bret Saberhagen wants this to be over and finished.
He is tired of the trade rumors.
He is tired of the uncertainty.
He wants the Mets to make a decision, and he wants them to make it now.
After pitching four strong innings against Montreal here this afternoon, Saberhagen expressed frustration over the trade rumors that have persisted since the conclusion of last season and then he sent a very simple message to the Mets' management through reporters: I want to be traded soon or I don't want to be traded at all.


ShowBiz Pizza Time (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PRIVATE MANAGEMENT SEEN FOR HOSPITALS  Moving forward with plans to turn over several city hospitals to private management, the Giuliani administration has identified Queens Hospital Center, Elmhurst Hospital Center and Coney Island Hospital as the leading candidates, aides to the Mayor said.
Page 1. 3D-RATE SERVICE FOR 1ST-CLASS MAIL Although the United States Postal Service proclaims that nothing keeps its couriers from their appointed rounds, the Bronx has been plunged into a postal crisis in recent months with residents and officials reporting chronic delivery of mail to incorrect addresses and letters mailed to addresses within the city -- even within the Bronx -- taking weeks to arrive.
Page 1.
PAYMENTS TO CONSULTANT FROZEN The president of the Health and Hospitals Corporation has suspended payments to a politically well-connected consulting firm whose role in the rebuilding of Kings County Medical Center is being investigated by the city.
Page 24.
GUN TRACKED IN SHOOTING OF STUDENTS A drug dealer was arrested in the illegal sale of a handgun that found its way into the possession of Rashid Baz, who is charged in the fatal shooting on the Brooklyn Bridge last week.
The authorities said the suspect, Albert Jeanniton, was the first link in a gun trafficking chain that led to Mr.
Baz.
But they added that they had no evidence that Mr.
Jeanniton, 25, knew Mr.
Baz or sold him the semiautomatic pistol, and so had no new clues on the motivations for the attack.
Page 25.
CABBY DEMANDS A HEARING Piotr Jaworski thinks of himself as a professional and the cab that he drives as his office.
That is why he is fighting with the city's Taxi and Limousine Commission over the stereo system in his taxi.
"They are telling me to take it out because it is not standard," said the Polish-born driver, who has been operating a cab here for 10 years.
"But I did not grow up for 25 years under Communism so that I will just roll over and allow some inspector in New York to dictate how I am supposed to listen to music in my place of business." About New York.
Page 25.
REGION  PROJECTIONS CLOUD TAX CUT Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey will not be able to rely on a growing state economy to help close a $2.4 billion gap and to pay for the next installment of her promised income tax cuts, the State Treasurer said.
Page 26.
SUSPECT RAPED AS A CHILD, LAWYER SAYS Ricardo S. Caputo, who returned to New York this week after 20 years as a fugitive and admitted the murders of four women in the 1970's, was raped as a child in Argentina and underwent psychiatric treatment there as a teen-ager, his lawyer said.
Page 26.
OFFICIALS SUED OVER PINE BARRENS Ending an uneasy alliance with developers and elected officials, five environmental groups sued Long Island government officials for approving athletic fields on 30 acres in a park in the Pine Barrens.
Page 26.
A PARKING SANCTUARY FOR COMMUTERS Hoping to catch a rush-hour express train to mid-Manhattan, many a harried commuter gives up the search for a legal parking spot and makes a furtive turn into the Roman Catholic church parking lot in Merrick, L.I., taking advantage of the good graces of the parish priest.
To make it legal , some have proposed that the railroad lease the lot for commuter parking.
Page 26.


N.Y.U. Wins In 3 Overtimes
New York University advanced to the final of the Division III Eastern Regional by beating Rowan College in triple overtime, 80-75, last night in Albany.
Center Jonathan Gabriel had 21 points, 15 rebounds and 3 blocks for the Violets, and guard Adam Crawford added 19 points and 8 rebounds.
Adrian Matthew had a game-high 25 points for the Glassboro, N.J., school.
In today's regional final, N.Y.U. will play Albany, which defeated Stockton, 60-54.


Public &amp; Private; Pols and Press and Palaver
Some superlatives from the Whitewater week that was:
Best Break for the Clinton Administration: Alfonse D'Amato as Ethicist.


Lawmaker's Health Plan Caught in Crossfire
For 12 months, Representative Pete Stark took potshots at President Clinton's health plan.
He said it was based on "a hope and a prayer and an untested theory." He likened it to a unicorn, "a beautiful animal in fairyland, but unseen on earth."
Now Mr.
Stark, a California Democrat who is chairman of the Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, is struggling to win votes for his own proposal, which is much different from the President's.
And he finds that Democrats and Republicans on his subcommittee are taking potshots at his bill, which would expand Medicare to cover millions of people who have no other source of health insurance.


Pacific Physician Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Who's in the Boardroom?
Trustees of the City University of New York are upset that W. Ann Reynolds, its chancellor, sits on five major corporate boards.
She spends too much time away from the university, they say, at a time when she is trying to push through a controversial plan to reorganize the system.
I'm upset too, and so should be any woman working in the corporate world -- but for a different reason.


What if you had a stock exchange and nobody came?
For the last two and a half years, Ukraine's market has been dressing up in high-grade new technology.
A million dollars' worth of gleaming I.B.M. computers line the rows of the exchange's trading hall, where, in theory, shares can be electronically traded within seconds by modem from any remote village.
An investment of more than $5 million, most of it from France, has transformed a building that once housed a school for Communist Party officials into what might be a cutting-edge bourse, where the technology would be familiar in New York, London or Tokyo.


Review/Jazz; Gerry Mulligan Plays the Enchanting Host
A good jazz soloist can create an environment by using specific harmonies, tempos and rhythms.
Some environments are all too familiar and don't have much to offer.
Others, like the ones regularly created by the baritone saxophonist Gerry Mulligan, are distinct and worth revisiting.
Mr.
Mulligan, at 66 an elder statesman of jazz, builds an atmosphere so redolent of relaxation and wit that it's no wonder he has remained one of the biggest draws in jazz for most of his 40-odd-year career.
On Thursday night at the Downtown Theater of Pace University, as part of the Highlights in Jazz series, he joined another of jazz's better-known soloists, the pianist Billy Taylor, for a concert that reaffirmed Mr.
Mulligan's brilliance.


Don't Sell Our Spy Technology
The Clinton Administration's announcement Thursday that it will allow American companies to market spy satellite technology abroad points to a dangerous weak point in a generally sensible new export control policy.
In seeking to justify the sales, a Commerce Department official offered this glib and expansive explanation: "In order to have national security, you have to have vibrant and competitive industries that are allowed to do what they do best." Such as selling high technology that could end up targeting American troops or military installations?


Mixed Signals Fatal for South African Separatists
The three white men had strapped on their pistols and raced 300 miles across South Africa to defend the apartheid homeland of Bophuthatswana, in what they were told was the first great battle against a Communist insurrection.
Now they lay in the dirt alongside their bullet-riddled blue Mercedes, one dead and two wounded, casualties of a fierce gun battle with the black homeland soldiers they had ostensibly come to save.


Catellus Development reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


To Control Diabetes, Cut Down Carbohydrates; No Insurance Coverage
To the Editor:
Re your Feb. 28 front-page article on diabetes: People with diabetes who want to prolong their lives while cutting the risk of devastating complications like kidney failure, blindness, stroke and limb amputation, often face an uphill battle with insurance companies if they try to follow the intensive treatment program advanced by National Institutes of Health's landmark 10-year study.


Planning and Paying for a Funeral in Advance
Anna Schwartz, 94, is in a nursing home in Manhattan.
Her nephew, Peter Carroll, a reference librarian from Rocky Point, L.I., is handling her finances and is named executor in her will.
Reviewing his aunt's records recently, Mr.
Carroll discovered that she went too a Manhattan funeral home in 1980 to make advance arrangements for her funeral.
No money exchanged hands, but the records were kept on file.
Although the prices have risen substantially, Mr.
Carroll wanted to see if he could adhere to his aunt's wishes, and stay within her budget.
He did some comparison shopping and found much lower prices at a funeral home on Long Island. 'This has been an eye opener for me,' Mr.
Carroll said. 'I never expected costs to vary this much.'


New York City Picks 3 Hospitals Intended for Private Management
Moving forward with plans to turn over several city hospitals to private management, the Giuliani administration has identified Queens Hospital Center, Elmhurst Hospital Center and Coney Island Hospital as the leading candidates, aides to the Mayor said yesterday.
While the details are far from worked out, city and hospital officials said the two Queens hospitals could be put into a closer relationship with the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, which already has affiliation agreements with the two institutions.


Slay Suspect Was Raped As a Child, Lawyer Says
Ricardo S. Caputo, who returned voluntarily to New York this week after 20 years as a fugitive and admitted murdering four women in this country and Mexico in the 1970's, was raped by a stranger as a child in Argentina, his lawyer said yesterday.
The lawyer, Michael Kennedy, also said that Mr.
Caputo had been physically abused by his mother's companion and that he underwent psychiatric treatment as a teen-ager.


Edessa Journal; Real 'Macedonia' Issue Is Real Estate
To the rest of the world, the fight between Greece and its neighboring former Yugoslav republic over the name Macedonia may make little sense.
But to Metropolitan Chrysostomos, who lives on one side of the border, and to Risto Yatchev, who lives on the other side, it comes down to a battle for land.
When Yugoslavia's southernmost republic declared itself the independent state of Macedonia in September 1991, Greece slapped a trade blockade on it.
Thousands of demonstrators took to the streets in Greece to protest the use of the name.


COMPANY BREIFS
INTERNATIONAL TOTALIZER SYSTEMS INC., Carlsbad, Calif., a maker of lottery and parimutuel wagering equipment, plans to expand its production capacity by leasing an additional 40,000 to 60,000 square feet of space and by hiring 60 new employees.


Ault Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Kruk's Cancer Confined
JOHN KRUK's testicular cancer has not spread to other parts of his body, the Philadelphia Phillies team physician said yesterday in Clearwater, Fla., but Kruk may undergo radiation treatment as a precaution.
Dr.
PHILLIP MARONE said CAT scans of Kruk's chest, abdomen and pelvis showed no signs of cancer.
In addition, he said blood tests, which detect cancer, have also come up negative.


Suzy Strain, Ballet Dancer, 35
Suzy Strain, a leading dancer with the Ballet Chicago, died on Sunday at her home in Chicago.
She was 35.
The cause is being investigated, said Colleen Lober, the general manager of Ballet Chicago.


For Military Contractors, It's Buy or Be Bought
A day after the Northrop Corporation lobbed a $2.04 billion, $60-a-share hostile takeover bid for the Grumman Corporation, the buzz up and down Wall Street was that no midsized military contractor should consider itself safe -- including Northrop itself.
"It's either eat or be eaten," said Guy P. Wyser-Pratte, the head of his own money management firm, which specializes in arbitrage.
"The value of every defense firm now has to be looked at. And if Northrop doesn't pull this off, they are extremely vulnerable to a takeover themselves."


Classical Music in Review
Hagen Quartet  92d Street Y


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
3.22
2.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.48
3.48
2.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.76
3.77
3.07
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.44
6.48
6.11
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.90
6.95
6.86
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.74
7.77
7.82
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.05
6.01
5.91
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Assigned Ron Watson, Troy Percival, John Fritz and Bob Gamez, pitchers, and Fausto Tejero and Jose Monzon, catchers, to minor league camp.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Assigned Apolinar Garcia, Ramser Correa, Greg McCarthy, and Calvin Jones, pitchers; Craig Colbert and Ryan Martindale, catchers; and Greg Briley and Ken Ramos, outfielders, to their minor-league camp.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Assigned Tate Seefried, first baseman, to their minor-league camp.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Announced an extension of their player development contract with the Chattanooga Lookouts of the Southern League through 1996.
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Pablo Duran, first baseman, to a minor league contract.
Basketball National Basketball Association  LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Extended the contract of Randy Pfund, coach, for one year through the 1995-96 season.
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Named Kati Kaiser vice president of ticket operations.
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Activated Terry Cummings, forward, from the injured list.
Placed Chris Whitney, guard, on the injured list.
Football National Football League  CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Merril Hoge, fullback, to a three-year contract.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed Tim Brown, wide receiver, to an offer sheet.
DETROIT LIONS -- Re-signed Brett Perriman, wide receiver, to a three-year contract.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Mark Didio, wide receiver, and Tony Barker, linebacker.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Signed Ethan Horton, tight end, to a two-year contract.
Canadian Football League  SACRAMENTO GOLD MINERS -- Traded Walter Bailey, defensive back, to the Edmonton Eskimos for Doug Parrish, defensive back.
Hockey National Hockey League  CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS -- Traded Frantisek Kucera, defenseman, and Jocelyn Lemieux, right wing, to the Hartford Whalers for Gary Suter, defenseman; Randy Cunneyworth, left wing; and an undisclosed draft choice.
Traded Troy Murray, center, to the Ottawa Senators for future considerations.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Recalled Mattias Norstrom, defenseman, from Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
International Hockey League  PEORIA RIVERMEN -- Signed Steve Wilson, defenseman, to a 25-game tryout contract.
Olympics  ATLANTA COMMITTEE FOR THE OLYMPIC GAMES -- Named Richard Stogner deputy chief financial officer.
Soccer National Professional Soccer League  NPSL -- Suspended and fined Wichita forward Chico Borja for one game for his conduct toward an official during Sunday's game; St.
Louis goalie Jeff Robben for two games for unnecessary play during Sunday's game; and Dayton forward Brad Smith for one game for his conduct during last Friday's game.
College  ALDERSON-BROADDUS -- Named Bill Denniston men's soccer coach.
HOUGHTON -- Named Peter Fuller men's soccer coach.
KENTUCKY -- Suspended Rodrick Rhodes, forward, from Friday's Southeastern Conference tournament game for breaking an unspecified team rule.
NEB.-OMAHA -- Announced the resignation of Bob Hanson, men's basketball coach.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 CHILLY GREETING IN BEIJING
Secretary of State Christopher arrived in Beijing to deliver a tough message to China's leaders on the country's poor human rights performance.
The atmosphere was decidedly chilly, with routine diplomatic niceties canceled.  1


Starks Is Out, But Davis Is on Target
On a night when John Starks could not play, Hubert Davis played the best game of his career.
Scoring a career-high 25 points on 10-for-11 shooting, Davis led the Knicks to their fifth consecutive victory, 90-83, over the Celtics at Boston Garden.
It was another superb defensive performance by the Knicks (41-19), who have held five consecutive opponents to fewer than 90 points for the first time in franchise history.


CHINA TRIP BEGINS ON A FROSTY NOTE FOR CHRISTOPHER
Secretary of State Warren Christopher arrived in Beijing on Friday night to deliver a tough message to Chinese leaders on the country's human rights performance.
The atmosphere was decidedly chilly, with each side keeping the other at arm's length and backing away from routine diplomatic niceties.
China showed its disdain for American human rights concerns by continuing to round up dissidents.


Simon Property Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Improving the View for All


Review/Pop; Songs of a Mythic Texas
In Texas, aging outlaws grow more courtly while their music pushes harder.
Billy Joe Shaver, better known as a songwriter than as a performer, came to Tramps on Thursday night leading Shaver, a lean four-man band featuring his son, Eddy Shaver, on lead guitar.
From unhurried Western swing to twangy, swaggering country-rock, Shaver makes music to burn down the honky-tonks.
The band understands Buddy Holly and the Eagles as well as Bob Wills and Merle Haggard; it's contemporary without ever disowning its roots.
Billy Joe Shaver's songs helped Waylon Jennings, Bobby Bare and others create the outlaw country movement of the 1970's.
Mr.
Shaver and fellow Texas songwriters like Willie Nelson were called outlaws because they defied Nashville country formulas.
Their songs entwine autobiography with visions of a mythic Texas, where "lovable losers and no-account boozers" become heroes.
In Mr.
Shaver's songs, the narrator is gruffly self-deprecating, a "fool" for a desirable woman, a "stray dog" in polite company.


Women Warriors -- and Sexist Men
By May 1992, the Navy had put in place a zero-tolerance policy for sexual harassment.
That same month Lieut.
Darlene Simmons, a lawyer in the Navy Reserve, accused her commander of sexual harassment.
Did the policy help her?
No.
On the contrary, she told the House Armed Services Committee this week, the policy and its procedures were ignored.
Trapped in a maze from which there was no exit, she was treated worse than a laboratory rat.


Lawmaker Says Officials Were Gagged Over S.&amp; L.
The top Republican on the House banking committee said today that bank regulators in Washington had "gagged and possibly coerced" their subordinates in Kansas City who sought a criminal inquiry into the failed Arkansas savings and loan at the heart of the Whitewater affair.
Representative Jim Leach, an Iowa Republican who has been a vocal proponent of Congressional hearings on the matter, made the accusation in a letter to the special prosecutor investigating events surrounding the savings and loan and the Clintons' real estate dealings.
The Clintons were partners with the owner of the failed financial institution, Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan, and his wife in a land venture, the Whitewater Development Company.


Chock Full O'Nuts Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


At the Western Wall, Some Pray and Some Protest
Like hundreds of other Jews, Robbie Berman went to the Western Wall today for midday prayers.
But first, like dozens of those who filed through the Dung Gate of the walled Old City of Jerusalem, he had to hand the police the pistol he carries.
For a while today, the Dung Gate police box looked like an arsenal.
And there was Mr.
Berman, a stand-up comic formerly of Woodmere, L.I., and now of Jerusalem, heading to prayer with an empty holster and a receipt for his gun.


Orchard Supply Hardware Stores Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Clinton's Chef Cooked His Own Goose
The back-to-back resignations of Bernard Nussbaum, the White House counsel, and Pierre Chambrin, the White House chef, help explain American politics.
On the surface, the departures seem wildly disconnected.
Bernie quit because meetings with Treasury officials had the appearance of impropriety to those concerned with Whitewater.
Pierre was asked to leave because his Gallic character and rich sauces conflicted with the low-calorie, New Age culinary nationalism of the Presidential family.


Seneca Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


'A Family in Stress' Over Its Stricken Rebbe; The Unspoken Question Among Lubavitchers: Who Is Going to Succeed Their Leader?
As Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson lies critically ill in a hospital, his body weakened by strokes and seizures, the Lubavitch Hasidim keep a sidewalk vigil, waiting and praying through teardrops and raindrops.
Many thoughts rush through their minds when they contemplate the physical trials of the 91-year-old man they all call Rebbe and many call Messiah, but one thought remains unspoken, if not unthinkable: death.
"It's not something we're even prepared to contemplate," said Rabbi Yisrael Deren, the regional director for Chabad Lubavitch in western and southern New England.
"What if the sun doesn't rise tomorrow morning? Our assumption is the Rebbe is going to get well."


Kamieniecki's Guarantee Is That Nothing Is Certain
After squirming for a spot in the rotation for three springs, this was supposed to be the training camp in which Scott Kamieniecki would feel secure.
He became an integral member of the Yankees' starting corps last year.
So these sunny days should have been reserved for simply getting prepared.
Things like tinkering with his pitches and strengthening his arm.
But life with the Yankees is rarely that easy.


Novichok on Trial
Yesterday in Moscow, Russia's chief prosecutor dropped all charges against Vil Mirzayanov, a chemist who was jailed for revealing that the Soviets had secretly developed a binary nerve gas, code-named Novichok, that is 8 to 10 times as powerful as anything in America's arsenal.
For speaking out, Mr.
Mirzayanov was imprisoned twice and put on trial for supposedly disclosing state secrets.
His vindication, due in large part to Western pressure, is a promising event, but it leaves unaddressed the larger issues of Russia's intentions in the field of chemical warfare.


Oregon Concern's Workers Learn and Earn
Many executives espouse the need for American businesses to provide better job-related training for their employees, but few deal with the issue as directly as Richard Gordon.
Mr.
Gordon, the president of a small Portland auto parts company, pays his 22 employees to read books like M. Scott Peck's "The Road Less Traveled," listen to tapes by DePak Chopra or watch self-improvement videos.


14 Starters but No Canaveral
Canaveral, the undefeated extra horse waiting for a vacancy in the Florida Derby, was officially scratched from the race today, leaving the original field of 14 intact.
Fair weather and a fast track were predicted for the race at Gulfstream Park on Saturday, with Holy Bull leading a pack of speed horses likely to set a fast pace.
Canaveral, who has raced and won twice for John Kluge, would have been one of the pacesetters.
But only 14 are allowed to go to the post for the Florida Derby, and he was 15th in career earnings among the horses entered.


Environmentalists Suing County Officials Over Pine Barrens
Ending an uneasy alliance with developers and elected officials, five environmental groups sued Long Island government officials today for approving athletic fields on 30 acres in a park in the Pine Barrens.
The groups, including the Long Island Pine Barrens Society and the Sierra Club, said the approval violated a 1993 state law creating a 100,000-acre pine barrens preserve on eastern Long Island where a central area of more than 50,000 acres would remain forever in a natural state.


U.S. to Act on Burmese Dissident
The Administration has decided to step up pressure on Myanmar to open talks with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the imprisoned democracy campaigner, and to ease its repression of the opposition, officials said today.
They ruled out sending an ambassador to Myanmar, formerly Burma, and said that they were considering pushing for an arms embargo against the country.


Q &amp; A
Stock Splits  Q. When a stock splits 2 for 1, does the share price automatically get cut in half?
LYNN AARON, Manhattan  A. Splits are usually announced by corporations after their stock has had a significant run-up in price, in the hope that a lower price will make it more attractive to investors.
A 2-for-1 split halves the price of the stock, but doubles the number of shares you own.
Frequently stocks rise on such an announcement, but most of the upward price movements from splits are not lasting.


Boston Parade Canceled Over Gay Issue
Hours after a gay group won the right to join the St.
Patrick's Day parade that has been a tradition here for 92 years, organizers said today that they were canceling the parade, which had been scheduled for March 20.
The state's highest court ended a three-year legal battle today and ruled that the parade organizers, a veterans' group, could not ban the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston from marching.


No Headline
Washington's a famous city, fast-paced and high-priced, and they have to have something to talk about during their three-martini lunches.
But we've got bigger things to worry about here in Ohio. -- ZANDRA WOLFGRAM of suburban Cleveland, on the Whitewater affair.  [ 1:2. ]


Snyder Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bronx Mystery: 3d-Rate Service for 1st-Class Mail
School officials at Monsignor Scanlan High School in the Bronx had 650 report cards to mail yesterday.
So they did the obvious thing.
They drove to the post office in Mount Vernon -- 20 minutes away in Westchester County.
Although the United States Postal Service poetically proclaims that nothing stays its couriers from the swift completion of their appointed rounds, the Bronx has been plunged into a postal mystery in the last several months as residents and local officials report chronic problems with letters being misrouted or taking weeks to arrive at addresses in the city -- even between points within the Bronx.


Western Banks To Relieve 40% of Polish Debt
After four years of negotiations, Western commercial banks agreed today to a reorganization of Poland's debt that will reduce what the country owes by more than 40 percent and is likely to enhance its economic prospects.
Poland is the fourth-largest debtor among the world's developing countries, ranking after the big Latin American nations that have reached similar debt-reduction agreements -- Brazil, Mexico and Argentina.


In Upset, Odds Are in Seton Hall's Favor
John Leahy had it all figured out.
For once, in this painfully inconsistent season for a shooter who had lost his shot, the numbers were on his side.
"I'm shooting about 25 percent for 3's," the Seton Hall junior said.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Ferrell Helps Hawks Stretch Lead  Lenny Wilkens chose quickness over size last night and the change worked for the Atlanta Hawks.
Duane Ferrell, starting in place of Jon Koncak, scored 19 points and Kevin Willis had 23 points and 15 rebounds as the Hawks routed Chicago, 108-77, stretching their Central Division lead over the Bulls to four games.
The Hawks lifted their record at home to 27-4. (AP)


Classical Music in Review
Hsin-Chuan Taiwanese Opera Troupe  Taipei Theater 1221 Avenue of the Americas between 48th and 49th Streets


John C. Dreier, 87, A Retired Professor And U.S. Diplomat
John Caspar Dreier, a retired United States diplomat and Johns Hopkins University professor of Latin American studies, died on Thursday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 87 and lived in Cambridge and Southwest Harbor, Me.
The cause was complications from congestive heart failure, his family said.


Baker (J.) Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Michael on Michael
In what he called a personal evaluation of his skills, especially hitting, Michael Jordan said in Sarasota, Fla., that he would go down to the minor leagues for at least one year in hopes of making the major league roster if the Chicago White Sox officials think that is what he needs.
Jordan did not start yesterday's split-squad game against Kansas City, but was a defensive replacement in the seventh inning in right field.
He never batted.
He is 0 for 12 in seven spring games with two walks and a sacrifice fly.


Reporters Win $25,000 Prize
Neill Borowski and Gilbert Gaul of The Philadelphia Inquirer have received a $25,000 prize for investigative reporting from the Joan Shorenstein Barone Center on the Press, Politics and Public Policy at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.
The annual award, the Goldsmith Prize, was given to the reporters for their seven-part series "Warehouses of Wealth: The Tax-Free Economy," which dealt with the abuse of tax-exempt status by nonprofit organizations.


Religion Notes
Unauthorized Autopsy
A Manhattan jury has ordered a funeral home to pay $1.4 million to the family of an 82-year-old Orthodox Jewish man whose body was sent for an autopsy without knowledge or approval of his family.


Stocks Rally Sharply, With the Dow Up 32.08
Stocks followed bonds again yesterday and rallied sharply.
Startled by and then drawn to bond interest rates that almost touched 7 percent, traders began buying bonds again, and stock traders followed by bidding up stocks.
Stocks sensitive to a resurgent economy and interest rates benefited, including United Technologies, Caterpillar, Procter &amp; Gamble and Citicorp.


A Broncos Offer Sheet Brown Can't Refuse
Los Angeles Raiders receiver TIM BROWN signed an offer sheet yesterday with Denver that would give him $11 million over four years with a no-trade clause, the Broncos said.
The Raiders have seven days to match the offer.
The no-trade clause is designed to limit the Raiders' options if they plan on matching the offer with the idea of sending Brown to another team.
Brown, 27, led the American Conference with 1,180 receiving yards last season and caught 7 touchdown passes.


Observer; Wide as a Church Door
While making tea by the kitchen TV I heard Janet say, "When you put a man's wife down a well and take her place, people are bound to hold a grudge against you." I wanted to comfort her, because that's what Janet had done: put a wife down a well, then moved in with the husband.
"Come on, Janet," I wanted to tell her, "there are worse things than putting a man's wife down a well. There's thrill killing, for instance, and it's made a media star of Charles Manson. Didn't you see Diane Sawyer doing another Manson interview just the other night, for Heaven's sake?"


New Pressures on the Slorc
Following an eight-month policy review, the Clinton Administration has reportedly decided to increase pressure on Myanmar, formerly Burma, and to ask other nations of the world to stop sending arms to its brutal military regime.
That would be a just and honorable response to Myanmar's obstinate refusal to hold talks with its democratic opponents.
This week, the Burmese general known as Secretary One, or S-1 for short, gave his first interview to a Western correspondent in two years.
Lieut.
Gen.
Khin Nyunt told Philip Shenon of The New York Times that he would not meet with, nor grant any political standing to, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese democracy leader and Nobel Peace Prize laureate who has been under house arrest in the capital for several years.


Robert Peary Jr., 90, Arctic Explorer's Son
Robert E. Peary Jr., an engineer and outdoorsman, died on Wednesday in Sarasota, Fla., at the home of his daughter, Josephine.
Mr.
Peary, who lived in Augusta, Me., was 90.
He died of cancer, said his son, Robert E. Peary 3d of Augusta.


Consumer Spending In Rebound
Consumer spending bounced back in February from January's freeze and earthquake, reflecting greater confidence, more jobs and growing incomes.
Retail sales rose 1.5 percent last month, the Commerce Department reported yesterday.
The gain was bigger than most economists expected and at first raised some fears of inflation among bond investors.


Southwestern Bell and Cox Renegotiating Deal
The Southwestern Bell Corporation said today that it was renegotiating the financial terms of its $4.9 billion joint venture with Cox Enterprises Inc., but officials at both companies said the deal was in no danger of collapsing.
Analysts said Southwestern Bell officials had told them at a meeting this week in San Antonio, where the company is based, that the officials would have to renegotiate the terms of the transaction in the wake of the move by the Federal Communications Commission last month to cut cable television rates by 7 percent.


She Skates. Can She Do Stand-Up?
Nancy Kerrigan, you've just taken a ferocious pounding in the media for not knowing how to deal with your Olympic fame.
What are you going to do now?
"I'm going to host 'Saturday Night Live!' "


Spar Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A book review on Feb. 21 about Donald Keene's "On Familiar Terms: A Journey Across Cultures" included an incomplete paraphrase of one recollection by Mr.
Keene about the aftermath of Pearl Harbor and the number of Americans who spoke Japanese then.
Mr.
Keene wrote: "Soon after the outbreak of war, I heard a radio broadcast to the effect that only 50 Americans knew Japanese. This was absurd: there were hundreds of thousands of Japanese-Americans who knew Japanese."


Benjamin And Nets Turn Tables On Pacers
Go figure.
One week after they gave up more points to Indiana than any other team has scored on them this season, the Nets held the Pacers to their lowest output of the season in an 87-73 victory before a sellout crowd of 20,049 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight.


Vincent Spagna, Painter, 96
Vincent Spagna, a painter, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan. He was 96.
He died after a long illness, family members said.


Use of Church Parking Is Pushed for L.I.R.R.
Hoping to catch a rush-hour express train to mid-Manhattan, many a harried commuter gives up the search for a legal parking spot and makes a furtive turn into the Roman Catholic church parking lot here, taking advantage of the good graces of the parish priest.
Only two blocks south of the crowded Long Island Rail Road Station, the vast lot of the Cure of Ars Roman Catholic Church has become a parking sanctuary.


Sports of The Times; Wanted: Hungry Coaches
PAUL EVANS stood outside the visitors' locker room at Madison Square Garden Thursday evening.
With another tournament game was still in progess, the muffled cheers of fans, the squeak of shoes, the shrieks of the referees' whistles provided background music for Evans's swan song.
A half-hour earlier, he'd made his last appearance as the head basketball coach at the University of Pittsburgh.
It had been an ugly defeat to St.
Johns's in a Big East tournament play-in game.
The Panthers' effort had been virtually devoid of emotion.
Whatever it is that kills a team's spirit and breaks up its cohesion had choked the life out of the Panthers long before Thursday's game.
Evans closed out an eight-year career at Pitt by watching his team tumble to its eighth consecutive loss.


Melvin N. Gough, Early Test Pilot And Air Safety Expert, Dies at 87
Melvin N. Gough, a test pilot, engineer and inventor who helped promote aircraft safety and led the investigation into New York City's worst aviation disaster, died on Sunday at his home in Melbourne Beach, Fla.
He was 87.
His family said he died of cancer.


Lesson From Space for Bronx Students


AIDS Test Panel
To the Editor:
I am one of the panel of New York State AIDS advisers who voted with the majority to reject a legislative proposal to amend the Public Health Law to mandate disclosure of test results to parents of newborns who test antibody-positive for the human immunodeficiency virus, which is believed to cause AIDS.
I object to the constant characterization of this issue as a conflict between a mother's right to privacy and the newborn's right to medical treatment.


Gun Used in Bridge Attack Is Tracked
A drug dealer was arrested yesterday for the illegal sale of a handgun that found its way into the possession of Rashid Baz, who is charged in the fatal shooting on the Brooklyn Bridge last week.
The authorities said the suspect, Albert Jeanniton, was the first link in a gun trafficking chain that led to Mr.
Baz.
But they added that they had no evidence that Mr.
Jeanniton, 25, knew Mr.
Baz or sold him the semiautomatic pistol, and so had no new clues on the motivations for the attack on a van carrying Hasidic students on the bridge.
The attack left one student dead and another critically wounded.


Beach Project to Pump Sand and Money
All those involved in the nation's most expensive beach restoration project, a long-delayed plan to rebuild beaches on New Jersey's severely eroded northern shoreline, refer to the endeavor in monumental terms.
But that may be all they agree on.
Work on the initial phase of the enormous project begins this spring with the pumping of millions of cubic yards of sand to create 140-foot wide beaches at Monmouth Beach and Sea Bright.
Then pumping operations will continue down the coast to Deal Lake just north of Asbury Park by 1998.


CHRONICLE
In celebration of St.
Patrick's Day, the Guinness Import Company, importers of Guinness stout, is giving away the company-owned Connie Doolan's Pub in Cobh, Ireland, to the American who, in 50 words or less, best describes "the perfect pint of Guinness."
More than 3,000 entries have already been received; the deadline is March 24, and entry forms are available in participating bars.
In mid-May, 10 finalists will be flown to Cobh (pronounced COVE) where they will compete before a panel of judges in pub games and be tested on bartending skills, including the gift of gab.


Mitchell Energy &amp; Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


U.S. Appeals Court Bars Both Contenders From Disputed Pennsylvania Senate Seat
Bruce S. Marks expected to take his seat in the Pennsylvania Senate on Monday, having won a trial court ruling that his Democratic opponent, William G. Stinson, stole the November election through voter fraud.
But today, a Federal appeals court said Mr.
Marks will have to wait, pending the outcome of a separate trial in Federal District Court.


Recycling Has Shown Remarkable Success in Four Short Years
To the Editor:
We disagree with "Recycling Creates More Problems Than It Was Meant to Solve" (letter, March 2) by Mark D. Shantzis, chairman of Hi-Rise Recycling Systems.
Recycling is one of several solid waste management solutions.
And considering that mainstream recycling has been operating for only about four years, the results are remarkable.


Sins of the Guildford Four Prosecution
To the Editor:
In a March 5 letter on the movie "In the Name of the Father," about the Guildford Four case, Brian Kirk, information consul, Northern Ireland, implies that the note "Not to be shown to the defense" attached to suppressed alibi evidence in Gerry Conlon's case was fiction.


Empire Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


House, With Little Passion, Passes Clinton Budget
After a debate that was genteel by its usual standard of oratorical combat, the House of Representatives voted along party lines today to approve a rough outline for future Federal budgets that is almost precisely what President Clinton was seeking.
It was an utter turnabout from the last major vote of 1993, not four months ago, when scores of House Democrats ignored Presidential pleas and very nearly hacked $90 billion more from Mr.
Clinton's spending plans.
And it signaled that the deficit-cutting lather that propelled budget politics in Mr.
Clinton's first year in office is dead.


CHRONICLE
While antiquing in New Haven a few weeks ago, EDWARD TURNER, an assistant public affairs officer for the United States Supreme Court and part-time antiques dealer, was thumbing through the manuscripts collection of a New Haven dealer, DAVID LESSER, when he stumbled across what appeared to be some old legal briefs.
What a find!
Among the documents were two original copies of the infamous Dred Scott decision of 1857, which found that black slaves lacked the rights of citizens, and a first-edition copy of the Judiciary Act of 1789, which established the Federal court system.


Classical Music in Review
'Stiffelio' Metropolitan Opera


U.S. and Japan Edge Closer To Ending Cellular Dispute
The Governments of Japan and the United States are in the final stage of negotiations aimed at settling a dispute over access to Japan's cellular telephone market and lifting Washington's threat of trade sanctions, officials said today.
The talks intensified on Friday, after a basic agreement was reached on a private basis between Motorola Inc., the American company that wants access to Japan's market, and the Nippon Idou Tsushin Corporation, a Japanese mobile phone service company commonly known as IDO.
Under that agreement, IDO promised to accelerate its purchases and installation of Motorola equipment.


Payments to Consulting Firm Frozen in Kings Hospital Work
The president of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation has suspended payments to a politically well-connected consulting firm whose role in the rebuilding of Kings County Medical Center is being investigated by the city.
Dr.
Bruce Siegel said he had frozen payments to Darryl E. Greene &amp; Associates "because of the fact that there is an investigation going on." He said he was also considering ending the contract altogether.


Iconoclastic and Busy Director: An Innovator or a Provocateur?
As a director, Anne Bogart resolutely probes behind the words, searching for fabric and context.
If the play is a classic, she says, she wants to rediscover its "original energy" and learn "what we can see in it as people in the 90's." Each time out, she asks herself, "Who needs to see this, and also who needs to perform it?" In her process, she pans her eye 360 degrees around a play or a playwright.
Ms.
Bogart pays a price for her iconoclasm.
She has often been involved in controversy, splitting audiences as well as critics.
Depending on the point of view, she is either an innovator or a provocateur assaulting a text.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a guilty plea in the kidnapping of a teen-ager, Shai Fhima, misspelled the name of the hometown of the accused man, Rabbi Shlomo Helbrans, in some editions.
It is Monsey, N.Y., in Rockland County, not Muncie.


See Inflation Coming? Buy Commodity Stocks
AMID the hot public offerings and the sizzling takeover targets, a revival is under way in a decidedly unsexy segment of the stock market.
Companies that produce materials like steel and paper and that supply metals like copper, aluminum and nickel are gaining favor.
The case for these commodity stocks rests on two fundamental beliefs.
The first is that the inflation worries coursing through the bond market for the last month or so are entirely justified.
The second is that the economic recovery, both here and abroad, will not only be robust, but long-lived.


Job Security That Is Based On Skills, Not the Economy
A year ago, Terri Welk, a 37-year-old airline worker with a new bachelor's degree in the emerging field of computer-based information systems, sent out a single resume.
After an interview two weeks later, she landed a job paying close to $40,000 a year.
Behind these prosaic facts is an adventure story of one woman's escape from the trap doors and falling pillars of the economy of the 1990's.
Mrs.
Welk may not have struck gold, but she had seen disaster coming and stayed one step ahead.
She is a winner in a world of work that for so many has become a world turned upside down.
A Night School Route
Working as a telephone operations manager for Trans World Airlines here in the late 1980's, she watched as the airline began reducing its work force and reorganizing its reservations business.
"I started wondering how secure my job really was," she said.


A Call to Battle Ends in Execution


Corrections
A headline in Business Day yesterday about a Russian oil refinery deal referred incorrectly in some editions to the participation of the Chevron Corporation and the Swiss company ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd.
The two companies will be involved with the construction of the refinery; they are not making an investment in it.
In addition, an adjoining article from Redwood City, Calif., about the 3DO Company's game machines erroneously carried a headline from the oil refinery article in some editions.
The article should have been headlined "3DO Adds to Builders of Its Games."


Business Digest
International  Western commercial banks agreed to reduce Poland's debts of $13.2 billion by more than 40 percent, substantially enhancing the country's economic prospects.
The debt-reduction deal appeared more favorable than those struck by the banks with Latin American countries during talks under the Brady plan.  [ Page 1. ]


CHRONICLE
In the words of their peers, they have "single-handedly effected major change in the way we receive health care."
On Tuesday, in a ceremony at the Ellis Island Immigration Museum, seven nurses will receive the Lillian D. Wald Spirit of Nursing Award.
Lillian Wald was a nurse and social reformer who died in 1940.


To Control Diabetes, Cut Down Carbohydrates; Manage, Not Medicate
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 28 article narrowly defines intensive diabetes management as a "strict medical regimen." One of the most dramatic outcomes of the diabetes study is that any improvement in blood glucose control will significantly reduce the risk of complications associated with diabetes.
What the study achieved must be translated into everyday practice.


Cold War's End May Give Life To a Shipyard
The Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, which is scheduled to close in 1995, may get an unusual reprieve: new work dismantling Russian warships.
Two Pennsylvania lawmakers, a Senate Intelligence Committee staff member and a senior Russian Foreign Ministry official worked out a proposal this week to keep the shipyard open for 10 years by converting much of the Russian fleet into scrap metal.


Classical Music in Review
Minerva World Premiere Series Kaye Playhouse


A Cabby and His Stereo: A Case of Civility Stifled
PIOTR JAWORSKI thinks of himself as a professional and the cab that he drives as his office.
That is why he is fighting with the city's Taxi and Limousine Commission over the stereo system in his taxi.
"They are telling me to take it out because it is not standard," said the Polish-born driver, who has been operating a cab here for 10 years.
"But I did not grow up for 25 years under Communism so that I will just roll over and allow some inspector in New York to dictate how I am supposed to listen to music in my place of business."


Deleted Short Stories Will Get Another Look
Reacting to accusations of censorship over the removal of three short stories from a new state reading test, California's Board of Education voted today to insure that the works will be considered for next year's test.
Last fall, the board and the California Department of Education deleted sections from the reading portion of the 1994 state achievement test with works by two Pulitzer Prize-winning authors -- two short stories by Alice Walker and excerpts from a story by Annie Dillard.
The test will be given to students next month.


Giants Raise Ticket Prices
The Giants, coming off an 11-5 season and a second-place finish in the division, announced yesterday a hefty rise in ticket prices for 1994 games at Giants Stadium, where nearly all 77,000 seats belong to season ticket-holders.
Prices for the upper and lower tier seats will rise to $35, from $28.
The 10,000 seats in the mezzanine tier will rise to $40, from $31.
The last increase in ticket prices occurred before the 1992 season, and the Giants said they expected that the new prices would be the third- or fourth-highest among the 28 National Football League teams next season.


Treasury Yield Retreats After Nearing 7%
Interest rates on Treasury securities fell sharply yesterday, reversing the previous day's surge and shaking off weakness that pushed the yield on a 30-year bond close to 7 percent during the trading session.
Many traders expected that level would be tested given the fragile psychology of the bond market.
But in intraday trading, the yield pulled back after reaching 6.996 percent as profit takers set aside their concerns about inflation and moved into the market to buy at cheaper prices.


No. 3 Missouri Survives First-Round Scare
Big Eight Missouri 64, Colorado 62: Paul O'Liney made two free throws with less than a second left, lifting third-ranked Missouri over Colorado, 64-62, yesterday in the first round of the Big Eight tournament in Kansas City.
It was the 19th straight Big Eight victory for Missouri (25-2), which probably clinched a No. 1 seed in the coming National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.


Europe Looks Good, but Can Be Volatile
Funds that invest in European equities are mostly quite young.
Only 10 of the 28 funds have been around for five years or more, probably because few people wanted to invest in a Europe mired in recession.
But the economic outlook has changed in the last couple of years.
The average Europe stock fund gained 25.6 percent last year, compared with a 9.9 percent increase in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index.


Wackenhut Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bank Deposits Lack the Luster of Short-Term Treasury Securities
Although banks have raised mortgage rates sharply in recent weeks, the interest rates they pay consumers on deposits have barely moved.
For conservative investors with a pot of cash, that means short-term Treasuries now have a substantial edge.
The annual yield on three-month Treasury bills has soared almost three-tenths of a percentage point, to 3.48 percent, since the Federal Reserve nudged up rates on Feb. 4.
Meanwhile, the average annual percentage yield on bank certificates of deposit has inched up six-hundredths of a percentage point, to 2.61 percent, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, North Palm Beach, Fla.
A year ago, the returns on these two short-term investments were much closer: 2.95 percent for the T-bill and 2.76 percent for the C.D.


Stastny Back in N.H.L.
PETER STASTNY returned to the National Hockey League yesterday when he cleared waivers and became a member of the St.
Louis Blues.
The 37-year-old center could play in tonight's game against the Islanders, a Blues spokesman said. (AP)


St. John's and Garden Bring Out Best in Marshall
The more awards he wins, the more praise he hears, the better Donyell Marshall plays.
Connecticut's nonpareil smashed the Big East tournament scoring record yesterday with 42 points against St.
John's, a virtuoso performance at Madison Square Garden that came one day after he received his plaque as the conference's premier offensive and defensive player by vote of the coaches.


INSIDE
Boston Irish Cancel Parade
Hours after a gay group won the right to join the St.
Patrick's Day parade, organizers canceled the march, a 92-year-old city tradition.
Page 6.
Mexican Political Breakout?
The Mexican Government's negotiator for peace with the Zapatista rebels may challenge his own party by seeking the presidency.
Page 2.
Russian Navy to the Rescue
The Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, scheduled to close in 1995, may get an unusual reprieve: new work dismantling Russian warships.
Page 6.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Kings County Hospital reconstruction referred incorrectly to a remark by an investigator for the Health and Hospitals Corporation regarding the performance of Turner/Santa Fe, the project manager.
Although the investigator, Joseph Quinones, accused several unidentified contractors pf contributing to the project's delay, he did not specifically name Turner/Santa Fe.


So What Is This Whitewater? The People Speak (or Yawn)
"Whitewater?" asked Zandra Wolfgram. "Whitewater what? Rafting?"
Official Washington may be consumed by the Whitewater affair, but beyond the capital's Beltway -- from Seattle to Chicago to Atlanta to Boston to Lakewood -- most people have other things on their minds, like the weather or the fortunes of Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan.


Fitting the Final Pieces of a Roadway Puzzle


Corrections
The Key Rates table on the Credit Markets page of Business Day yesterday misstated Thursday's yield on 10-year Treasury notes in some editions.
The yield was 6.48 percent, not 4.09.


Peyton Houston, 83, Corporate Executive Who Wrote Poetry
Peyton Hoge Houston, a retired executive who composed 10 volumes of poetry over nearly 60 years, died on Tuesday while vacationing in Rincon, P.R.
A resident of Greenwich, Conn., Mr.
Houston was 83.
He died of heart failure after returning from a swim at the beach, his family said.


Baseball Has Nothing to Say About Doubleday's Alleged Slur
Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, said yesterday that he did not know whether major league baseball would look into reports that one of the Mets' owners, Nelson Doubleday, had made anti-Semitic remarks.
Selig said he had only read news accounts of the alleged remarks and so could not comment on them.
A new book about the business of baseball attributes an anti-Semitic quotation to Doubleday, and a former Met employee also said he had heard Doubleday make such comments occasionally during his tenure with the team.


Dry Cleaners Agree to Curb Toxic Fumes
New York State environmental regulators and a group representing neighborhood dry cleaners said yesterday that they had reached an agreement that would establish the nation's toughest controls on dry cleaning fluid.
The accord is intended to protect tens of thousands of apartment-dwellers near dry cleaners from the toxic fumes those fluids produce.
Although the Neighborhood Cleaners Association agreed to the proposed rules, it said that the new regulations were so onerous that hundreds of shops might be forced out of the business, especially mom and pop shops that could not afford the cost of compliance, totaling $50,000 in some cases.
Surviving shops would have trouble raising prices because the industry is so competitive, but it may be harder to find dry cleaners, an industry expert said.


Loremil Machado, 40, Afro-Brazilian Dancer
Loremil Machado, a performer and teacher of Afro-Brazilian dance, died yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital.
He was 40 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said Barbara Browning, a longtime friend.


U.S. Caught at U.N. Between P.L.O. and American Jewish Groups
As the Clinton Administration struggles to restart the Middle East peace talks, it has found itself caught between Palestinians urging it to make concessions on a Security Council resolution and American Jewish groups pressing it not to give in too much.
To appease Palestinians angered by the Hebron massacre two weeks ago, the Administration has signaled its willingness not to veto a resolution backed by the Palestine Liberation Organization that calls for greater security for Palestinians and states that Jerusalem is part of the occupied territories and not a part of Israel itself.


Don't You Dare Call Farrakhan a Conservative
To the Editor:
Your series on Louis Farrakhan and the Nation of Islam was revealing in many ways, but not in calling him "politically and socially conservative." Conservatives can understand the news media's difficulty in accurately labeling him, but he deserves that one no more than Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, another startling addition to "conservative" ranks.
More important, however, was your March 3 assertion about Mr.
Farrakhan that "much of his oratory and writings about everything from homosexuals to abortion to bootstrap capitalism could come from the Republican Party platform." Try this excerpt on Mr.
Farrakhan: "We declare that bigotry and prejudice have no place in American life. We denounce all who practice or promote racism, anti-Semitism or religious intolerance." That's from the 1992 Republican platform.
You can find similar language in the several platforms preceding it.


Holly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


9 Hurt by Spray of Mace
Nine people were injured about 9:50 P.M. yesterday when they were sprayed with pepper Mace outside the Loews Theater at Broadway and 84th Street on the Upper West Side during a dispute between two men, the police said.
Three people were taken to St.
Luke's Hospital with respiratory problems, said Capt.
Jeffrey Armstrong, a tour commander at the Emergency Medical Service, and six others refused treatment.
None of the injuries was described as serious.
A 43-year-old man, Larry Lesman, of 200 Pinehurst Ave., was arrested and charged with second-degree assault, the police said.


Lone Star Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2d Mortar Attack on Heathrow
For the second time in two days, terrorists fired mortar shells at Heathrow airport early this morning and although the four rounds again failed to explode, the attempt raised widespread alarm over security measures at London's main airport.
The I.R.A. took responsibility for the first attack, and the second, 30 hours later, bore the signs of the same group.
Neither caused any injuries but both disrupted traffic at Heathrow, one of the world's busiest airports, and made British citizens feel vulnerable again after months of relative peace.


To Control Diabetes, Cut Down Carbohydrates
To the Editor:
I have had Type I diabetes for 48 years, since age 12.
For the last 11 years, I've been a physician specializing in the treatment of diabetes.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AIDS  SLEEP WITH THE ANGELS  A Mother Challenges AIDS.
By Mary Fisher.
Moyer Bell, cloth, $22.50; paper, $12.95.


Choreographer Gazing
Merce Cunningham's friends and colleagues celebrate his 75th birthday with a little dining and lots of dancing, March 1.


Gold Rush Fever Grips Capital As Health Care Struggle Begins
Ordinarily, a tax bill is as big as it gets for the lobbyists, public-relations specialists, direct-mail wizards, pollsters, consultants and assorted other players in the political industrial complex of the nation's capital.
But that was before health care.
Other issues may have the headlines, but health care is what has truly taken over the culture of the capital in the past few weeks, as bills begin moving in Congress and all the carefully laid plans to sway or woo or frighten 534 lawmakers come into play.


Plans for Caldor's Hit $4 Million Snag: Parking
Plans to transform the abandoned Macy's on Flatbush Avenue into a Caldor's have hit a surprise snag, community leaders and elected officials said last week.
The Giuliani administration, looking for ways to cut a daunting budget gap, has proposed removing from its capital improvements budget a $4 million contribution toward parking for the project, including a rooftop lot on the new structure to be built for the store.
A total of $10 million in city financing for the 645 parking spaces was pivotal in persuading Caldor's to lease the site.
The new store would be one of a wave of large discounters now moving into the city.


SUNDAY
What does the fact that John Paul Jones was accused of rape have to do with the love between Heloise and Abelard, Napoleon and Josephine, Marx and his wife or the "vigorous and ribald" love lives of Boswell and Havelock Ellis? ("Marx in Love," Sunday, Feb. 13)?


Elevating Sales to a Degree Program
WHERE do the heads of American corporations come from?
Some reach the top position through a company's legal department, others from accounting, but the majority of chief executive officers are former sales executives.
"Sales are the engines that drive companies," said Edward Flanagan, president of the International Association of Sales Professionals, a trade group with a chapter in Westchester.
"You only have to examine any corporate financial statement. Up in the left-hand corner are the company's sales figures, listed prominently.


Africa and World Bank: Plans Pay Off
The World Bank today made public its most comprehensive study ever of African economies, concluding that those countries that carried out tough austerity measures and economic reforms in the 1980's improved their growth while those that did not continued to deteriorate.
The study looked at 29 sub-Saharan African economies during two periods: 1981 to 1986, when most African countries were in economic crisis -- with high inflation, falling growth rates and over-valued exchange rates -- and 1987 to 1991, when all introduced economic reforms along lines prescribed by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.


World Markets; Argentina: A Slow, but Rocky, Recovery
THE second half of 1992 was a time most traders on the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange thought they would never forget, when a soaring equities market, which had been fueled by foreign investor optimism over economic changes here, lost 65 percent of its value in four months.
But last month, as shares on this emerging market once again became the darlings of international mutual fund investors, up more than 20 percent in value for the year, memories appeared to be short.
Argentine stocks could do no wrong -- until a series of local and international events caused a selloff.


An Authentic Spokeswoman
To the Editor:
Ann Hulbert expresses enough unpleasant opinions about Carolyn Chute's brilliant new novel, "Merry Men" (Feb. 6), that she might have refrained from the false and gratuitous insinuation in the second paragraph of her review that the author has somehow enriched herself by "recycling the spectacle of poverty for spectacular profit."


Dressed To Thrill
IF there were a waiting room to get into Pedro Almodovar's world, chairs would be wrought iron covered with red vinyl cushions, walls would be aqua, and the receptionist, at a Memphis desk beneath a Frank Lloyd Wright window, would have generous cleavage heaving above her gazpacho-red dress.
And nearly every seat would be taken by fashion's elite, the same sort of designers, editors and art directors who crowded into recent New York screenings of the director's new film, "Kika."


NOT AN URBANIST, ONLY A GENIUS
Paul Goldberger's graceful essay "Not an Urbanist, Only a Genius" (Feb. 13) is a fitting tribute to a designer whose work and thoughts continue to dominate the architectural scene.
But was Frank Lloyd Wright really not an urbanist, as the title claims?
Broadacre City's uniquely American, decentralized urbanism was surely as comprehensive a theory of town planning as many others that were being proposed in the mid-1930's.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FUTURE OF BOSNIA
Stephen Walker, one of three State Department officials who resigned last August in disagreement with the United States' policy toward Bosnia, will speak about the crisis in that part of the world today at 6:30 P.M. in the New Rochelle Public Library.


Mrs. Clinton Concedes Mistakes Were Made
Hillary Rodham Clinton said in interviews with two news magazines today that she and President Clinton had made mistakes in handling what has become known as the Whitewater affair.
Her interviews, with Time and Newsweek, are part of an effort by the Clinton Administration to counter criticism of their real estate investment in Arkansas and their response to questions about the dealings.
At first, the Clintons considered appearing on television programs next week, but ultimately decided to grant interviews to the news magazines.


Productivity Booms at Workers' Expense
To the Editor:
Sylvia Nasar's article "The American Economy, Back on Top" (Feb. 27) celebrates the current boom but gives short shrift to the disastrous effects on workers and families.
Recent gains in productivity were obtained mainly by raising factory output while reducing factory jobs and middle-management jobs.
But the painful downsizing has been masked by a vast rise of mostly low-level and low-paid service jobs -- often temporary or part-time work.
Among most groups there are stagnant wage rates, reduced real family incomes, swollen numbers of discouraged workers and limited purchasing power.
At the least, we should be expanding our care for the victims of this kind of boom.
EDWIN P. REUBENS  Fort Lauderdale, Fla., March 3  The writer is professor emeritus in economics at City College of New York.


Sump Pumps May Require Extra Care This Year
SRING thaws this year may mean flooded basements for many homeowners.
A sump pump in a shallow basement pit, or sump, is generally an effective solution to the problem, but only if the pump works properly.
Sump pumps come in two styles, pedestal and submersible.
A pedestal pump has an electric motor attached to a hollow shaft about three feet long.
At the base of the shaft are the pump parts.
The unit stands upright in the sump, with the motor above the water.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Sent Brian Barber, Brian Eversgerd, Doug Creek, Willie Smith and Steve Montgomery, pitchers, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
Hockey  National Hockey League  HARTFORD WHALERS -- Assigned Frank Pietrangelo, goalie, and Igor Chibirev and Mike Tomlak, centers, to Springfield of the American Hockey League.


Sump Pumps May Require Extra Care This Year
SRING thaws this year may mean flooded basements for many homeowners.
A sump pump in a shallow basement pit, or sump, is generally an effective solution to the problem, but only if the pump works properly.
Sump pumps come in two styles, pedestal and submersible.
A pedestal pump has an electric motor attached to a hollow shaft about three feet long.
At the base of the shaft are the pump parts.
The unit stands upright in the sump, with the motor above the water.


Sexual Politics
To the Editor:
In answer to Jane Smiley's question -- how many women vividly recall the day in 1970 when Kate Millett's "Sexual Politics" liberated them from having to fake an interest in Henry Miller? -- I can go one better.
Not only did I go through my bookshelves and dump a lot of male authors (D. H. Lawrence and Freud come to mind) in the garbage, but I stopped reading male authors for 10 years.
It is the most liberating gift I have ever given myself.
After 40 years of seeing the world -- religion, sex, politics, art, etc. -- through the filter of the male mind, it was thrilling to see it with my own eyes and brain and as women experience it.


For Governor's Husband, A World Cup Role
WHEN Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman named her husband, John, co-chairman of the New Jersey World Cup Host Committee, it was his first official appointment in her administration.
Taking the unpaid post was a departure from Mr.
Whitman's usual posture of a mate who is highly supportive, but avoids any official roles.
His appointment, he said, "demonstrates to everyone how important the Governor feels the World Cup is to New Jersey and how she wants to know intimately what is going on every step of the way."


Racial Issues Dominate An Election
In elections tomorrow at Community Board 14 -- whose meetings were so disrupted by racially charged protests three years ago that they have had a police presence ever since -- black members will challenge white incumbents for two important posts, chairman and third vice-chairman.
The board's chairman of five years, Alvin Berk, will face Laurel Scott, and vice-chairwoman Mollie Scheff will face Gail Smith.
The officers will be elected by members of the board, which represents Flatbush and Midwood.


Big Sur
To the Editor: Last August a friend and I spent a couple of days meandering down Highway 1 from San Francisco to Carmel and Monterey.
We traveled through Big Sur ("Big Sur Costs, High and Not So Low" by Susan Spano, Jan. 30), spending the night at Andrew Molera State Park, for around $5.
We parked and hiked a few hundred yards into a large campground nestled between the ocean and rolling hills.
After a dinner of cheese, fruit, popcorn, nuts and wine (we travel light), we hiked a breathtaking trail along the ocean bluffs.
Being Easterners and accustomed to camping inside stifling zipped-up tents to keep out mosquitoes, blackflies and rain, we enjoyed the rare treat of sleeping out in the insect-free, cool dry air in our sleeping bags with nothing between us and the stars, catching sight of a great horned owl and a little bat flying over the field.


Fishing Fleets Waste Much of the Catch
To the Editor:
Your March 7 front-page report on the drastic decline in catches for the United States fishing fleet because of overfishing and pollution points up a tragic situation.
Another element in this tragedy deserves mention: the extent to which the fish that are caught are underused.


Slipping Through the Net
Are you information-poor or information-rich?
Is there an entrance ramp to the data highway near you?
Or are you that new creature, an information hermit?
Palo Alto is at one extreme.
The town has just gone on line by making some of its records accessible on the Internet.
In the future it will offer more records and services.
And who in town is on the Net?
As much as half the population is, according to estimates.
That doesn't mean half the population has computers, or modems.
Half the population has computers, modems and Internet access.


Subway Tunnel or Water Tunnel?


A Little Postal Perspective, Please
When the cost of mailing a letter rises next spring to 32 cents, as it almost certainly will, postal rates will finally get back to where they were in 1799.
That's right, 195 years ago.
The increase was proposed on Tuesday by the governors of the United States Postal Service, and was welcomed by all the important lobbying groups that influence rate changes.
In 1799, when rates varied according to distance, it cost 31 cents to send a letter from Boston to Savannah, for example.
And that was real money -- the same price as a pitchfork, a bundle of quill pens or three or four shots of rum in a tavern, according to historians at Old Sturbridge Village in Sturbridge, Mass.


Claiming a Potent Piece of Urban Turf
"RECLAIMING OUR PAST, Honoring Our Ancestors," at the Urban Center will echo in this city's memory long after the show comes down.
The 30 architectural projects on view (through April 21), entries in a design competition held in January, share a historical focus.
They commemorate the African Burial Ground, an 18th-century grave site unearthed three years ago in lower Manhattan.
But the show also has emphatic designs on the future.
While the projects are intended to preserve a historic site and honor those buried there, their mission is also to protect a tradition of cultural diversity for generations yet unborn.
The architects faced an unusual challenge.
They were not just competing against each other.
They were also up against the haunting power of the site in its present form.
Above ground, the site is a void, to all appearances a vacant lot.
This in itself is a historical milestone.
Four years ago, plans were proceeding to erect a building on this spot: a four-story annex to the new Federal Office Building now nearing completion on Broadway at Duane Street, two blocks north of City Hall.
The discovery of skeletons during excavation of the site led historians to identify this as the "Negros Burial Ground," the nation's oldest known black cemetery.


How the Rolls-Royce of Building Managers Suddenly Lost Its Luster
Bert Rubenstein, an employee of the Milstein family real-estate empire, was assigned in late 1989 to help run the company's newly acquired real-estate management division, Douglas Elliman-Gibbons &amp; Ives.
The company, one of the city's largest residential managing agents and a major broker, had long considered itself the Rolls-Royce of managers because of its roster of distinguished buildings.
It was an eye-opening experience.
Mr.
Rubenstein noticed that a lot of the people in the office were vendors and contractors, many of whom sat at the same Douglas Elliman desks every day.
This blatant lack of an arms-length relationship with suppliers was only the first thing that raised questions in his mind.


On the Whole, Teachers Would Rather Be in the Classroom
WANTED: Teachers willing to take jobs as school administrators.
Applicants must be able to spend 50 to 60 hours a week on school budgets, building maintenance, bus schedules, student discipline, staff supervision and endless meetings and paperwork.
Sound attractive?
Not to many.
Rather than take a job that promises more responsibilities and headaches and, in some cases, only a minor salary increase, teachers are choosing to stay in the classroom.


Who's Hoodwinking Whom?
To the Editor:
Imagine Garry Trudeau's being hoodwinked by a staid company like Hammond.
He begins his review of Scott McCloud's "Understanding Comics" (Feb. 13) by assuming that the editors of "What's What," having been misinformed by a "mischievous aficionado," actually believed that the nonsense glossary terms in a page on the comics were genuine.
In fact, the page was an in-house joke.
Ernest Dupuy, then an editor at Hammond, showed me a page proof of the comics entry long before the book was published.
His delight and that of the other editors indicated not only their pleasure in the playful deception but the respite it provided from their preoccupation with the very accurate labels in the rest of the volume.
Mr.
Trudeau should have recalled the maxim of that great cartoon character Smokey Stover: "Scram gravy ain't wavy."  GERALD WEALES  Philadelphia


Commercial Property/International Design Center; An Empty Feeling? Try Mixing Uses
IT seemed like a really great idea a decade ago: a huge, self-contained furniture mart, just across the East River from Manhattan, full of all the residential furniture anyone could ever want.
Then, when neither buyers nor sellers stormed the doors, Plan B seemed a surefire winner: Fill the showrooms with enough contract furniture -- the industry term for corporate furniture bought in bulk -- to make the place a must-visit destination for anyone outfitting an office.


First in War, Last in Peace
THE PATTONS A Personal History of an American Family.
By Robert H. Patton.
Illustrated. 320 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $25.


Journal; Ugg A Wugg
I was naive enough to believe that no American school administrator could ever top the lunacy of Jane Brown, the headmistress of a primary school in the poor London district of Hackney.
In January Miss Brown refused free tickets for her students to attend a Royal Ballet performance of "Romeo and Juliet" on the grounds that it was a "blatantly heterosexual love story."
In the uproar that ensued -- "Wherefore art thou heterosexual Romeo?" asked a headline in The Daily Mail -- she was accused of importing a "Californian concept of political correctness" to England and of being "the first person ever to complain about heterosexuality in the British ballet." Miss Brown apologized, but not before her kids missed the show.


Wishful Thinking: Remembering Winter '94
ROY NEMERSON is on the phone.
You remember Roy, the Coping column's comedy consultant.
"Cold? Only time in New York history a cop yells, 'Freeze!,' a whole neighborhood obeys. How come Andrew Giuliani dropped out of sight? I guess you can't see him over the snowbanks."
Why are we still talking about winter?
The calendar says spring is only a week away.
But then again, this was supposed to be another greenhouse winter.
I thanked Roy and put him on hold.
There were others in the Coping corps to check up on.


West's Fears In Bosnia: 1) Chaos 2) Islam
LATE last year, the peace negotiator Lord Owen addressed an issue that has seldom been openly discussed but has rarely been far from European politicians' minds during the Bosnian war.
"The European Union," he said, "has no reason to be suspicious or to fear a new Muslim state emerging within Europe. For Europe over the centuries has been enriched by Islam."
The sense of that enrichment, evident from Cordoba in Spain to Sarajevo, has, however, been dimmed by more pressing concerns.
Rising Islamic militancy in neighboring Algeria, a steady flow of Muslim immigrants across the Mediterranean from North Africa and explosive racial tensions in cities short of jobs have produced a thinly veiled anxiety in Western Europe over the potential radicalization of a Muslim-led Bosnia.


Sabbath Assistance


A New Crane to Help Lift Up a Sagging Port
One of the last of New York City's bustling ports, the Red Hook Marine Terminal, will gain a refurbished, high-tech crane next week.
In a major feat of marine engineering, the 70-ton, 120-foot-tall crane will be placed on a special rail-track barge and floated about two miles north along Upper New York Bay from the South Brooklyn Marine Terminal in Sunset Park, where it has been perched idly for years.


Passing the (Inventive) Hat
The Hatter's Ball raises funds for a summer arts program for children and teen-agers; the Burden Mansion, Feb. 25.


Leprechaun, Pied Piper? You Bet, but A Modernist Too, Sort Of
As James Galway sees it, his popular image is not quite accurate.
He does not deny that he helped create it or that he is, to a degree, what he seems to be: a jolly bearded Irishman whose countless crossover disks and compilations of spiffy transcriptions as well as his lively stage manner and golden, rounded tone have helped him displace Jean-Pierre Rampal as the world's most popular flutist.
But having made his name, the 54-year-old Mr.
Galway would now like more attention paid to his serious side.
On Wednesday evening at Carnegie Hall, he will join Leonard Slatkin and the St.
Louis Symphony in the New York premiere of William Bolcom's "Lyric Concerto," a work he commissioned and has played in St.
Louis and on tour in Europe.
This is by no means his first foray into contemporary music.
Last season, he toured with new works by Robert Beaser, Lowell Liebermann, Paul Dunkel, Dave Heath and Gary Schocker.


Poet of Prague
Josef Sudek (1896-1976) was a one-armed Czechoslovak photographer with legendary vitality and a poetic sensibility.
His long career began with the avant-garde movement that emerged, along with the Republic of Czechoslovakia, at the close of World War I. As the 237 reproductions in JOSEF SUDEK (Takarajima/Distributed Arts Publishers, $125) make clear, the photographer's work reflects little of the social and political turmoil endured by his homeland.
His romantic, ironic and occasionally surreal images are rooted instead in art and music.
Lugging heavy tripods and cameras over his shoulder, manipulating equipment, film and cloth with one hand, he found sustenance for his vision on his native ground -- in Prague, the Bohemian countryside, his cramped studio -- and never left Czechoslovakia after 1926.
Mists, dark shapes, vapor-coated windows and tangles of brush dominate his imagery.
Sudek's beloved country seems to have been a dark and muddy place, and the music that inspired him must have been rather melancholy.
Between the wars, his commercial work included product advertising and magazine assignments and ranged from modernist constructions of Czechoslovak ceramics to majestic photographs of Prague's ancient cathedral.
His later work, better known here, often turned inward, resulting in images like the still life of an egg, its stark beauty glowing against a muted ground of a glass pane.
At the same time, however, he took up the panorama camera, producing expansive horizontal landscapes and views of Prague streets.
Zdenek Kirschner, the chief curator of prints and photography at the Museum of Decorative Arts in Prague, knew Sudek for 25 years before his death.
His text provides an informative overview of the photographer's life as well as comments on specific photographs.
ROSEMARY RANCK


Irish Pizza Just for St. Patrick's Day
IRISH pizza for St.
Patrick's Day?
At Truffles, a much acclaimed restaurant in Sligo, Ireland, that is what customers will be eating this holiday.
The pizzas are topped with spinach and leeks, cabbage and Parma ham, or blood sausage with pears.
"We don't look up the old textbooks for Irish cooking anymore," said the chef and proprietor, Bernadette O'Shea.
"In the 70's in Ireland they began to revive the past. Then in the 80's they realized they had more to offer than that. Since then the face of Irish cooking has been significantly and permanently changed."


Word for Word: Musical Sendups; Stop, in the Name of Parody! The Supremes Uphold a Tradition
LAST week the Supreme Court struck a blow for parody when it unanimously overturned a lower court's judgment that the rap group 2 Live Crew had infringed the copyright on Roy Orbison's "Oh, Pretty Woman" by recording its own rap version of the classic with lyrics like "big hairy woman."
Before the Court ruled that the rap version was a form of social commentary and thus fair use of the original under the law, the case had some otherwise light-hearted people fretful and frowning over possibly dire implications for a longstanding American musical tradition.
Mainstays of humor like Mad Magazine, The Harvard Lampoon and Mark Russell filed briefs on behalf of the rappers.
The Capitol Steps, the Washington musical parody troupe, sent the Justices a cassette tape with the group's performance of a revue of musical parody throughout American history (including tunes borrowed for serious political ends, as opposed to humorous ones).
Here is a sampler culled from the Capitol Steps' compilation and other sources: Jose, Can You See?
"The Star-Spangled Banner," whose lyrics were written by Francis Scott Key during the War of 1812, didn't officially become the national anthem until 1916.
But even in Revolutionary times the melody of the future anthem was well known; it came from a popular late-18th century English drinking tune and was borrowed for many parodies, like this one aimed at colonial governors:


Obscure Films Fuel a New Festival
NEXT WEEKEND, IN something that might be termed the obscurer-than-thou sweepstakes, New Yorkers will be faced with two film festivals dedicated to novice directors.
One is the venerable New Directors/New Films series, co-sponsored by Lincoln Center and the Museum of Modern Art; it opens on Friday at the Museum of Modern Art with 23 features (all by directors at the beginning of their careers) and 11 shorts from 18 countries.
Among its films are several that already have distributors, including "Clerks," about a convenience store in New Jersey; "Fresh," about a young drug dealer in Brooklyn, and "Cronos," a Mexican vampire film.


On Broadway, Then and Now
THE history of Broadway, from footpath to Boulevard of Dreams, is set forth in an exhibit at the Museum of the City of New York.
Originally scheduled to close this spring, the show has been extended through the end of the year.
Old maps, photographs and newspapers are used to evoke Broadway through the years, while the city's first public park, public theater and skyscraper were being established along its shoulders.
"Broadway Cavalcade," as the show is called, segues into another exhibit at the museum, "Broadway! 125 Years of Musical Theater."Throughj costumes, set designs, posters, newspapers and programs, the show traces the history of the musical.
Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue and 103d Street; 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Tuesday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Sunday; suggested donation $5, $3 elderly, students and children, $8 families; (212) 534-1672.


Above the Battle at West Point
MY uncle Len has always marched to the beat of a different drummer, and that beat led him, on a recent weekend, to check in at the Hotel Thayer at West Point for "undisclosed reasons." As a traveler, Len has always cloaked his movements in a fog of mystery to match his actual cloaklike trenchcoat.
Len raised me from age 8 and, during my childhood, he would periodically vanish on what he called "secret missions." At 6 feet 6 inches, tiptoeing on his size 13 shoes, Len's personal aura seemed to combine Sam Spade with Len's own lifelong hero, Abraham Lincoln.
"There's a matter of national importance that must command my attention," Len would say as he departed.
He was famous, in our family, for his secrecy and style of traveling light.
He carried only a manila envelope.
Everything else, including his shoes, would be mailed ahead to the "undisclosed location," and then returned in a sturdy metal mailing box that looked as if it might really contain what Len implied were classified materials.
When I was 10, I was sure Len was a world-class spy, or some sort of government agent.
At some point in my teens, I peeked into the "classified" file and found only a clean change of underwear and rolled socks.
I began to suspect he hadn't truly traveled abroad on a matter of international diplomacy but had taken a weekend flyer with his girlfriend.


A Family Restaurant
Sure, the food's great at the Bangkok restaurant Cabbages and Condoms.
But it's nothing compared to the promotional tie in, which makes a Happy Meal look like a Sunday school picnic.
"Anyone eating here," says the restaurant's founder, Mechai Viravaidya, "is entitled to a free vasectomy."
Mechai isn't kidding.
"My philosophy is that if family planning is to work, contraceptives must be as easily accessible as vegetables." To that end, Mechai, 53, an economist educated in Australia, started a vegetable-and-contraceptive stand in 1974; it evolved into the restaurant seven years ago.
He also started the Population and Community Development Association, a private group that promotes birth control, AIDS prevention and economic development.


Israelis Debate Not Risks, but the Future
To the Editor:
I read with great interest "The New Palestine" A. M. Rosenthal's March 8 column, warning of Palestinian espectations of statehood since the declaration of principles was signed in Washington on Sept. 13.
He seems to view a Palestinian entity as a great risk for Israel.


Minority Book Fairs Fill Retailing's Cultural Gap
Growing up in the late 1950's and early 60's, Christine Dina of Stratford said, it was nearly impossible to find biographies of prominent black men and women.
Three decades later, Ms.
Dina says her 15-year-old daughter, Alana, is having the same problem.


Art Shows: Always in Season
IT used to be primarily in high summer that cities all over Europe set their sights on the exhibition fancier.
The major shows coincided with the straw hat, the white shoes, the sun block and the long delicious dinners outdoors in park and piazza.
And people came running, like boys and girls let out of school.
But today the exhibition fancier is pampered year-round.
Even in a season that cries out for greatcoat and galoshes, a big city has to have something special to see.
Not to have it is construed as a failure of civic virility.


Data Bank/March 13, 1994
Data Bank/March 13, 1994
Consumer Credit
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Annual percent change
9.1
11.5
10.7
Sales at Retail Outlets
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
Monthly percent change
1.5
-1.6
1.1
Productivity
IV Q'93
III Q'93
II Q'93
Percent change
6.1
4.0
-0.4
Weekly Jobless Claims
March 4
Feb. 25
Feb. 18
In thousands
346
314
375
3-Month Treasury Bills
March 11
March 4
Feb. 25
Rate in percent
3.48
3.51
3.36
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.76
3.72
3.58
Auto Production
March 4
Feb. 25
Feb. 18
In units, weekly total
147,157
151,150
144,014
Truck Production
In units, weekly total
115,614
121,145
120,612


POLAND SEEKS TIES TO EUROPEAN UNION
Concerned about resurgent Russian nationalism, Poland has stepped up its efforts to join the European Union with the idea that even partial membership would push it further into the orbit of the West.
The Polish Foreign Minister, Andrzej Olechowski, said at meeting of the union in Brussels this week that Poland would make its application for what he called partial membership next month.
If the union agreed, such an arrangement would allow Poland full participation in the union's foreign and security activities, he said.


MTV Has a Hit With Words By Jon Stewart
WEARING A BASEBALL cap, jeans and a two-day stubble, Jon Stewart is scarfing down a pepperoni pizza in a cramped dressing room whose most significant objects are a bottle of Stress Tabs and a pack of Camel Lights.
In between bites, he ponders his newfound celebrity as one of television's hippest talking heads: the collegiate, smart-mouthed host of "The Jon Stewart Show" on MTV.


Following The Leader
To the Editor:
The headline "Dance Invasion" (Feb. 27) states, in part, that in West Coast Swing dancing, "no one leads." While it is an understandable misinterpretation of Ms.
Elena Iannucci's remarks, this is simply not true.


Welfare Reform Meets Reality
President Clinton promised voters he would put a two-year limit on welfare benefits and then require recipients to work.
The idea was to give poor parents the independence and dignity that come with work and give their children the benefit of working parents as role models.
But as the Administration prepares a plan to deliver to Congress, the vision is threatened by budget issues.
The Administration may be trying to start too boldly given its limited resources.
Welfare reform is foremost about saving families, not money.
Benefits cost government only about $20 billion a year.
If reform is shaped to avoid spending a few billion more, then what started out as a noble effort to overhaul welfare could easily wind up impoverishing even more children -- an appalling prospect for a nation that already relegates more than 20 percent of its young to poverty.


Bonnie Brooks, Andrew J. Jonas
Bonnie Renee Brooks, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Brooks of Miami, was married last evening to Andrew Jay Jonas, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sterling Jonas of Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
Rabbi Herbert Baumgard officiated at the Biltmore Hotel in Coral Gables, Fla.
The bride, 24, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is a law student at Columbia University.
Her father is the president of New Generation Computing, a software company in Miami.
Her mother, Nancy Brooks, is the company's marketing director.


Laurie Bloom, C. D. Harbert
Laura Maureen Bloom, the daughter of Ronald H. Bloom of Beverly Hills, Calif., and the late Sandra D. Bloom, was married on Feb. 20 to Christopher David Harbert, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward W. Harbert 2d of La Quinta, Calif.
Rabbi Stan Levy performed the ceremony at the Bel Air Hotel in Los Angeles.
Mrs.
Harbert, who is known as Laurie, is also the stepdaughter of Marci Bloom.
The bride graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father is the president of Crown Associates Realty in Beverly Hills.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


Lawyers Can Lead the Fight Against Harassment of Women; And So Can Soldiers
To the Editor:
Soldiers all over Norway engaged in a nationwide protest against violence to women during the March 8 celebrations of International Women's Day 1994.
The voluntary campaign opened with a greeting by the minister of defense.
The emphasis was on solidarity with women, particularly rape victims in Bosnia and other war zones.
Soldiers in uniform displayed campaign posters, collected money at stands in the streets and knocked at doors to raise money for women victims of violence.


In a City of Graffiti, Gangs Turn to Violence to Protect Their Art
"Sometimes when I'm walking down the street and I see this bare wall, the urge hits me and, like, I just can't control it," Alex Alvarez said, explaining why he is one of thousands of teen-agers scribbling graffiti in Los Angeles.
"I write my name up there and then maybe paint a little extra picture around it," he said, "and -- KA-POW! -- I'm famous. It's a real rush."


They've Got Your Name. You've Got Their Junk.
AMY RINK enjoys shopping by mail, but lately she is not willing to pay the price.
It is not the expense of the merchandise that irks her, but the inevitable tradeoff: a single order can prompt a steady stream of unwanted mail, a costly nuisance since Ms.
Rink must pay by the container to dispose of trash from her home in Novato, Calif.
With the help of the Stop Junk Mail Association in Sausalito, Calif., Ms.
Rink reduced this mail by 75 percent.
Then last Christmas, she ordered $10 of ornaments from a mail-order catalogue.
Despite a written request with the order that she did not want any new solicitations, that purchase started the cycle again.
Ms.
Rink said that in the future she would not buy from a company unless it gave her the option to keep her name private.


China Dissident, Hoping to Meet Christopher, Is Detained at Home
"They are playing the bully," Xu Liangying said today about being confined by the Chinese authorities to his tiny apartment in Beijing's university district.
"I have been put under house arrest because I am not allowed to go out."
Professor Xu, the 74-year-old Academy of Sciences researcher and translator of Albert Einstein's works, had wanted to arrange a meeting with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who arrived here on Friday.
But the professor found himself restricted to his residence today, apparently because he and six other leading intellectuals made a written appeal to President Jiang Zemin this week to end the repression of free speech in China and release all political prisoners.


A User's Guide to AIDS Services
A vast network of services has been created to deal with the AIDS epidemic in New York City.
Here is a look at some of the more important ones.
ANONYMOUS TESTING SITES  STATE
Bronx: Mott Haven.
Monday through Thursday, 8:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M., Friday 8:30 A.M. to 12:30 P.M., closed Saturday and Sunday. (718) 292-38531 or (800) 526-4823.
Average wait 24 hours, results in 10-14 days.


Lifting Aid Ban Is Proposed To Control Pakistan's Arms
The Clinton Administration, eager to force Pakistan to halt production of nuclear weapons materials, is proposing that Congress, in exchange, lift its ban on military aid to Pakistan.
The plan, which is in the early stages of discussion, would allow Pakistan to take possession of dozens of F-16 fighter planes it has already paid for but which were never delivered because of a legislative roadblock known as the Pressler Amendment.


Baby Asian Elephant On View at U.S. Zoo
Kumari, the first elephant born in the National Zoo in Washington, in its 105-year history, is receiving visitors.
She was born Dec. 14 to Shanthi, an orphaned Asian elephant that was a gift to the United States from the children of Sri Lanka in 1977.
Kumari has been on view since last month.
Asian elephants are an endangered species, with a world population estimated at less than 40,000, according to a spokeswoman for the zoo.
Shanthi was selected for breeding by the Elephant Species Survival Plan, which is coordinated by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums, with 77 participating institutions.
Shanthi went to the Burnett Park Zoo in Syracuse in 1991 for breeding to Indy, also an Asian elephant.


Tax Relief
Wage-earners can rest easy.
The Internal Revenue Service, responding to complaints, finally fixed the problem with the W-2 form.
For 1993 the box for local wages wasn't big enough to type in a yearly salary of seven figures.
For 1994 it will be.
Who said tax collectors don't have hearts?


Welfare Hotel Becomes Workplace
Deanna Wood, 51, has survived a stroke and drinking problems.
Now she is about to start her first real job in 20 years.
"I'll get to pay taxes like other people," she mused.
Ms.
Wood is to work at the new Ben &amp; Jerry's ice cream parlor, opening on March 25 on the ground floor of the Times Square building at 43d Street near Eighth Avenue.


Going Alone
To the Editor: I must add praise to Robert Packard's "In Praise of Going It Alone" (Jan. 2).
You might say I rate an E for excellence in independent travel: I am energetic, enthusiastic and elderly.
With gray hair and a friendly look, I have everything going for me.
I ply my ploy with a phrase book of whatever country, and responses account for adventures and acquaintances beyond any plans.


Ward Among 10 Sullivan Finalists
CHARLIE WARD, the Heisman Trophy winner from Florida State, is one of 10 finalists for the Amateur Athletic Union's Sullivan Award, presented annually since 1930 to the nation's outstanding amateur athlete.
The winner will be announced tomorrow night at the Indiana Convention Center in Indianapolis.
The only football players who won the Sullivan, dominated historically by track and field athletes and swimmers, were the Army teammates DOC BLANCHARD in 1945 and ARNOLD TUCKER in 1946.


THE FIRST AMENDMENT, UNDER FIRE FROM THE LEFT
Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press." The late Justice Hugo L. Black wrote memorably about that proposition: "First in the catalogue of human liberties essential to the life and growth of a government of, for and by the people are those liberties written into the First Amendment to our Constitution."
Are those guarantees in trouble?
That is the question put by The Times Magazine to two quite different authorities: Floyd Abrams, the prominent First Amendment lawyer, and Prof.
Catharine A. MacKinnon, the author of "Only Words" and an advocate of legal measures to curb pornography.
They met at The New York Times for the discussion excerpted here.
Anthony Lewis, a columnist for The New York Times, was the moderator.


St. Thomas
To the Editor: This letter is a note of caution for anyone traveling to St.
Thomas expecting to find duty free bargains.
On a recent cruise which stopped for a day in St.
Thomas, most passengers agreed that there were few bargains, other than liquor.
Indeed, some items were far more than they are in the New York area.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  CHINA REBUFFS U.S.
China flatly refused to improve its human rights policies, as the United States has been demanding, and warned that revoking its trade privileges could backfire.  1  China cordoned off dissidents' houses during the U.S. visit.  8


Awaiting Spring and Dreaming Of Lettuce, Frilly and Wholesome
IT'S time to think about planting those spring greens.
As soon as the icebergs melt and the mudholes dry out.
As soon as a ball of earth crumbles in your hand, as the saying goes.
In June.
Actually, when we have a wet, cold winter like this, and I get sick and tired of standing around with my spinach seeds in my hand, around the third week in March I trundle out the old half whisky barrels, fill them with compost, divide the area into quarters and toss in four kinds of seeds.
I might plant arugula, spinach, kale and mustard greens in one and favorite lettuces like mesclun, Red Sails, Oak Leaf and curly cress in another.


Sports of The Times; N.F.L. Coach Who Doesn't Have Any Players
HE'S the only National Football League coach without a team, without a stadium, without a practice field, without even a desk as such.
In a corner room of the deluxe trailer that serves as the expansion Jacksonville Jaguars' offices, Tom Coughlin sat behind a round wooden table, the only N.F.L. coach without a season this year.
"But this opportunity," he was saying now, "won't come up again in my lifetime."


McDonald's Chicken: It's a Whopper
Why is a great bulbous chicken, aglow at night like a beacon, nesting atop the McDonald's at 56th Street and Eighth Avenue?
"A creative promotion of a new product by a local store," says Laura Vega, marketing director at the chain's regional offices in Valley Stream, L.I.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Roger Smith Hotel misstated its location.
It is at 47th Street and Lexington Avenue, not Madison.


March 6-12: Tailhook's Wake; The Navy Is Appalled At What It Keeps Doing
Navy Secretary John H. Dalton said he was shocked to hear last week that sexual harassment goes unpunished in the military and that commanders often retaliate against women who complain.
His comments came a day after four women, representing each of the military service, told the House Armed Services Committee that despite all the promised Pentagon reforms after the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal, men in the military still verbally abuse women and make unwanted sexual advances.


A Tradition Of Exile
To the Editor:
"Exile's Riposte" (Feb. 27) blames the victim when it attributes Shere Hite's expatriation to Europe to her "anger."


'Damn Yankees' Scores With a Team Effort
THE NOISE YOU HEAR COULD BE coming from the Marquis Theater, where a carnival of antic ghosts, all alive even if two are technically dead, has taken up residence in the revival of the 1955 Broadway hit "Damn Yankees." From the big brassy overture, played at a pitch that once awakened the three-martini butter-and-egg men, until the finale, "Damn Yankees" is a mostly breathless recollection of a kind of sophisticated, slightly bogus Broadway innocence that still charms.
Though some of the contributors don't always deliver, the show early on achieves a momentum of good feeling that carries the performance aloft and safely keeps it there.
As much as anything else, "Damn Yankees" is a salute to that most resilient of Broadway wizards, the 106-year-old George Abbott, who directed the original production and collaborated on its book.
He was sitting down front at the Marquis the other night, but his sleight-of-hand was apparent in virtually everything that was happening on the stage under the direction of Jack O'Brien.


Laura Rutkiewicz and Michael Lee
Dr.
Laura Ann Rutkiewicz, a family practice resident at the Somerset Medical Center in Somerville, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Lee, an associate consultant at the Wilkerson Group, health-care management consultants in New York.
The Rev.
Anthony Siriani, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Immaculate Conception in Somerville.
The bride, 27, who uses her family's original surname, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Rut of Stockton, Calif.
She graduated from the University of California at Davis and received her M.D. from Georgetown University.
Her father is a chief supervising bridge engineer for the state of California in Sacramento.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Evening Hours column on Feb. 27 misidentified a guest at the preview of an exhibition honoring Frank Lloyd Wright, at the Museum of Modern Art.
He was Marell Battle, not Christopher Scholz


With Last Holdout Out, Work Begins on the York
After being blocked for a year and a half by a tenant who would not move out, work began last week on the decaying York Hotel at 222 East 86th Street.
The York became entangled in a tug-of-war when the Postgraduate Center for Mental Health bought the building in 1992 for $1.5 million with the intent of turning it into a residence for 39 mentally ill people.


The Night; Disparate Ambitions
Uptown -- Gentlemen, if you harbor a dream of ascending to Fabio-dom by becoming a model for romance novel covers, you should know that just having rippling stomach muscles and big pectorals -- even shaved pectorals that can barely be garaged inside a billowy pirate's blouse -- isn't enough.
Neither is having a skimpy gladiator's outfit or long, shiny hair that you fling while turning around in tight jeans for a crowd of women looking you over as if you were something on a dessert tray.
To be a winner, as a strapping specimen from the Bronx named John D'Salvo was last Saturday when he won the Mr.
Romance Cover Model Pageant at the Roosevelt Hotel, you have to know how to properly answer the question, "What is a romantic evening?"


Bookshelf
MISSING ANGEL JUAN.
By Francesca Lia Block.
HarperCollins. $14. (Ages 12 and up) In the fourth provocative short novel about an eccentric, interconnected group of characters, that wild L.A. girl Witch Baby heads for New York in pursuit of her boyfriend, Angel Juan.
The writing continues to dazzle.
BIRTHDAY MONSTERS!
Written and illustrated by Sandra Boynton.
Workman. $6.95. (Ages 1 to 4) The birthday child looks very much like a hippopotamus.
Her friends, the birthday monsters, arrive just after dawn, bring presents, make a wonderful mess and clean it up.
Part of an appealing new board-book series.


Choosing The Best Mortgage
ALTHOUGH most of the first-time buyers now flooding the market are choosing fixed-rate mortgages, this may not necessarily be the wisest choice.
True, such mortgages are easier to understand and far more predictable: What you pay at the outset is what you will always pay.
But they're certainly not the least exxpensive way to go.


March 6-12: Burmese Standoff; A General Lowers Hope That He'll Meet Dissident
As the head of Burmese military intelligence, Lieut.
General Khin Nyunt should know that the biggest danger to the survival of the military junta is Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Prize-winning opposition leader who has been under house arrest for nearly five years.
Her name is whispered almost as a mantra by the people of Myanmar, formerly Burma, as their best hope for democracy.
But in an interview last week, the strongman said Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi had little support among the Burmese people and ruled out early talks with her.
"From what we see her supporters are only from outside Myanmar," he said.


Fordham Moves to N.C.A.A.'s
Fordham 64, Holy Cross 60
Win or sit home -- that's the way it was today for the Fordham women's team.
Win and get the Patriot League's automatic bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Lose to second-seeded Holy Cross and waste a 20-victory season because the league doesn't rate an at-large bid in the 64-team tournament.


Saving Gibson Guitars From the Musical Scrap Heap
THE exterior of the drab warehouse in a sun-parched Nashville industrial park offers no hint of the activity within.
To guitar aficionados, the Gibson Guitar Corporation plant is a virtual Santa's workshop.
Scores of gleaming, hand-painted guitars dangle from overhead, many models resonant with musical history: B.B.
King's "Lucille," the classic solid-body "Les Paul," the asymmetrical "Flying V" popularized by Jimi Hendrix.
The electric sanders and paint sprayers create an especially sweet birthday chorus for Gibson, which marks its centennial this year with concerts, exhibits and a May tribute at the White House, with the sax-jamming President Clinton as host.


Crossing Cultures: The Complex Life of a Man of All Things
WAS it the fact that the Persian rugs themselves were so large that contributed to the sense of a certain almost fairy tale strangeness as I waited for Feradoun Hoveyda, ambassador to the United Nations under the Shah of Iran, to re-emerge?
Or was it the fact that they went from wall to wall, instead of being set in the center, so that as soon as one rug ended, defining the ending of one room, immediately another began?
It was only once I was sitting several rooms and rugs away from the foyer that I became aware of a frosted glass panel-- the only window that I would later remember -- through which you could see the light.
It had a medieval, churchlike appearance strangely in keeping with the Persian door panels and the tapestries in the room where we sat.


A CAUTIONARY FABLE
Maureen Dowd went beyond the boundaries of fair journalism in "A Cautionary Fable," about the resignation of Hillary Rodham Clinton as First Lady (On Washington, Feb. 13).
Although presented as "fable," what does the reader take from this?
That Mrs.
Clinton is enmeshed in guilt and foul play (of course, Dowd is only kidding), and this before any evidence is presented or evaluated.
When we wrote satire about Richard Nixon, it came after the facts and history had recorded its verdict.


Temporary Jobs Now Seem Anything But
During recessions, employers put off the cost of new hiring by paying people extra to work overtime.
They also turn to part-time and temporary workers who are rarely paid benefits.
But it has been three years since the economy began rebounding from the last recession, and these arrangements seem to have taken root.
Factories nationwide are relying on record levels of overtime, typically four and five hours a week.
Ford's 4,350 workers in Kansas City, for example, have been putting in 50-hour weeks for a year and a half.


Healthful Possibilities in 'Italian Light'
CALL it Italian light.
People eat differently from the way they did a decade ago, and 1990's dining habits are having an impact on Island restaurants.
Vizio, a new entry in Roslyn Heights, conforms to current patterns by offering an array of healthful possibilities.
The newcomer has the same ownership as La Ginestra of Glen Cove.
Diners will find traditional favorites from that restaurant on Vizio's menu, as well as grilled meats and fish, salad plate mates for entrees and vegetable and seafood appetizers.


Gridiron at Club Med
For football fans depressed that the season is over, there is Med Bowl III, a two-hand touch football game pitting Club Med vacationers against 10 National Football League players.
Staged on a beach at Club Med-Turkoise in the Turks and Caicos Islands, the game tops off a week of activities with the professional players from April 9 to 16, including demonstrations, clinics, photo opportunities and autograph signings.
The N.F.L. players taking part include Ronnie Lott of the New York Jets, Junior Seau and Mike Dyal of the San Diego Chargers, Steve Beuerlein of the Phoenix Cardinals and Ricky Watters of the San Francisco 49ers.
Cost without air fare is $1,030.
Call (800) 258-2633.


Corrections
The Streetscapes column on Feb. 13, about sidewalk construction sheds, misidentified the designer of the one enclosing the site of the Jekyll &amp; Hyde restaurant on the Avenue of the Americas between 57th and 58th Streets.
It was designed by the restaurant's owner, D. R. Finley.


Big East's Final Surprise: UConn Won't Be There
John Thompson, seemingly impervious to stress after 22 years as the Georgetown coach, said he was "nervous" about yesterday's semifinal game at Madison Square Garden, one matching the Hoyas and Seton Hall in the Big East tournament.
He had reason to be uneasy.
His team had lost its last three regular-season games and had been on the road for the past eight nights, living in hotels.
"Our kids are not used to the pro style of life," he said.


Health Forum Airs Chronic Questions
HESITATINGLY, 65-year-old Gloria Goff, a resident of this city, stepped up to the microphone and told a panel of four United States Representatives that the cost of her arthritis prescriptions was "weighing her down."
Robert Sawyer, a 26-year-old from Chappaqua, told the lawmakers that he was a cancer survivor who was "furious about having to do battle with the insurance companies" to cover the costs of his treatment.
Weighing Varied Proposals
And a Hartsdale resident, Eva Scholle, 34, said she was recovering from a mental illness and wanted to know if the health-care proposals being considered in Congress would help her and others similarly afflicted.
"We need extra services to manage on a daily basis," she said.


Report Details Waldheim's Role in Nazi Military
The Justice Department report that led to the barring of Kurt Waldheim from the United States six years ago will be released for the first time this week.
It cites Nazi documents indicating that the former United Nations Secretary General "assisted or participated in" the deportation, mistreatment and execution of civilians and Allied soldiers in World War II.
A department spokesman, John Russell, said yesterday that he could not say why the report by the Office of Special Investigations was ordered withheld by the Bush Administration in 1987.
But Mr.
Russell said that, based on Freedom of Information Act requests, it had been determined by the Federal District Court in the District of Columbia and Attorney General Janet Reno that the report should be made public.
Release of the 204-page report, which led to Mr.
Waldheim's name being placed on what is called the immigration "Watchlist," had been sought by the press and the World Jewish Congress.
A copy of the report was obtained by The New York Times.


Phone Line Helps County Detectives
IN a listening post on the fourth floor of an old brick building on Washington Street, a lone sentinel waits by the phone.
Anxious callers speak to him in whispered, halting sentences, telling tales of crime and asking for assurances of anonymity.
"We don't want your name," he tells them.
"We will know you only by your confidential code number. Now give me more details."


Corrections
The What's Doing column on Jan. 30, about Ottawa, overstated the unusualness of the city's northern location.
A reader's letter received on Feb. 22 points out that Ottawa, though among the coldest capitals, lies south of Paris, London, The Hague and Vienna, among other capitals.


Andrea F. Katz, Jeffrey M. Fine
Dr.
Andrea Fran Katz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Burton Katz of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Jeffrey Mark Fine, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred D. Fine, also of Scarsdale.
Rabbi Eric Wittstein performed the ceremony at the Mark Hotel in New York.
The bride is an ophthalmologist in private practice in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a medical degree from Johns Hopkins University.
The bride's father is an internist with the New York Medical Group in the Bronx.


Old Chestnuts Or Fresh Delights?
To the Editor:
In Tony Scherman's review of the album "Rhythm, Country and Blues," musical memories are dismissed as nothing more than middle-aged (if not ancient) overly familiar bores.  [ "Country Meets Black Pop (Unhappily)" Feb. 27 ] .
To suggest that the selection of older, more experienced rhythm-and-blues artists for a project of duets with young, rising country stars was a mistake is to suggest that there is no meaningful connection between the past and the present in music today.
But Mr.
Scherman goes even further, suggesting that the album was put together as part of a marketing plan to sell more country and rhythm-and-blues CD's.


Elisa Fleishman, William G. Carey
Elisa L. Fleishman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nelson Fleishman of New York, was married last evening to William G. Carey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Carey of Rockville Centre, L.I.
The Rev.
William Brosnas, a Roman Catholic priest, and Cantor David Benedict jointly officiated at the Pegasus Suite of the Rainbow Room in New York.
Mrs.
Carey, 23, and her husband, 28, work at Hi Fashion Fabrics, in New York, she as a sales representative and he as a sales executive.
The bride graduated from Michigan State University.
Her father is a managing director of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
Her mother, Anita Fleishman, teaches the third grade at Public School 158 in New York.


Sarah Camougis And Trey Felker
Sarah Nicole Andreson Camougis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Camougis of Worcester, Mass., was married there yesterday to Leighton Felker Young 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Young of Houston.
The Rev.
Dean Paleologos performed the ceremony at St.
Spyridon Greek Orthodox Cathedral.
The bride, 27, graduated from the University of Virginia and received a law degree from Suffolk University.
She is a clerk for Judge Henry J. Boroff of Federal Bankruptcy Court in Boston.
Her father is the vice president of the American Reclamation Corporation, a recycling and environmental services company in Southboro, Mass.
Her mother, Irene Camougis, is a broker for Trust of New England Better Homes and Gardens, a real estate company in Worcester.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
105.06
105.51
118.07
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6831
1.7186
1.6652
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3628
1.3571
1.2446
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5001
1.4901
1.4362
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$385.20
$377.00
$327.90
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Police Announce Crackdown On Quality-of-Life Offenses
The New York City Police Department yesterday announced a citywide campaign that would make it more difficult for people committing minor offenses like urinating in public and possessing marijuana to escape punishment.
Pursuing Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's theme of improving the quality of life in the city, the Police Department will overhaul procedures for issuing Criminal Court summonses, with the goal of reducing the number of evaders.
Under the current system, only a fraction of people given summonses show up in court.


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about the Grand Central Partnership's decision to suspend a homeless-outreach program referred incorrectly to financing arrangements.
The New York Community Trust, a foundation, had agreed to provide $45,000 of the cost; it made no commitment to raise additional funds.


Q and A
World Cup in D.C.
Q.
I am a soccer fan and would like see a World Cup game in Washington, D.C., combining this with a family vacation.
Can you help me on tickets and hotel accommodations? -- Mrs.
Stephen Walker, Englewood, Colo.


For Those Who Died Covering the News
To the Editor:
As the mother of Dan Eldon, a 22-year-old Reuters photographer who was stoned to death in Mogadishu, Somalia, last July 12, I was deeply moved by "Slaughtering the Messengers" (editorial, Feb. 25).
Dan and three colleagues, Hansi Krauss (Associated Press) and Anthony Macharia and Hos Maina (Reuters), were covering the aftermath of a United Nations bombing of a meeting place of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid's followers.
More than 50 people died, and scores were injured in a scene Mohammed Shaffi, a Reuters television cameraman, called the worst carnage he had ever seen.


Dogs' Days End
Husky dogs have been pulling sleds in Antarctica since 1898.
They accompanied Roald Amundsen and his men (above), and pulled them to the South Pole and back -- the ones that weren't eaten along the way.
They frustrated Robert Falcon Scott before he died on his trek back from the pole.
He preferred ponies.
In recent years, dog sleds have been used less and less, and now the last 14 dogs, kept by the British Antarctic Survey, have left the continent.
The quest for ecological purity is the reason.
By treaty, dogs are now banned from Antarctica, the reason being that they might introduce new microorganisms or viruses.


Elvis Costello, a Shrewd Pop Pro Pushing 40
"I'M HAVING THE TIME OF MY life/ Or something quite like it," Elvis Costello sings on his raucous, caustic new album, "Brutal Youth." The couplet reminds a listener that this British rocker is incapable of anything less than intense ambivalence: Even as the first line offers what is for Mr.
Costello a rare display of happiness, the second casts doubt on whether the feeling is genuine.
While most of the album's lyrics are filled with more typical expressions of anger, sarcasm and frustration, the melodies include some of Mr.
Costello's airiest, most intricate and witty compositions.
"Brutal Youth" (Warner Brothers 9 45535-2; CD and cassette) reunites Mr.
Costello with the Attractions, the crack three-man band with whom he recorded a series of ferocious albums in the late 70's and early 80's.
And coming after his most dramatic stylistic departure -- the fussy pop chamber music he made with the Brodsky Quartet on last year's "The Juliet Letters" -- "Brutal Youth" sounds like a strategic retreat, a return to Mr.
Costello's earliest, rawest method of record making.


New Yorkers Break Down Barriers to Immigrants' Health Care
Dr.
Francesca Gany, an internist at the medical clinic at Bellevue Hospital Center, has never been to Senegal in West Africa, where abdominal cramps are often treated with kell, a medicine made from tree sap.
But she has discovered that her Senegalese patients here think unflavored gelatin works well as a substitute.
Such small successes have encouraged the Senegalese to turn confidently to this doctor, who is learning to speak their dialect, Wolof, enjoys sharing their spicy stews and drops by to celebrate naming-day ceremonies for their newborn.


One Musician's Vote For WFUV
To the Editor:
As a professional musician who often travels out of town, I am constantly dismayed at how much better, more varied and more interesting other cities' radio stations are than those here in New York City.


Embargo Creates 'Oil Boom' Near Haitian Border
In just five months, this remote rural area has moved from the quiet pace of an agricultural economy built around tobacco and sugar to the giddy frenzy of an oil boom.
There are no oilfields in the border province of Dajabon.
Instead, the new wealth comes from a crush of entrepreneurs, large and small, eager to supply gasoline to neighboring Haiti, which has been under a United Nations oil embargo since October.


Profile; Ruffling Feathers, Big Time, in Staid Old Mexico
AT the end of the best business day of his life, Bernardo Dominguez Cereceres kicked back in his suite at one of the 74 Westin Hotels he had just agreed to buy for $708 million, punched a few numbers into the pay-per-view system and ordered the gangster movie "Carlito's Way."
As the violent film unfolded, Mr.
Dominguez rested peacefully.
The touchstone of his quick rise into Mexico's business elite has always been the belief that daily success meant accomplishing 50 percent of what he set out to do.
On this day, the percentage had zoomed to 100, and on top of it, he was indulging his 10-per-week addiction to American movies, especially those about good guys who appear to be bad guys.


Washington Might Recognize a Bosnian Serb State
The United States may be prepared to recognize a state for Bosnian Serbs on part of the territory they now hold in Bosnia and Herzegovina if such recognition would help foster an overall settlement of the war acceptable to the Muslim-led Bosnian Government, Administration officials said this week.
A senior official said that while the Clinton Administration strongly favors preserving Bosnia and Herzegovina intact by persuading the Serbs to join a proposed federation of Muslims and Croats being negotiated by the United States, the eventual acceptance of a Bosnian Serb state could not be ruled out.


A Night At the Opera (Sans Song)
THANKS TO CHARLIE CHAPLIN'S SCORE FOR his 1928 silent film "The Circus," which was recently played at the Metropolitan Museum of Art by a chamber orchestra as accompaniment to the movie, it was impossible to watch the Little Tramp without thinking about opera.
Gillian B. Anderson, who discovered the music in Chaplin's archives and conducted the performance, identified many of the melodies Chaplin and his musical collaborator, Arthur Kay, linked to the images.
Prominent among them, were quotations from Bizet's "Carmen" and Leoncavallo's "Pagliacci."
The allusion to the Leoncavallo opera was appropriate.
The Tramp in the movie resembles not only the opera's Tonio, who plays a clown in a traveling dramatic troupe and is hopelessly in love with Nedda, but also Canio, Nedda's husband, who is betrayed by her.
Venality, however, is replaced by nobility, tragedy by sentimentality; the hobo, unrequited in love, steps aside for the sake of the woman's happiness.


A First Glimpse of Cheever Country
THIRTEEN UNCOLLECTED STORIES BY JOHN CHEEVER Edited by Franklin H. Dennis. 227 pp.
Chicago: Academy Chicago Publishers. $19.95.


Irish Pizza Just for St. Patrick's Day
IRISH pizza for St.
Patrick's Day?
At Truffles, a much acclaimed restaurant in Sligo, Ireland, that is what customers will be eating this holiday.
The pizzas are topped with spinach and leeks, cabbage and Parma ham, or blood sausage with pears.
"We don't look up the old textbooks for Irish cooking anymore," said the chef and proprietor, Bernadette O'Shea.
"In the 70's in Ireland they began to revive the past. Then in the 80's they realized they had more to offer than that. Since then the face of Irish cooking has been significantly and permanently changed."


March 6-12: Buy or Be Bought; With Grumman for Sale, A Bidding War Erupts in A Shrinking Arms Industry
In a sign that the consolidation of the weapons industry in the wake of the cold war is far from over, the Grumman Corporation, a New York military contractor, became the target of a bidding war last week between the Martin Marietta and Northrop corporations.
On Monday, Grumman agreed to be acquired by Martin Marietta, based in Bethesda, Md., for $1.93 billion, or $55 a share.
Industry analysts and investors said the combined company would have enough customers and weapons programs to weather further Pentagon budget cuts.


Vienna
The label "festival" for what Vienna offers in the way of music, drama and dance this spring and summer seems redundant.
The old city that so many composers and artists called home is in fact an all-year feast for music lovers: they may choose among the productions of two opera houses during 10 months, and almost daily -- year round -- among operettas, musicals, concerts, recitals, and church choirs.
Nevertheless, star-emblazoned Vienna Festival Weeks will be held from May 6 to June 12, followed seamlessly by the 43d Vienna Music Summer, June to September.
Offerings range from piano sonatas in the modest house where Schubert was born in 1797 to black South African "Music of Freedom," and from bittersweet Mozart operas to stark Pina Bausch ballet.


Q and A
A Tree Is The Root of A Problem Q. My neighbor's tree along the property line is invading my garden, uprooting the cement walk and possibly my foundation wall, causing leaks.
The tree is huge and old, with mighty roots.
How responsible are they for the damage? . . .
Helen Straub, Staten Island


Science Fiction
Anger, the dominant emotion of the 1990's, is the burden of THE IRON DRAGON'S DAUGHTER (Avonova/Morrow, $23), by Michael Swanwick.
Mr.
Swanwick's previous book, "Stations of the Tide," won a Nebula Award for best novel in 1991.
At the heart of his marvelous new work is a creature named Melanchthon, who is at the same time a dragon, a sentient machine and the living embodiment of anger.
Forged as a weapon of war but discarded as junk by his onetime masters, Melanchthon seeks revenge for the indignities he has suffered.
For a creature of such twisted pride and power, nothing less than the destruction of all creation will do.
In need of a collaborator, he seizes on a "changeling" named Jane, a human child who was snatched from "the lower world" -- our world -- to serve the same masters who cast off Melanchthon.


Editorial Notebook; When Turks Saved the Jews
Branko Grujik, the Mayor of Zvornik in Bosnia and Herzogovina, certainly knows how to look far back in anger.
While taking a journalist around the smashed ruins of a city "cleansed" of its 40,000 prewar Muslim inhabitants, the Mayor paused to boast: "The Turks destroyed the Serbian church that was here when they arrived in Zvornik in 1463. Now we are rebuilding the church and reclaiming this as Serbian land forever and ever."
I was struck by how the Mayor totally missed an obvious and pertinent lesson of the turbulent 15th century: The cause of Islam and Turkey flourished because so many Christians thought and behaved with the same suicidal intolerance he displays today.


Firemen in Waiting
FIREFIGHTERS spend most of their time waiting, fidgeting benchwarmers at a game they can only anticipate.
While they wait, they make their own beds, scrub their own toilets, polish their truck (they call it an apparatus).
In full fire regalia, they take their shiny red truck to the supermarket, then cook feasts together.
They drill on techniques, lift weights, watch television and read mountains of Playboys dating back more than a decade.
At Ladder Company 176, in a tattered corner of Brooklyn, firefighters go about their tasks with a camaraderie found in few groups outside the Boy Scouts. (Women are still a rarity, accounting for just 35 of the city's 11,800 firefighters.) In fact, the men like their jobs so much they routinely arrive an hour or so early.


Political Correctness: A Quirk The British Can Do Without
LAST week a Long Island school decided to cancel a student production of "Peter Pan" because it was deemed offensive to American Indians.
Here, Anthony Shaffer, the playwright appointed to come up with ideas for the famed Earling Film Studios, issued an advisory to Britain's Asian Indians.
Minority groups were not going to get a pass from comedy.
"People who come to live in England must not be offended if, from time to time, they become the butt of a comic idea, just as a cockney wouldn't mind," he said.
"It may well be that 'The Man in the White Suit' becomes 'The Woman in a White Sari.' "
In the same week, much of London was decorated, if that's the word, with a billboard advertising Wonderbra, a photograph of a giggling, scantily clad model above the quotation "Or are you just glad to see me?" The ad was enough to cause a car crash, joked one cartoon, but it caused barely a ripple among feminists.


State Employees Brace for the Budget
When Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman releases her 1995 budget on Tuesday, no group will pore over its numbers more anxiously than New Jersey's state employees.
With a $2.2 billion projected budget gap to close, Whitman administration officials have been hinting that state workers' wages and fringe benefits, accounting for 20 percent of state spending, will be high on the list for budget savings.


St. Thomas
To the Editor: "What's Doing in St. Thomas" (Jan. 23) did not mention the very interesting visit that can be made to the second-oldest synagogue in the United States and its territories.
This landmark Sephardic Synagogue at St.
Thomas, in Charlotte Amalie, is picturesquely situated on a narrow street high above the harbor.
It was built in 1833, and is worth visiting for its architecture and its fittings.
Its sand floor is said to commemorate the Exodus.
Tourists are welcome not only during religious services but also during the week.
JAY M. PASACHOFF  NAOMI PASACHOFF  Cambridge, Mass.


Call Me Smiley
Perhaps the Central Intelligence Agency should try keeping track of whales instead of moles.
Aldrich Ames, so the Government claims, passed secrets to the Soviet Union and later to Russia, practically with impunity, even though the agency was looking for a traitor in the ranks.
Meanwhile, from World War II on, the Soviets were dispatching the world's whales, also with impunity, and lying about it with the help of the K.G.B.


Israelis Debate Not Risks, but the Future; The Settlement Issue
To the Editor:
During the implementation of the Camp David Accords, Menachem Begin urged Jewish settlers of Sinai to leave peacefully, while Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres visited Jewish settlers in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, assuring them that if Labor were to form a government, it would never sanction dismantling any Jewish settlements.
Thus, it was no surprise that in the secret negotiations between the Israeli Labor Government and the Palestine Liberation Organization that led to signing an agreement of principles last September, that the Israelis deferred the matter of the settlements until "not later than 1996." The Labor Government hoped the issue of the settlements would go away as Palestinians gradually accept a fait accompli.


F.Y.I.
'Le Gran Bwa'
Q.
I'm told that at the southeastern edge of Prospect Park, along the edge of the pond, there are tree trunks carved into interesting sculptures, and that religious ceremonies are celebrated there.
What's this all about?


Untangling the Threads Of the Whitewater Affair
WHITEWATER DEVELOPMENT COMPANY began in 1979 as a small investment between the Clintons and an Arkansas businessman.
But in recent weeks, the name Whitewater has come to stand for a host of tangentially related issues, from the 1993 suicide of Deputy White House Counsel Vincent W. Foster to the propriety of the White House's contacts with regulatory agencies whose inquiries touched the Clintons.
As Robert B. Fiske Jr., the special counsel looking into the matter, took his first grand jury testimony from White House officials last week, nearly every aspect of the case remained shrouded in uncertainty.


Deadline for New York Coliseum Deal Postponed
The long-delayed proposal by Mortimer B. Zuckerman to redevelop the site of the New York Coliseum at Columbus Circle in Manhattan has been postponed again, this time for 35 days.
With a deadline tomorrow, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which owns the property at Columbus Circle, reached an agreement on Friday to allow Mr.
Zuckerman more time before forcing him to forfeit his $33.8 million deposit on the four-and-a-half-acre site.
The extension until April 18, which is permitted under the contract that the M.T.A. and Mr.
Zuckerman reached in 1989, came after a State Supreme Court judge declined on Friday to grant Mr.
Zuckerman and his development company, Boston Properties, an injunction blocking the M.T.A.'s seizure of the deposit.


In the Portrait Game, the Photographer Wins
JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU WAS of the opinion that if a man was not mad, he could be cured of every folly save vanity.
As it was in the 18th century, so it is today; customs and values pass by, but self-love goes on forever.
Only the expression and depiction of vanity change.
Locked into our bodies as we are, and doomed to address the world from faces we might not have chosen, we concentrate much self-love (and hate) on the image we imagine we project.
Portraiture, which brings the object of vanity before one's own eyes, reflects the shifting means and expectations of self-display.


Habitats/Moving Up by Moving Down; New Harlem Rowhouses
BEFORE Toni Clarke and Andrew Igbo moved to Harlem's newest condominiums, at Frederick Douglass Boulevard and 137th Street, last month -- the first family to move into the brick rowhouses -- they lived only 10 blocks away, in the city-owned Polo Grounds housing project.
"The apartment was nice but some of the people were unbearable," Mr.
Igbo said.
"It was pretty dangerous but it was pretty cheap. I was content. We could rent cars and leave town every weekend, but Toni said, 'Honey, we got to get out of here.' "


Redesigning Democracy
THE TYRANNY OF THE MAJORITY Fundamental Fairness in Representative Democracy.
By Lani Guinier. 324 pp.
New York: Martin Kessler Books/The Free Press. $24.95.


No. 1 Returns as Both Coach and Ambassador
The question is inevitable.
Mookie Wilson can be talking to children about the dangers of drugs.
He can be talking to adults about working toward racial harmony.
The location and the topic don't really matter.
When he asks for questions, the first one is always the same.
"Mookie," someone asks, "what's wrong with the Mets?"


Sump Pumps May Require Extra Care This Year
SRING thaws this year may mean flooded basements for many homeowners.
A sump pump in a shallow basement pit, or sump, is generally an effective solution to the problem, but only if the pump works properly.
Sump pumps come in two styles, pedestal and submersible.
A pedestal pump has an electric motor attached to a hollow shaft about three feet long.
At the base of the shaft are the pump parts.
The unit stands upright in the sump, with the motor above the water.


Sexual Politics
To the Editor:
Jane Smiley's review of Robert Olen Butler's novel "They Whisper" (Feb. 13) deserves comment.
Ms.
Smiley notes that the novel has "a strong cumulative effect," is "many-faceted and fascinating" and is "a fully realized and important expression of our era." She concludes that Mr.
Butler writes so well that he achieves what "only the best novels do." Yet she backs off "from judging whether 'They Whisper' is a great book, or even a good one." Why?
The answer lies in Ms.
Smiley's view that the novel "fully partakes of the ambiguous nature of sexual politics in our time." In effect, she reserves judgment because she disagrees with the novel's sexual politics.


Similarities Despite Radically Different Styles
JAY MILDER and Jon Waldo: the first has a reputation that goes back to Manhattan of the late 1950's; the second is a relative newcomer.
Despite this and their radically different styles, the two painters have qualities in common.
Mr.
Milder, whose show is at the new Shoe-String Gallery in Jersey City, began as a figural Expressionist when art was coming down from Abstract Expressionism, on its way to Pop and the more or less concurrent modes of Color Field and Minimalism.
Despite this, New Image painting and the triumphant "return" of the figure in Neo-Expressionism, Mr.
Milder has continued to tend his own garden, leaning more toward the European Cobra painters than to any in his own country.


Condemning A Family Trade
In the half century that the Mennella family's Ace Wheel and Rim Company has been ensconced in its modest wood-frame building at 33-19 Northern Boulevard, the owners say they have had lucrative offers for the site from the White Castle restaurant chain and other would-be buyers.
The Mennellas were never tempted and never sold.
They had become attached to their old-fashioned auto parts store, its shelves stacked with rims, wheels and brake drums -- and to its backyard fig and peach trees and summer harvests of tomatoes, eggplants, beans and cucumbers.


NOT AN URBANIST, ONLY A GENIUS
When you break rehearsals for lunch," Mike Todd told me, "go down to my office and introduce yourself to my important guest." (It was 1946. Todd was producing, and I was directing, "January Thaw" for Broadway).
Frank Lloyd Wright, in a flat, broad-brimmed hat and cape, stood, looking out Mike's bay window at the office buildings across from our rehearsal hall, on West 56th Street.
I coughed to signal my presence and introduced myself.
Another long wait and I summoned the courage to stutter, "Sorry to intrude sir, but I wonder if you would share with me what has caught your interest out the window?"


Self-Help at Cancer Retreats
BIRCHES surround a cozy house nestled in the woods here, where the sun shines brilliantly on the snow, and inside it is toasty.
The house, on a hillside at the end of a country road that winds through the grounds of Four Winds Hospital, is the setting for a new series of gatherings for cancer patients sponsored by the Retreat Community, based in South Salem.
The nonprofit organization, which is independent of Four Winds, a psychiatric hospital, was begun by Carolyn and Jeffrey Vreeland, a married couple who developed the four-day, three-day and daylong retreats for people living with cancer in various stages.
The couple said the purpose of the program, called Birchwood Cancer Retreat, the first of which begins next Sunday with a one-day pain workshop and continues on March 24 with a four-day retreat, was to help those coping with the illness to live with less isolation and fear.


Plane Crashes in Staten Island Park


Greed Sells
To the Sports Editor:
So the CBS Sports executive Rick Gentile thinks Richard Sandomir's criticism is "out of touch with the American public" ("The Olympics Became a CBS Mini-Series," The Times, Feb. 27)?
If he and the other schedulers who dragged Olympics viewers around each night thought that we did not resent the manipulation, then they are the ones out of touch.
Sandomir was absolutely on target with most of his complaints (and some praise) about CBS's coverage, especially in regard to figure skating.


Sump Pumps May Require Extra Care This Year
SRING thaws this year may mean flooded basements for many homeowners.
A sump pump in a shallow basement pit, or sump, is generally an effective solution to the problem, but only if the pump works properly.
Sump pumps come in two styles, pedestal and submersible.
A pedestal pump has an electric motor attached to a hollow shaft about three feet long.
At the base of the shaft are the pump parts.
The unit stands upright in the sump, with the motor above the water.


SUNDAY
As an amalgam for filling cavities, what better substance than "Gunmelt" (Sunday, Feb. 13)?
Then we would all be seen to be biting the bullet of gun control.
ELIZABETH BOLEMAN-HERRING Clemson, S.C.


Volunteers 'Repair the World'
NO matter what her other obligations may be in a typical week, Thursday afternoons usually find Ruth Meyer at the Lord's Pantry in White Plains, preparing meals and loading them into her car to deliver that evening to four or five homebound AIDS patients in Mount Vernon, Port Chester, Eastchester and White Plains.
"It's the most satisfying and gratifying thing I've done," said Mrs.
Meyer, a Hartsdale resident who retired from the American Heart Association.
"This is something that must be done. It's on a one-to-one basis. It makes you feel good. I'm very, very happy I'm helping to do this. We are lucky to be able to ease the enormous pain these people have in some small way."


U.N. Puts Off a Resolution To Condemn Mosque Attack
At a brief meeting convened at the request of Russia's representative to the United Nations, Yuliy M. Vorontsov, the Security Council decided to hold off a vote on a resolution condemning the massacre of Palestinians by a Jewish settler at a mosque in Hebron last month.
The United States has delayed the adoption of the resolution pending a commitment from the Palestinians to return to peace talks in Washington.
The Council will take up the resolution again on Monday.


Wall Street; As in the Old Days, Americans Take On More Debt
CONSUMERS are borrowing and spending again.
Last week, the Government reported that the outstanding total of consumer credit rose $6 billion in February, to $796.1 billion.
Over all, the amount that consumers owe is up 7.1 percent over the last year, the most rapid increase since 1989, before the most recent recession.
Auto credit is coming back even more rapidly.
Americans now owe $279 billion for cars, an increase of 7.8 percent over the last year.
The last time auto credit rose that rapidly, Ronald Reagan was President.


Feminist vs. Feminist
To the Editor:
Democrats disagree about the North American Free Trade Agreement; it's a discussion.
But differing feminist opinions about new reproductive technologies are, to Robin Marantz Henig, who reviewed Janice G. Raymond's "Women as Wombs" (Feb. 6), a "bitter" fight and "nasty" battle.
To my mind, the heritage of the last 25 years is a lively, complex intellectual climate, with feminists -- naturally -- of many persuasions, undaunted by the traditional female fear of conflict.
I'm sorry Ms.
Henig chose to stand on the sidelines clucking over what she thinks is a catfight -- and I think is a conversation -- instead of giving readers a better appraisal of the ideas under discussion.
LOUISE BERNIKOW  New York


Edgy In Chicago
ON a freezing winter morning in a section of Chicago called Wicker Park, Brad Wood, a 30-year-old record producer, took a short walk.
Closing the black metal door of Idful Music Studios, his no-frills recording studio situated in a strip mall next to a coin laundry, Mr.
Wood took a brisk left turn on Damen Avenue.
Dressed in his red trucker's cap, blue jeans and lace-up work boots, he resembled nearly all the other pedestrians on the street.
And confronted with a red traffic light, he acted like a Chicago pedestrian, too, jaywalking over to Milwaukee Avenue, the narrow, dark, crowded road on which he lives.
After vaulting up four flights of wide wooden stairs, he reached his multiroom loft.
There Mr.
Wood found Leroy Bach on the sagging sofa, asleep in last night's clothes.
To this morning scene, Mr.
Wood supplied this reveille: "How very Charles Bukowski of you, Leroy."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HEALTH CARE  THE ROAD TO REFORM  The Future of Health Care in America.
By Eli Ginzberg with Miriam Ostow.
Free Press, $22.95.


With Booty Firmly in Hand
A new generation is carrying home treasures from the Sunday flea markets along the Avenue of the Americas in the mid-20's.
The after-brunch browsers often arrive in high style: a young man, bottom right, is wearing a matching camel-color coat and vest, gray flannel trousers with a matching cardigan tied around the waist, tennis shoes, a white Buster Brown-collared shirt, a black silk camelia instead of a tie, and a set of mahogany chairs.


Political Memo; Cuomo and Giuliani, Looking For Allies, Find Each Other
As with tick birds and cattle, there is always a degree of symbiosis between New York State governors and New York City mayors.
But rarely has that interdependence been more apparent than in the first three months of the Giuliani administration, when a Democratic Governor and a Republican Mayor have eagerly subordinated their partisan differences to their mutual political needs.
To close a $2.3 billion budget gap, the key test of his first year in office, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani needs cash from Albany.
He has thus far found a generous benefactor in Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo. 'They Need Each Other'
Mr.
Cuomo, meanwhile, is running for a fourth four-year term and will badly need the votes of the Democrats and independents who helped elect Mr.
Giuliani.
The Mayor was accommodating this week when he refused to rule out supporting Mr.
Cuomo.


The Games, Practice; the Money, Real
THE crack of the bat, the chatter of players lazily chasing fly balls in pregame practice, the clamor of fans straining for a glimpse of their favorite slugger -- all that remains the same.
But in many other ways, Space Coast Stadium, the 7,500-seat preseason home of the Florida Marlins that opened here last weekend, deliberately breaks with the tradition of spring training as an idyllic anachronism in the big business of professional sports.
An outer-space motif, in keeping with the nearby Kennedy Space Center, includes an 80-foot rocket outside the stadium, twin gantries that bracket the main entrance and a scoreboard that launches a giant baseball after a Marlin home run -- all monuments to the marketing savvy of H. Wayne Huizenga, the entertainment magnate who owns Blockbuster Entertainment as well as the Marlins.
The prices are also out of this world for a spring-training stadium: box seats go for $12, compared with $8 charged by the World Series champion Toronto Blue Jays for their best spring-training seats, and there are even luxury suites, for $25,000 apiece a year.


Miss La Marca And Mr. Sacco
Nicoletta Maria La Marca, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard J. La Marca of Cliffside Park, N.J., was married there yesterday to Steven Christopher Sacco, the son of Santo M. Sacco and the stepson of Patricia C. Sacco of New Providence, N.J.
The Rev.
James Jannucci performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
La Marca Sacco, 25, teaches French and Latin at the Dwight-Englewood School in Englewood, N.J.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is a professor of graphic design at Long Island University in Greenvale.
Her mother, Giovanna B. La Marca, teaches art at the Bronx High School of Science.


Success Vs. the Swamp
To the Editor:
In his article "Alternative Art Spaces: Survival of the Nimblest"  [ Feb. 20 ] .
Allan Schwartzman implies that alternative art spaces are a sort of Off Broadway proving ground for visual artists.
He dutifully lists those artists (all white, some women) who "made it" out of this milieu to become commercially successful.


Wall Street; Potential Snag in Apparel-Tag Deal
TO many investors it feels like the perfect fit -- an up and coming tag and label maker joining with an electronics company to put antitheft labels into clothing.
But echoes from a similar effort in the recording industry -- which failed -- may be a warning signal that investors should heed.


PARTY ATTACKING CLINTONS' CRITICS
Trying to deflect the glare of the Whitewater affair from the White House, the chairman of the Democratic Party harshly attacked three Republican Senators today, calling them unfit to criticize President Clinton because of questions about their own behavior.
The chairman, David C. Wilhelm, asserted at the close of the party's spring meeting here that it was "most bizarre" for the Republicans to turn to leaders like Senators Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York, Phil Gramm of Texas and Bob Dole of Kansas in "an obsession with Whitewater." He said, "Their true colors have been showing in the past week as they grope for their mother's milk, wallowing in whatever sleaze and mud they can create from the Whitewater investigation."


HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON
LIKE shy college freshmen at orientation, the half-dozen women who sat around a conference table one recent Saturday afternoon at the Graham-Windham residential campus here hesitantly shared cookies and confidences.
They rarely looked away from the meeting's leader, who alternately elicited information about the women seated in front of her and described a tough assignment the women might be offered.
These women, nearly all of whom, as mothers and grandmothers, had already raised families, were about to set out on a different kind of parental experience.
They were here to learn about the Therapeutic Foster Boarding Home program, a joint venture of the county's Social Services Department and Graham-Windham Services to Families and Children, a nonprofit child-care agency in Manhattan.


Croat Offers to Rebuild The Bridge at Mostar
In one of the first private responses to the new peace agreement between Croatian and Muslim forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a Zagreb contractor has offered to rebuild the Old Bridge in Mostar.
The bridge spanned the Neretva River until last November, linking the mostly Croatian west bank with the Muslim-controlled east side.
Croatian gunners said they destroyed the bridge to prevent Muslim fighters from using it to move supplies from their stronghold on the east bank to the narrow strip of land they control on the west.


Fishermen and Other Residents Rally To Fight Ferryboats as Threat to Way of Life
FOR more than 200 years, the resilient fishermen from this tiny Raritan Bay village have battled severe storms at sea and heavy flooding in port.
In recent years, they have voiced concerns about overregulation from what they say are too many overlapping state and Federal agencies, as well as water pollution, declining fish stocks and a growing public awareness of the need for safety in eating seafood.
They know they are in a fragile industry.
But now the fishermen from the port of Belford, the last major commercial fishing enclave in New Jersey's Bayshore area and a strong economic force in the region, are facing what they call their biggest survival challenge ever: ferryboats and commuters.


Jewish History in Poland
LOT Polish Airlines recently inaugurated a Jewish heritage department, offering tours of what the company calls the most hallowed and harrowing sites linked to Jewish history in Poland.
The program, organized by Joram Kagan, author of "Insider's Guide to Poland's Jewish Heritage" (Hippocrene), includes five- and nine-day tours that encompass sites like the Warsaw Ghetto, the Jewish Historical Institute, Cracow's Jewish quarter and the Auschwitz-Birkenau death camps.Call (800) 223-0593.


Deborah Kaplan, Neal H. Beylus
Deborah Rachel Kaplan, the daughter of Judy and Stanley Kaplan of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Neal Howard Beylus, the son of Rena and Leon Beylus of Miami Beach.
Rabbi Solomon Schiff, an uncle of the bride, will officiate at the Great Neck (L.I.) Synagogue.
Mrs.
Beylus is an associate in securities research at Lehman Brothers, the New York investment bank.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is a systems director at The New York Times.


'New Language Of the Stage'
To the Editor:
It was a pleasure to read Vincent Canby's essay on Edward Albee's "Three Tall Women"  [ "A Season of Albee, Obsessions Safely Intact," Feb. 20 ] .
It is a work that I consider, with "The Man Who Had Three Arms," among the playwright's best accomplishments in recent years.


Voices and Visions: Diary of a Confession to Four Murders
In the weeks before he returned to the United States and surrendered, Ricardo S. Caputo gave extensive, chilling accounts of the killings of four women in the 1970's to a lawyer and a psychiatrist here in his native city.
In sessions with one or the other of the two men, the 44-year-old Mr.
Caputo told of hearing bizarre voices and of seeing hallucinations before and after each murder.
He said the feeling of being imprisoned in relationships had touched off his violent behavior.
He described the traits of the three distinct personalities he claims are within him.
He told of his two marriages, one in Los Angeles and the other in Mexico City, and of his wives and four children.


State Is Rolling Out the Red Carpet for World Cup Soccer
GEORGE R. ZOFFINGER recalled sitting in a Portuguese restaurant in Newark in 1990, about to eat a forkful of paella, when Gov.
Jim Florio endorsed his idea: bring the World Cup to New Jersey.
Mr.
Zoffinger, then the State Commerce Commissioner, was given the go-ahead to offer Giants Stadium as a site for World Cup games in 1994, the year the United States would be the host nation.
In 1992, soccer's governing body, the Federation Internationale de Football Association, announced nine American sites for World Cup play, including Giants Stadium.
Seven games will be played there, and the organizers say the matches will add up to the largest sporting event ever held in the New York metropolitan area.
Over a five-week period beginning on June 18, half a million people are expected to see the games.
The finals will be held in Los Angeles.


The Louvre Features Century's Great Voices
The celebrated singers of this century are the theme of the "Classique en Images" festival to be held at the auditorium of the Musee du Louvre in Paris through March 28.
The event features about 100 films of concerts, opera performances and recitals, as well as filmed master classes by Tito Gobbi, Cathy Berberian, Germaine Lubin and other celebrated singers.
Among the film rarities scheduled is Rosa Ponselle singing excerpts of "Carmen" (1936), showing March 24 at 8 P.M.
On March 19 several films on French singers, including Regine Crespin and Ninon Vallin, will be featured.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption last Sunday about zoning and sex-oriented businesses misstated the location of Manhattan Video.
It is at 60 West 39th Street.


Devils Make Sure Neely Is Kept Under Wraps
There were two games going on simultaneously on the Byrne Meadowlands Arena ice this afternoon, the Devils against the Bruins and Claude Lemieux against Cam Neely.
A slash took off the top of Neely's right pinkie, forcing him to miss the biggest part of the second period, and the Devils went on a 2-1 victory.


March 6-12; Reanimating the Dead With Computers


Big East's Final Surprise: UConn Won't Be There
He was back in his town, and his shots kept going in.
Long before the end of this senior year, the numbers attached to Rob Phelps declared that he was erratic.
The numbers do not reflect resilience or sense of purpose.
The ball goes in or it does not.
Yesterday, with a chance to help take his team where it had never gone, Rob Phelps had a game that defied the numbers.
It would not do Phelps justice to say that his 23 points became the difference in Providence's 69-67 victory over Connecticut.
Or that his 10-of-11 shooting was the major reason the Friars will play in the Big East championship game for the first time in the 15-year history of the tournament.
Six of Seven Are Defeated
Phelps complicated Connecticut's effort to become a No. 1 seed in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament field that will be announced today, and contributed to a bizarre pattern.
Of the eight highest ranked teams in the nation, six of the seven that played yesterday were defeated.
North Carolina, the only one to win, needed an overtime period.


Why Military Contractors Covet Grumman
THE Grumman Corporation, the venerable Long Island military contractor whose future seemed dim, has suddenly emerged as a highly coveted jewel of the weapons industry.
As Pentagon spending shrinks, the industry has consolidated, and there are few companies as big as Grumman left to buy -- or as willing to sell to survive.
The Northrop Corporation, a competing weapons maker based in Los Angeles, ignited a bidding war for Grumman last week, making a $2.04 billion offer, or $60 a share, that topped a $1.9 billion bid, or $55 a share, made earlier in the week by the Martin Marietta Corporation.


'Hold On to That Shot,' Kubrick Said
MOST aspirants in the movie industry toil for years in obscurity awaiting a Big Break.
Anthony Harvey -- as actor, editor and director -- started at the top.
In his first acting role, at 14, he co-starred with Vivien Leigh and Claude Rains.
When he took up film editing, he was soon cutting classics like Stanley Kubrick's "Dr. Strangelove" and Martin Ritt's "Spy Who Came in From the Cold."
On Mr.
Harvey's first time as director of a full-length film, "The Lion in Winter" (1968), he won the Directors Guild of America award.
Part of the reason for his vaulting to success is that Mr.
Harvey, 62, of Water Mill, attracts talent like a trampoline does tumblers.
The cast of sterling actors he has directed includes George C. Scott, Joanne Woodward, Liv Ullmann, Anthony Hopkins and Glenda Jackson.
A recurring element through his career is his work with Katharine Hepburn.
She has appeared in four of his projects, winning an Academy Award for Best Actress for "The Lion in Winter" and starring in the Emmy-winning "Glass Menagerie" (1973).
"Tony is a brilliant director who has a wonderful sense of the medium of film because of his training," Miss Hepburn said in a phone interview.
"He has real imagination. He's one of the best directors I've ever worked with." That praise comes from an actress who has worked with Howard Hawks, John Huston, John Ford, George Cukor and Frank Capra.
In his most recent effort, Mr.
Harvey once again directed Miss Hepburn, paired with Anthony Quinn in a romantic comedy called "This Can't Be Love." CBS-TV will broadcast the made-for-television film tonight at 9 o'clock. 'Baptism by Fire'
Mr.
Harvey was born to the boards in London.
His stepfather, Morris Harvey, was an actor who wrote revues for Gertrude Lawrence.
At 5, Mr.
Harvey saw his first play with Jessica Tandy as the ingenue.
He recalls watching a stellar season of Lawrence Olivier and Ralph Richardson at the Old Vic.
His stepfather's acquaintance with Ms.
Leigh won Mr.
Harvey an audition for the role of Ptolemy in a film of George Bernard Shaw's "Caesar and Cleopatra" (1946).
Playing opposite Leigh and Rains "was a marvelous baptism by fire," Mr.
Harvey said.
Almost literally by fire, because the film studio was bombed in the blitz, which caused filming to be suspended.
When Mr.
Harvey returned the next year to shoot his battle scenes, he had outgrown his costume and had to be filmed in close-up, from the neck up.
He studied acting at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art.
"I realized very soon that I wasn't going to be an Albert Finney and quickly got out of it," he said.
Mr.
Harvey achieved his next break by haunting studio gates until he cornered John and Roy Boulting, two well-known film makers, and persuaded them to hire him as an assistant editor.
After a year of gluing together film with cement, he became chief editor on hit films like "I'm All Right, Jack," starring Peter Sellers and Richard Attenborough. 'Peter Sellers of the Cutting Room'
After editing "Lolita" and "Dr. Strangelove" for Mr.
Kubrick, Mr.
Harvey had become such a perfectionist that he knew it was time to move on.
Mr.
Kubrick told him, "I think you're becoming the Peter Sellers of the cutting room," and encouraged him to direct.
Paradoxically, Mr.
Harvey's films are not tour de forces of cinematic cross-cuts.
He eschews bouncing from shot to shot like a ball at a tennis match, MTV-style.
Stillness and simplicity characterize his approach.
A virtuoso cutter, he understood the virtue of not cutting away to another actor's reaction shot.
"If an actor is giving a dazzling performance, hold on to that shot," Mr.
Kubrick had advised him.
Mr.
Harvey based his first short film in 1966 on a play by Leroi Jones, now Amiri Baraka, "Dutchman," about murder on the subway.
Made in six days on a budget of $20,000, the film was critically acclaimed.
Shirley Knight won the Golden Lion Best Actress award at the Venice Film Festival for her work in it.
When Peter O'Toole saw "Dutchman," he knew that Mr.
Harvey, despite his inexperience with features, was right for "The Lion in Winter." The director's knees trembled at the prospect.
"I was absolutely panic stricken," Mr.
Harvey recalled.
To impress Miss Hepburn, he sent her roses, an unfortunate choice.
"These are the most dreadful flowers I've ever seen," the actress told him.
"They've got wires in them."
In rehearsals Mr.
Harvey was so awe struck that he deferentially called the star Miss Hepburn.
"How can I call the woman I've worshiped all my life just plain Kate? I have to show respect!"
The film, set in the 12th century, featured Ms.
Hepburn as Eleanor of Aquitaine, who squabbles with her estranged husband, Henry II, played by Mr.
O'Toole.
Miss Hepburn delivered memorable lines like, "Hush, dear, mother's fighting." The royal family is fraught with sufficient treason, patricide, incest and sodomy to satisfy the most vulturish tabloid.
"What family doesn't have its ups and downs?" Ms.
Hepburn asks.
Ready to Go Overboard
Mr.
Harvey gave his idol one of the grandest entrances in film history, floating upstream in a barge.
Dressed in sumptuous robes, Miss Hepburn seems incandescent, as glints of light irradiate the scene like an illuminated manuscript.
What is not evident is that the scene was shot at high tide as wild winds buffeted the boat.
Persuaded that it would founder, Miss Hepburn advised an armor-clad actor to unbuckle his breastplate.
She planned to jettison her heavy gown and swim naked to shore.
Mr.
Harvey was elated with Miss Hepburn's performance.
"Working with her is like going to Paris at the age of 17 and finding everything is the way you thought it would be," he said at the time.
Miss Hepburn made an exception to her practice of not seeing her films.
She screened "Lion" in the office of the producer Joseph Levine, bursting into tears of relief at the end.
The movie became a critical and commercial hit, winning the New York Critics Award as Best Film.
Mr.
Harvey was thrust overnight into the spotlight.
"It was a thrilling start," he said.
"But when you have success so early everything after that is under great scrutiny. You wonder what the hell to do next."
Retreating from the public glare, he turned down many offers, including "Cabaret" and "Love Story." "I let them go out of total indecision," he recounted.
"It was a terrible mistake."
After a series of mostly forgotten films for major studios, Mr.
Harvey's most visible project was an adaptation of Tennessee Williams's "Glass Menagerie" for ABC-TV.
He wanted Miss Hepburn for the lead, but she was at first reluctant after Laurette Taylor's sensational portrayal on stage.
Miss Hepburn had gone with Spencer Tracy to see the play five nights in a row.
She told Mr.
Harvey that the soles of her feet were bleeding from the intensity of the experience.
Their next film together, "The Ultimate Solution of Grace Quigley" (1983), was a black comedy in which Miss Hepburn played a woman who hired a hit man (Nick Nolte) to put her aged friends out of their misery.
When it was released in the United States, it was a resounding flop.
Mr.
Harvey attributed the failure to Cannon Films's recutting the picture to contrive an upbeat ending.
Bitterly disappointed, the director licked his wounds.
"I needed to go to a rest home, which I practically did for six years," Mr.
Harvey said.
Unable to muster the spirit to work, "I wasted those years."
Besides Miss Hepburn, Mr.
Harvey has worked with other major actresses like Bette Davis and Faye Dunaway in "The Disappearance of Aimee," a 1976 made-for-television film.
Davis, in her late 70's, "absolutely took a dislike to Faye Dunaway," Mr.
Harvey recalled.
"I would line them up for a two-shot," he said, "then look through the camera, and I couldn't see Bette." Each time, she inched her chair away to evade a tete-a-tete with the younger actress.
Mr.
Harvey's latest project arose from his desire to capture Miss Hepburn doing what she has always done best.
Among her most memorable films are the dueling-duo movies like "Adam's Rib" with Tracy.
"Kate is always marvelous when she's up against a macho actor," Mr.
Harvey said.
"Whether it's John Wayne or Spencer Tracy or Bogie, the chemistry with those actors brings out her best."
In "This Can't Be Love," Mr.
Quinn plays a hammy hero against whom the flinty Miss Hepburn, at the age of 86, strikes sparks.
"Kate is unique with this great courage and her wonderful sense of being able to laugh at herself," Mr.
Harvey said.
In her 50th film in a career of 62 years Ms.
Hepburn shows the difference between merely going long and clearly going strong.
In "The African Queen" her character told Bogart loftily, "Nature, Mr. Allnut, is what we are put into this world to rise above." In her latest film, she rises above frailty in a portrayal of a tough woman rejuvenated by romance.
"I feel 70 again!" she says in the role.
Miss Hepburn felt so sprightly during the filming that she was always first on the set.
Once, when Mr.
Harvey arrived tardy, she whacked him with her cane, saying, "You've kept me waiting!" He disappeared briefly, returning with a bandage spotted with fake blood swathing his head.
Mr.
Harvey criticized the trend to inane movie sequels.
As Tracy described Hepburn's character, using a Brooklyn accent in "Pat and Mike": "She ain't got much meat on her, but what she's got is cherce."
Mr.
Harvey, too, prefers quality to quantity.
"It's important to try and do something different and not repeat oneself," he said.
"One should take risks and break all the rules." What about the producer?
"To hell with him," he declared.
"The thing is to make a film one enjoys and feels passionate about.
"I try to make films that are uplifting. One has to have hope for the human race and love and the feeling that life can be wonderful." Anxious Anesthesiologist
Mr.
Harvey finds the wonderful life not in California, but in living on the East End.
He told an anecdote about having major surgery in a hospital in Los Angeles.
"As I was coming to, the anesthesiologist said, 'I'm very anxious to get into movies.' "
"Only in Hollywood!" Mr.
Harvey exclaimed.
"It's so ridiculous. You couldn't put it into a movie."
His life in Water Mill, where he moved three years ago from Manhattan, consists of taking long walks by the sea with his golden retriever, Rufus.
"I grew up in the country, and I'm a passionate gardener," the director said.
The view from his art-stuffed house is of fields, a lake and wild geese flying over in chevron formation.
Mr.
Harvey is planning his next project, a film with Mr.
Quinn based on the last years of Tolstoy's life.
He would love to make a comedy like Laurel and Hardy's movies, "screamingly funny films," he said, "where you roar with laughter till tears pour down your face."
"If you don't have a sense of humor about yourself you're doomed," Mr.
Harvey said.
"That's why I was silly to get into a depression over that last film. You can't sit around feeling sorry for yourself. You have to say, 'Onwards.' "


EXIT THE CRITIC
In "Exit the Critic" (Feb. 13), Frank Rich summed up well the extraordinary pressures under which The Times's chief theater critic works.
His article showed the human side of a man obviously in love with the theater.


March 6-12: Growing Up Painfully; Florida Teen-Ager Rejoins Parents She 'Divorced'
It must be enormously difficult to be a 15-year-old whose every move is watched with consuming fascination.
Kimberly Mays lives that way, working out the tangled loyalties of her life while trailed by dozens of reporters, television cameras and celebrity photographers.
Her latest encounter with the difficulties of growing up was played out in full view last week, after she announced that she had run away from her Englewood, Fla., home and had decided to live with Ernest and Regina Twigg of Sebring, Fla., the biological parents she legally "divorced" last summer.


A Segovia Disciple Turned Rebellious
INTELLECTUAL restlessness is a wild card that can lead a musician along underexplored historical byways or through forests of contemporary arcana.
But it can also take the form of open rebellion against conventional expectations, as it has in the case of John Williams -- the guitarist, not the conductor and film composer -- whose three-concert overview of the literature for his instrument at the 92d Street Y continues on Tuesday and concludes on Saturday.
Mr.
Williams, who was born in Australia in 1941, moved to London when he was 10 and studied with Andres Segovia.
Segovia virtually anointed Mr.
Williams his successor (to the chagrin of Julian Bream, who was a few years older and already finding his own post-Segovia path), and for a time Mr.
Williams did everything expected of a Segovia disciple.
He made his way through the standard repertory and produced recordings that were stunning for their virtuosity and technical precision.
He commissioned new works, transcribed old ones and toured the world.


Robinson's 40 Points Lift Spurs Into First
Spurs 109, Rockets 98
David Robinson had 40 points and 16 rebounds, taking advantage of foul-plagued Hakeem Olajuwon as the San Antonio Spurs beat the Rockets, 109-98, last night in Houston.


A Rare Double: Speed and Distance
Milton Campbell, a sprinter from Frederick Douglass High School in Atlanta, has become the brightest young track talent in the nation with a secret weapon that would shock his opponents.
He runs distance.
In the fall, while Campbell's rivals are polishing their trophies, he competes in 5,000-meter (3.1 miles) races on the Douglass cross-country squad.
"It builds my stamina for the 400 meters in track," he said.


Gideon Taylor and Deborah J. Kazis
Deborah Jane Kazis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Earle W. Kazis of Rye, N.Y., was married last evening to Gideon Taylor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mervyn Taylor of Dublin.
Rabbi Asher Ostrin performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis in New York.
Rabbi Norton Shargel also officiated.
Ms.
Kazis, 27, is keeping her name.
She is a writer in New York.
She received undergraduate and M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University.


Northern Boulevard, Megastore Central?
Legend has it that Northern Boulevard follows the route of ancient Indian paths.
In more recent decades, the thoroughfare has led a more prosaic existence, lined with aging warehouses and factories and a string of automobile dealers.
Suddenly in the 1990's, however, it is becoming a major urban retail center.
"It certainly is a hot megastore retail strip, a natural land-use change that the market is dictating," said Jack Rainey, executive director of the Long Island City Business Development Corporation.


SURFACING
RESPITE  Tea salons: The next coffee bars?
Too soon to say, but their ranks are growing.
T, in SoHo, offers more than 200 brands of international tea and a "proper tea" session at 3:30 P.M.
ILLUSION  The Super Uplift bra: Gossard, the British lingerie maker, will introduce its latest cleavage enhancer, the Super Uplift, at Saks this Wednesday. (The company had popularized the famed Wonderbra but lost the license to make it.)  MERCHANDISING  The royal catalogue: The House of Windsor mail-order catalogue is an anglophile's trove of elegant goods like wall tapestries and ceramics.
Most of the concerns listed hold the royal family's seal of approval, the Royal Warrant.
For a catalogue: (800) 433-3210.


How the Rolls-Royce of Building Managers Suddenly Lost Its Luster
Bert Rubenstein, an employee of the Milstein family real-estate empire, wasassigned in late 1989 to help run the company's newly acquired real-estate management division, Douglas Elliman-Gibbons &amp; Ives.
The company, one of the city's largest residential managing agents and a major broker, had long considered itself the Rolls-Royce of managers because of its roster of distinguished buildings.
It was an eye-opening experience.
Mr.
Rubenstein noticed that a lot of the people in the office were vendors and contractors, many of whom sat at the same Douglas Elliman desks every day.
This blatant lack of an arms-length relationship with suppliers was only the first thing that raised questions in his mind.


In the Region/Westchester; Dealing With a Severe Winter's Damage to Homes
AS elsewhere in the Northeast, homes in Westchester County, both vacant and occupied, have taken a terrible beating this winter as a result of the succession of snowstorms and extremely low temperatures.
"We had a deal on one house," said Dorothy Mertz, a broker associate with the Prudential Ragette Realtors in Eastchester, "and when the termite inspector went there he found it was completely flooded." It was so bad, Ms.
Mertz said, that the floors throughout the house were warped and "rose up in a V shape."


Pentimento
This spring, a gallery of 19th-century images emerged from the collections of John Galliano and Vivienne Westwood, suggesting a cast of perennial characters.


Prices at Ebb Tide for Waterfront Property
BUFFETED by storms that made insurance tricky to find or difficult to afford and by reassessments that sent property taxes soaring, waterfront properties in many parts of the metropolitan New York region are now being traded at some of the lowest prices in recent history.
"This last recession is the only time I know of when blue-chip real estate did not keep its value," said lyn Hanberg, co-owner of Dunham Ltd.
Realtors in Old Lyme, Conn.
She said many prime waterfront properties in her part of the Connecticut shoreline had tripled in value during the boom of the mid- to late 1980's and "when they fell, they had that much farther to fall."


A Homeland's Agony
It is a quirky little state previously known for gambling, pop shows and topless reviews.
Even in South Africa people struggle to pronounce its name.
By the end of April it will cease to exist.
But Bophuthatswana (bah-POO-taht-SWA-nah) last week proved an important turning point on South Africa's way to democracy.


Story of Journalist's Killing Still Has Two Missing Pieces
With last week's conviction of a teen-ager in the killing of an anti-drug journalist in Queens, law-enforcement officials say they now hope that vigilance and luck will allow them to catch the remaining person charged in the case who is still at large.
That person, Guillermo Leon Restrepo Gaviria, a citizen of Colombia, is accused of relaying the order to kill Manuel de Dios Unanue.
The order, from a reputed drug-cartel leader in Colombia who was angered by Mr.
De Dios's writings, went to a cartel confederate in New York who conspired to carry out the killing, officials said.


Kelly Seems Delighted By a Single Compliment
Often after Pat Kelly has ranged deep behind second base, into shallow center or left field, and corralled a bloop that should really have been a hit, Buck Showalter will marvel at his infielder's amazing agility.
He will gaze at Kelly and then think about Roberto Alomar of Toronto, usually the only other second baseman who Showalter thinks can duplicate the dazzling defensive pursuits.


For a Recycling Company, Good News and Bad
Atlas Paper Stock's horse-drawn wagons started collecting scrap paper in Manhattan's downtown printing district shortly after World War I. Since then, times have changed radically for the salvage business.
Recycling is not only socially responsible; a local law makes it mandatory.
On April 13, the city will start enforcing requirements that businesses separate paper, cans and plastics for recycling, with fines of $25 to $500.
Expecting that the crackdown will produce a ready-made stream of discarded paper, Atlas plans to expand its operations tenfold, to handle 400 tons a day.
The company, though, faces opposition from some community members, who contend that the West Village is no place for such an operation.


A Sporty Styling Coup From Flat Rock
TEN years ago, you will recall, I was lamenting the sorry state of automotive design.
You don't recall? Well, take my word for it.


Immigrants to Life Underground; Illegal Cellar Cubicles Are One Rung Above Being Homeless
On the day seven years ago when Frank Durente circled over Manhattan Island for the first time, he looked down and genuinely believed that the buildings, the sidewalks, New York itself, was reaching up expressly for him.
He saw himself living in one of the tiny buildings below, finding regular work and proudly sending some dollars home to his family in Guyana from the city he had conquered.
"This is where I belong," he wrote in his red pocket diary as he was about to touch down.
Now Mr.
Durente sees New York from below ground, through the smashed window of a door jammed against garbage cans and thrown-away furniture.
Time for him is a withering experience.
He spends most of it in his 5-by-8-foot room, in the basement of an apartment house in Brooklyn that has five other spaces just like his, on a block where dozens of men and women and even children live in exactly the same way.
Untold Fire and Health Hazards
They are part of a population of immigrants in New York who exist literally beneath the boards, invisible to the city that once beckoned them so promisingly.
They carry on their lives in rooms -- really cubicles -- illegally carved out of the basements of private homes and apartment houses, presenting untold fire and health hazards and subtly altering the personality and quality of life in dozens of neighborhoods throughout the city.


Keep the Personal Touch
To the Editor:
"Computer Keiretsu: Japanese Idea, U.S. Style"(Viewpoints, Feb. 6) sketched a vision of American companies linked by software that eases information sharing.
But computer systems cannot substitute for human systems.
Before an electronic keiretsu can create seamless operations, some vital organizational and cultural issues must be addressed.


CHINA REJECTS CALL FROM CHRISTOPHER FOR RIGHTS GAINS
Chinese officials today flatly rejected Secretary of State Warren Christopher's demand that Beijing improve its human rights performance and warned that stripping China of its trade privileges would backfire.
In a day punctuated by harsh and often acrimonious exchanges, the Chinese also accused the United States of breaking Chinese law by meeting secretly with a leading dissident last month.


Techno Wars: A House Divided Over Beats
ONLY A FEW YEARS AGO, IT WAS easy to define techno as a fast-paced dance music based on electronic textures.
It was easy to say where one would hear techno: at raves, where the music combined with psychedelic lights and strobes to induce the ultimate trance-dance experience.
But today, techno means atmospheric chill-out music designed for home listening as often as it does party music.
There are even techno clubs where people sip tea rather than take Ecstacy and lull about on mattresses rather than leaping about on the dance floor.
Rave music has spread from Britain and Europe -- where it is still the dominant strand of pop culture -- to Japan, Australia and America, albeit as an underground phenomenon.
Yet when a pop movement reaches such global proportions, it tends to split apart.
Just as is happening in rap, techno is splintering into a profusion of subgenres.
But if there's a basic schism, it's between "progressives" who want techno to evolve from a style geared to 12-inch singles into an album-based art form and "hard-core" fundamentalists who admire the music's origin as the soundtrack to nonstop ecstatic dancing.


Accomplice to a Clotheshorse
For 26 years, Elvira Nasta worked as a fitter in the alterations department at Bergdorf Goodman, and for 11 of those years she adjusted the clothes I bought.
Elvira saw me on my fat days and on my thin days; she got to know my figure's idiosyncrasies, its deviations from fashion's standard sizes, and she passed no judgments, except in those rare instances when she would mutter something about designers being nuts if they thought women came in the shape of the dress I had on.
We talked a lot, mostly about food, men and getting older, and we laughed often.
I regarded her as my collaborator.
A graduate of the Central High School of Needle Trades, the daughter of an Italian immigrant who designed embroidery, Elvira fixed top-of-the-line mistakes on more than one occasion.
When the pattern maker's execution fell short of the designer's intention, she made up the difference.
Strapless bodices were boned so that they wouldn't bunch.
Hems were weighted to make jackets hang straight.
Elvira knew the best designers' clothes from the inside out, and I respected her favorites -- Trigere, Armani, Givenchy -- though I seldom, if ever, bought what they made.
She thought the clothes I did buy were fine, as long as she didn't have to wear them.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Two 'Rings,' Other Golden Notes
AFTER a late run of early-autumn festivals, the musical season in Europe settles into its regular rounds.
By midspring, however, just as the leaves are budding and flowers poking their heads above ground, festivals reappear.
Communities large and small hope to attract tourists, and since Europe is a cultured place, what better lure than the arts?
By late spring, festivals are in full bloom, and quite naturally the highlights of the musical calendar tend to coincide with them.
Salzburg, that picture-perfect Austrian Alpine city, is best known for its venerable summer festival of music and theater in late July and August, when the mountain meadows are lush and green and the temperatures downright balmy.
But in 1967, the conductor Herbert von Karajan started a Salzburg Easter Festival, which turned out to be an Alpine foothold for the Berlin Philharmonic (the Vienna Philharmonic has traditionally been the principal orchestra at the summer festival).
Claudio Abbado, the new principal conductor of the Berlin orchestra, is now also the mainstay of the Easter event.


Ex-Lions Cornerback Signs With Broncos
Cornerback RAY CROCKETT has left the Detroit Lions and signed a four-year, $6.4 million contract with the Denver Broncos.
The Broncos are hoping the 5-foot-9-inch, 181-pounder will improve a pass defense that ranked 27th last year among the National Football League's 28 teams.
Crockett, a fourth-round draft pick from Baylor, led the National Football Conference in interceptions in 1991 with six. (AP)


On His Feet, Chasing a Dream
The black baseball cap with "SOX" stitched into the front, explained Doc Rivers, represented a small tribute to Michael Jordan.
Rivers's personal protest to the Sports Illustrated cover telling Jordan to give it up.
His show of support for a man in pursuit of what is, at best, the implausible dream.
"You know what I don't buy about the way people are reacting to Michael?" Rivers said.
"All this Ted Williams stuff, you know, how he's demeaning their game. Whose game? It's not their game. It's no one's game.


UP AND COMING: Robert Stanton; An Actor Speaks: 'Squeegee, Police'
IF YOU HAD CALLED ROBERT Stanton's answering machine a few months ago, this is what you would have heard: "Bell jar! Ett da sonorous drone, police state de klink, die nombri epp die bee's nest, epp songjuan barf hell tsouris potable."
The lanky actor was just rehearsing for "All in the Timing," six skitlike one-act comedies by David Ives, directed by Jason McConnell Buzas, and now at the John Houseman Theater.
In one, "The Universal Language," Mr.
Stanton slaps on heavy black glasses and an academic robe and becomes the one and only professor of Unamunda.
This is a strange language in which "Harvard U" is "how are you," "loop" is "not" and "squeegee" is "excuse me," not the polysyllabic Wall Street lingo Mr.
Stanton adopted for the film "Bob Roberts" or the American plainsong he used as the father in "Dennis the Menace."


Pamela Chasek, Langston James Goree
If you ask Pamela Chasek and Langston James Goree when they met, they'll give you two dates: one for when they met electronically and another for when they met physically.
They first encountered each other in September 1990, on the Internet, the global computer network.
Ms.
Chasek, now 32, was living in Washington and working on a Ph.D. in international politics at Johns Hopkins University.
Mr.
Goree, now 40 and an environmentalist who is so proficient with computers that friends call him a "techno-lord," was living in the Amazon rain forest in Brazil.


Whatevergate; The Mysterious Chemistry That Turns Whiff to Stench
AFTER lingering in a vaporous state for two years, the Whitewater case seemed to begin crystallizing last week.
One indication was the words on the front page: shredding, special prosecutor, subpoenas, grand jury, cover-up, immunity, Congressional hearings.
Another was the images on television: President Clinton parrying razor-edged questions from reporters about his and his wife's conduct; officials leaving the Federal Courthouse with their lawyers and climbing into government sedans to be driven back to the White House.


On Reducing Employees' Trips
This is in response to a letter to the New Jersey editor on Feb. 20, regarding the article "New Rules Nudging Companies to Reduce Employee Commuting."
The letter states that drivers who "putt along in line" (drive at 55 m.p.h.) will cause accidents by crossing from the High Occupancy Vehicle (H.O.V.) lane through lanes of speeders to an exit lane, and, further, that increasing the speed limit to 65 m.p.h. would improve traffic flow, fuel economy and safety.


A la Russe


A Winter of Disaster Leaves the Bills to Prove It
It wasn't a hurricane or an earthquake, but the winter of 1993-94, which is now entering its final full calendar week, has become a disaster of its own sort, leaving a trail of damage, hardship and bitter memories whose effects will be felt for years in the eastern half of the United States.
Spread over three months, the winter has ebbed and flowed, striking with fury one day, only to give way to days of sunshine.
Seemingly relentless, the series of 16 snow and ice storms that have battered the East and Southeast are an unconventional disaster, but one that nonetheless ranks among the worst to have hit the country in recent years.


Declan Haun; Photojournalist, 56
Declan Haun, a photojournalist in Washington whose coverage of the civil rights movement in the 1960's gained national attention, died on Monday at the Hospice of Washington.
He was 56.
The cause was throat cancer, said his son Werner.


BEST SELLERS: March 13, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
2
2
8
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
3
3
83
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
4
4
19
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
5
6
48
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
6
15
2
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
7
5
5
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an accident, creates familial tension.
8
7
7
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple.
9
8
3
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths investigate a series of catastrophes.
10
9
3
SAREK, by A.C.
Crispin. (Pocket, $22.) The life of Spock's father, an illustrious "Star Trek" ambassador.
11
13
3
RAMA REVEALED, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $22.95.) The concluding volume in a series about the voyage of a starship.
12
10
8
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
13*
1
ROGUE WARRIOR II: Red Cell, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) An attempt to stop nuclear materials from reaching North Korea.
14
11
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
15
14
7
HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) American servicemen on a sabotage mission in 1942.
16*
11
3
MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) Archy McNally searches for a thief.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
44
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
12
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
3
9
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
4
4
23
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
5
9
4
A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.
6
6
29
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
7
10
15
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
8
5
27
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
9
1
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga., discloses the alliances and hostilities that thrive there.
10*
13
2
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician reflects on "life's final chapter."
11
7
3
LEAVING HOME, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $22.95.) From a childhood in foster homes to a column for The International Herald Tribune: the humorist's memoir.
12*
31
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
13
8
3
ANN-MARGRET: My Story, by Ann-Margret with Todd Gold. (Putnam, $23.95.) The autobiography of the Swedish-born, Illinois-bred actress and entertainer.
14
82
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
15
12
2
MY LIVES, by Roseanne Arnold. (Ballantine, $23.) The television personality discusses her professional life and private affairs.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
8
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
2
2
42
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
3
20
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
4
4
33
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 26, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE CORRESPONDENCE OF SIGMUND FREUD AND SANDOR FERENCZI: Volume 1, 1908-1914, edited by Eva Brabant, Ernst Falzeder and Patrizia Giampieri-Deutsch under the supervision of Andre Haynal. (Belknap/Harvard University, $39.95.) These letters between the commanding Freud and an influential, mercurial disciple promise a major contribution to the exploration of psychoanalysis in the making.
DARKTOWN STRUTTERS, by Wesley Brown. (Cane Hill, paper, $11.95.) A vivid, disturbing historical novel that makes freewheeling use of the facts to focus on the personal identities of blacks and whites in 19th-century America.
KNIGHT'S CROSS: A Life of Field Marshal Erwin Rommel, by David Fraser. (HarperCollins, $30.) A thoughtful, most readable life of a remarkable soldier, by a senior British general.
THE LANGUAGE INSTINCT, by Steven Pinker. (Morrow, $23.) A lucid guide for lay people to current Chomskyan linguistics and its central thesis: we are born programmed for language, with all the grammar we need right in our heads.
THE LATE SHIFT: Letterman, Leno, and the Network Battle for the Night, by Bill Carter. (Hyperion, $24.95.) It wasn't as easy as offering Mr.
Letterman $1 zillion, as this detailed, gripping account by a Times reporter shows.
LIBERTY AND SEXUALITY: The Right to Privacy and the Making of Roe v.
Wade, by David J. Garrow. (Lisa Drew/Macmillan, $28.) A monumental account of the change in attitudes that culminated in the 1973 Supreme Court decision making abortion a constitutional right.
THE MAKING OF MEMORY: From Molecules to Mind, by Steven Rose. (Anchor/Doubleday, paper, $12.95.) A neurobiologist seeks to unite chemistry and consciousness, supporting his argument with experimental results.
MILLROY THE MAGICIAN, by Paul Theroux. (Random House, $24.) Mr.
Theroux's 20th work of fiction is a dark satire of our national obsession with trim bodies and religious television, embodied in a single eccentric prestidigitator.
ON THE REAL SIDE: Laughing, Lying, and Signifying -- The Underground Tradition of African-American Humor That Transformed American Culture, From Slavery to Richard Pryor, by Mel Watkins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) The creative dealings of black folk with the paradox of life in a land professing equality; by a former editor at the Times Book Review.
PARALLEL TIME: Growing Up in Black and White, by Brent Staples. (Pantheon, $23.) This memoir by an editorial writer for The New York Times is a vivid portrait of the worldly education of a young black man who made it, haunted by the specter of a brother murdered at 22.
TEN TALES TALL &amp; TRUE, by Alasdair Gray. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) Stories of zany boldness, by a weirdly talented multimedia artist, that dramatize symbioses of oppression between willing victims and victimizers.


Sacrificing a Coat for Education


Whose Liver Is It Anyway?
Most of the time at Sandra Smith-Gill's laboratory at the National Cancer Institute, it's the same old same old, working away on immune systems and how they recognize different molecules.
But, as it happens, she works with bird proteins, in particular lysozymes.
And that's how the work on pate de foie gras came her way.
Naturally it was the French who brought it to her.
It seems that duck and turkey liver were sneaking into the revered foie gras (liver from specially fattened geese).
How to tell the difference?


Connecticut Dark Horse Takes On His Own Party
Mayor Joseph P. Ganim of Bridgeport, at age 34, is the youngest and perhaps the least known of the pack of Democrats running for governor of Connecticut this year.
But he is using his dark-horse status to real advantage -- or at least real publicity -- by picking a fight with his own party chairman, Edward L. Marcus.
Mr.
Marcus wants the party to close ranks around a front-runner as early as possible, perhaps even before this summer's convention, perhaps as early as May, when convention delegates are selected.
In all likelihood, that would exclude Mr.
Ganim from consideration.
Apparently convinced that he had little to lose and much to gain from noisily challenging that position, Mr.
Ganim dived in.


A Decade of Disillusionment in Grenada
NEARLY a decade before the United States began grappling indecisively with what peacekeeping or peacemaking roles it might undertake in the post-cold war world, there was Grenada.
Small and close to home, Grenada was not Somalia or Bosnia.
People were not starving or being shelled.
But there was political turmoil.
An authoritarian and unelected leftist government under Prime Minister Maurice Bishop, who was respected by Grenadans but demonized by the Reagan Administration, was under attack from more radical hard-liners within its own camp backed by the Cubans and Russians.


A One-Man Play With 38 Characters
IF ever an actor acted as though his life depended on it (because it did), he's Guy de Bonheur.
Consider the scenario.
Time: 1943.


The Executive Computer; Will New Power Macintosh Put Apple Back on Top?
APPLE COMPUTER will introduce the Power Macintosh tomorrow, and Mac lovers everywhere can breathe easy.
Apple appears to have pulled off the most important product transition in its history without crashing.
Nothing in Apple's history has made this a sure thing.
The faithful could look back through the years at the debuts of the Newton, Lisa and Apple III, and find much to worry about.
Even the introduction of the original Macintosh in January 1984 was less than an unqualified success: Apple rolled out a slow machine at a high price with little software and no compatibility with its core product at the time, the Apple II.


Just What Did Leni Riefenstahl's Lens See?
ONE OF THE MORE remarkable anecdotes in the recent autobiography by Leni Reifenstahl, who is also the subject of the new documentary "The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl," is her account of being summoned to see Benito Mussolini in 1936.
She remembers being asked by him to give Adolf Hitler a crucial message.
"You can tell the Fuhrer that whatever happens with Austria I will not interfere in Austria's internal affairs," Mussolini reportedly told his then-celebrated visitor, who relayed those words to Hitler as soon as she returned home.
That exchange, she acknowledges, paved the way for Germany's later unimpeded annexation of Austria.
But in Ms.
Riefenstahl's telling of this story, she also emphasizes Mussolini's admiration for her film-making talents, which she says was as ardent as Hitler's.
And she describes a subsequent invitation from Hermann Goring; he asked her to his apartment for tea to try to find out what was on Il Duce's mind.
A few pages earlier, Ms.
Riefenstahl writes in detail about a privileged visit to Hitler's private quarters.
"Hitler wore plain clothes and seemed totally at ease," she begins, setting the scene.


School Bridges Cultural Gaps
For years, Irish, Italian and Jewish residents dominated the mix of single-family, wood-frame homes, brick high rises and mom-and-pop stores of Castle Hill.
But in the last decade, as they began to move out, younger immigrants -- most of whom do not speak English -- have replaced them, posing tough new challenges for the schools.
Now school officials hope that a pilot program at Castle Hill Middle School, one that focuses on international studies, will provide some answers to the problem of teaching a student body that is more and more diverse.
If the program works, it may be extended to six other schools in Queens, the city's most ethnically diverse borough.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
A Pharmacy Dedicated To People With H.I.V.
The city's first pharmacy specifically for people who are H.I.V.-positive or have AIDS will open next week at 197 Eighth Avenue at 20th Street.


Ms. Gliedman, Mr. Shapiro
Lesley-Anne Gliedman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Gliedman of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Eytan Shapiro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Isadore Shapiro of London.
Rabbi Arnold Turetsky performed the ceremony at the University Club in New York.
Ms.
Gliedman, who is keeping her name, is a consultant with Winebow, a wine wholesaler in New York, and a wine educator.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father, an orthodontist in New Rochelle, N.Y., is a clinical professor of orthodontics at Columbia University.
Her mother, Carole Y. Gliedman, is the managing director of I. Freeman &amp; Son, an antique-silver firm in New York that was founded by the bride's grandfather Maurice Freeman.


David K. Blume, Nancy C. Braverman
Nancy Claire Braverman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Julius Braverman of Montvale, N.J., is to be married today to David Keith Blume, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Blume of Lake Grove, L.I.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel will perform the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Mrs.
Blume, 26, is an associate at Hughes Hubbard &amp; Reed, a law firm in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and from which she also received her law degree.
Her father is a dentist in Montvale.
Her mother, known professionally as Dr.
Dorothy Block, is a clinical psychologist in Montvale.


The Price Is Rising, but Croll Isn't Selling
Jimmy Croll Jr. said he was offered $1.5 million for Holy Bull, the 3-year-old colt he owns and trains, before the Fountain of Youth Stakes at Gulfstream Park on Feb. 19.
Croll turned it down without a second thought.


No Headline
"China will never accept the U.S. human rights concept. History has already proven that it is futile to apply pressure on China." LI PENG, the Chinese Premier.  [ 1:6. ]


MANHATTAN UPDATE
*
UNION SQUARE: The Transit Authority has rejected a central element of designs for the renovation of the Union Square subway station, despite strong community support for the plans, an agency spokesman said on Friday.
Although the plan had already been approved, the spokesman, Jared Lebow, said that officials now had "strong reservations" about the cost and safety of an open, glass-roofed pavilion, which was to have been installed at the southeast corner of Union Square.
The pavilion, part of the $63.3 million station renovation, would have included an information booth, elevator and escalators.


Finding the Right Plant for the Right Place
FOR many, this has been a winter of discontent.
Thoughts are turning toward the closed toolshed door, the any-minute-now warmth of spring and getting the garden in order.
One common approach in this season is to wait for a fine sunny day and head off to the local nursery or well-stocked garden center, or both.
There, the plants desired can be selected.
If a particular plant can't be found, substitutes might be made.
Or rather than select one of a certain plant, maybe three or four would do.
There is no reason to plan ahead, everything can be completed in a day's journey.


Midtown East: Lunch on a Budget
AL BUSTAN #  (212) 759-5933; 827 Third Avenue, near 51st Street; $; all major credit cards
This cheerful Lebanese restaurant is popular for its fresh, lively fare at budget prices.
The table is set in Lebanese tradition with a head of Romaine lettuce, olives, pickled turnips and other condiments.
Enticing appetizers include baba gannouj, the eggplant puree with sesame cream; fatayer, phyllo dough stuffed with lemony spinach; arayess, tasty toasted pita bread triangles filled with either minced lamb or Lebanese cheese; and hummus, the chickpea puree.
Hummus is served two ways, plain or enriched with lemon juice, sesame cream and delicious bits of highly seasoned lamb and pine nuts.
Recommended main courses include kafta khashkhash, succulent minced lamb with onions, garlic and parsley with a tomato-based sauce; and the mixed grill of chicken, lamb chops and sausage.
Al Bustan serves a $16.95 prix-fixe menu at lunch in addition to the regular menu. (Diner's Journal: 1/31/92)


French Charm
LE PISTOU


Travel Industry Prepares For a Rush to Vietnam
WITH the end of United States trade sanctions against Vietnam, the number of Americans traveling there is likely to increase markedly, whether they are motivated by business opportunity, family ties, historical interest or the imponderable attraction of old soldiers to battlefields they cannot forget.
Although it will take months for all the arrangements to fall into place, the travel industry is already planning for the rush.
United Airlines and Northwest Airlines have applied for permission to fly from American cities to Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.
United would fly from Los Angeles, Northwest from Detroit via Tokyo.
Continental and Delta are also considering providing service.


Chivalry Is Not Dead
THE KNIGHTS OF MALTA By H. J. A. Sire.
Illustrated. 305 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $45.


Troubled Past For Man Held In Girl's Death
The 19-year-old Manalapan, N.J., student accused of killing the 6-year-old daughter of friends of his parents molested three young children in June 1991 while he was a juvenile, a New Jersey judge said yesterday.
After pleading guilty to three counts of aggravated sexual assault in Family Court in Monmouth County, the youth, Kevin Aquino, was sentenced in December 1991 to one year of probation and one year of psychiatric therapy consisting of two hours of counseling a week, said Lawrence Lawson, the Chief Judge of Monmouth County.


Accord Will Allow U.S. Cellular Phones in Japan
Clearing away one of several trade disputes that have roiled relations between the United States and Japan in the last month, President Clinton today announced a detailed agreement to expand American access to the Japanese cellular telephone market.
The agreement calls for one of Japan's main providers of cellular telephone service to invest in additional equipment that would make it easier for people there to use cellular telephones manufactured by Motorola Inc.


Simon's 'Jake's Women' Is Not Comedy Material
WHEN Neil Simon's name is attached to a play's title, it usually means that the work is a sure-fire big seller at Long Island theaters.
Whether or not the popular support is always justified is the question of the moment at the Island premiere of Mr.
Simon's "Jake's Women," at the Arena Players Repertory Theater through next Sunday.
The comedy, which starred Alan Alda when it opened on Broadway a couple of years ago, is about a successful writer's effort to come to grips with the death of his beloved first wife so that he can get on with his second marriage.
If that does not sound like comic material, it is because it is not funny.


U.S. Issues Warning On Travel in Rwanda
The State Department has issued a warning urging United States citizens to defer all travel to the central African country of Rwanda.
The warning, issued on Feb. 23, refers to recent ethnic and political violence -- including the assassination last month of two Rwandan political leaders -- which has resulted in "house burnings, barricades and stoning of vehicles in Kigali, as well as in other areas of the country." Kigali, the capital of Rwanda, is about 50 miles from the Parc National des Volcans, home to the endangered mountain gorilla.
For a copy of this and other travel warnings and consular information sheets, call (202) 647-5225; for information by fax, dial (202) 647-3000 from a fax machine.


Holy Bull and His Fans Breathe Easy in Florida Derby
Well, Holy Bull didn't stop running in the stretch this time.
Instead, three weeks after he quit breathing and quit running in the Fountain of Youth Stakes, the big gray colt led every step of the way to win the $500,000 Florida Derby by nearly six lengths and restored his rank as the East's leading candidate for the Kentucky Derby.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on Feb. 20, about smoking rules, referred incorrectly to Air Canada's routes.
The airline serves the Caribbean, Europe and Asia; it is not limited to the United States and Canada.


Newman Provides A Cushion On Bench
A day after Johnny Newman proved how tough a defensive player he can be by shutting out Indiana's Reggie Miller in the fourth quarter, he proved tonight how unstoppable he can be himself with a game-high 21 points in the Nets 117-92 victory over his former Charlotte Hornets teammates.
"Johnny Newman is giving us a lift off the bench and playing some very crucial minutes," said Nets Coach Chuck Daly, who was happy to have his team three games over .500 at 32-29.
"It's a nice cushion to have for a three-game trip to the Far West."


Corrections
An article on Feb. 27 about the Kennedy family's activities in Ireland included an erroneous name among the Irish-American politicians known in Dublin as the "Four Horsemen." In addition to Senators Edward M. Kennedy and Daniel Patrick Moynihan and the late Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the group included Hugh L. Carey, the former Governor of New York, not Representative Thomas S. Foley of Washington, the current Speaker.


O'Keeffe Painting Of Radiator Building
To the Editor:
One noteworthy addition to your glowing Streetscapes profile of the American Radiator Building ("A 1924 Precursor of Art Deco," Feb. 20) is an acknowledgment that this New York City landmark has been immortalized by one of America's finest painters.
In 1927, three years after the building opened, Georgia O'Keeffe painted "Radiator Building -- Night, New York," one of a series of New York cityscapes.
In the painting O'Keeffe depicts a nocturnal view of the dark tower brightly lit by the floodlighting that made the building such a popular spectacle in its heyday.


Revel With A Cause
Diffa benefits from an auction; Manhattan Opera House, Feb. 26.


Fraud Charged In Senate Race In Pennsylvania
In the latest twist in Philadelphia's disputed State Senate election, the State Attorney General announced today that the Democratic candidate has been charged with three counts of election fraud, including one allegation that he personally opened and counted absentee ballots in his polling place.
The charges are misdemeanors.
The Attorney General, Ernest D. Preate Jr., said that the Democrat, William G. Stinson, could be fined up to $1,000, imprisoned for up to a year, forbidden to vote for four years and permanently barred from holding any elected or appointed public office if convicted of any of the three counts of fraud.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
EARTHLY POWERS By Anthony Burgess.
Carroll &amp; Graf, $15.95.
The narrator of this novel, Kenneth Marchal Toomey, is an elderly author, Roman Catholic and homosexual, who has lived long enough to witness most of the disasters of the 20th century.
In contemplating his life he also meditates on God and creation, and on just how much man can do to justify his existence in a world in which divine purpose remains mysterious.
This book is "spacious and intricate in design, wonderfully sustained in its execution," Martin Amis said here in 1980.
METAPHYSICS AS A GUIDE TO MORALS By Iris Murdoch.
Penguin, $15.
The author has made her reputation as a philosopher as much as a novelist.
Here, she discusses the meaning of "Good" in the modern world, in which literal interpretations of religion have lost much of their power but the themes and images of faith are still important in defining a moral life.
Last year our reviewer, Alasdair MacIntyre, said, "This book is a salutary and needed reminder of the intellectual and moral power of the Murdoch version of Platonism." He concluded, "Iris Murdoch has once again put us all in her debt."


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  The boys of Company 176 spend a lot of time waiting, and cooking and polishing.
Sometimes they also put out fires.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Amid the silent relics of Brooklyn's waterfront glory, there's business, and hope, in America's chocoholic habit.


Businesses Press Lawmakers on Overhaul of Education
The delicate consensus that supports public education is being tested in the Legislative Office Building's hearing rooms as advocates of an ambitious plan to overhaul the schools try to push it to the top of the General Assembly's agenda.
Strongly endorsed by Connecticut's business leaders, the plan takes its lead from President Bush's America 2000 initiative, which called on states to set "world class" standards for their schools to prepare students to compete in a global economy.


Answered Prayer
To the Editor:
In response to E. L. Doctorow's call for a group biography of the Beecher clan in his review of Joan D. Hedrick's "Harriet Beecher Stowe" (Feb. 13), I am glad to report that Milton Rugoff has done a splendid work entitled "The Beechers: An American Family in the Nineteenth Century" (1981).
HENRY ELKINS  Bronxville, N.Y.


THE GOOD SON
I was puzzled that so much attention was given, in Richard L. Berke's article "The Good Son" (Feb. 20), to whether Al Gore has what it takes to become President.
What's significant to me is his commitment to placing important issues on the public agenda.


IN SHORT: FICTION
TALE OF INJUSTICE  ITSUKA  By Joy Kogawa. Anchor, paper, $9.


Can the Operatic Britten Escape The Long Shadow of His 'Grimes'?
WHEN BENJAMIN Britten's "Peter Grimes" descended on the musical world in 1945, it seemed miraculous, heaven-sent, an answer to all prayers.
Had the spirit of Verdi come back to life, after smoldering for several decades in the subconscious of Strauss and Berg?
Such are the dangers of vastly exceeding all expectations.
No subsequent Britten opera quite matched the fearless dramatic assurance of "Grimes," and a degree of disappointment set in.
It became a commonplace to say that England's boy wonder never fulfilled his early promise.
Recordings tell the tale of Britten's reputation.
The composer directed all but two of his operas for London, and then an ominous silence fell.
The only conductor to enter the field was Colin Davis, directing "Peter Grimes" and "The Turn of the Screw" for Philips.
Then, in 1987, Virgin Classics issued the wonderful W. H. Auden operetta "Paul Bunyan," and in the last year three new efforts have arrived: a "Grimes" on EMI, a "Midsummer Night's Dream" on Virgin Classics and a first recording of "Gloriana" on Argo, filling the last major gap in the Britten catalogue.


Freaked on Clout
Following a cease-fire in Sarajevo, an Associated Press photographer captured a happy sight: "Bosnian children could return to being children," read the caption in The New York Times, "hitching a slippery ride behind a United Nations armored vehicle."
Hitching a ride?
To most of us, that means "thumbing a ride," asking a driver to pick you up.
The action of the Bosnian children in the snow required a reach into dialect.
Earlier that week, Beth Wagner of the A.P. reported from Philadelphia about the same dangerous but frequently engaged-in pastime: "It's called hopping cars in Philadelphia, bumper-hitching or shagging in Detroit, skitching along the Eastern Seaboard. In northern Indiana it's hooky-bobbing."


Shameful Judging
To the Sports Editor:
Brava to Lisa Luciano for telling the shameful story of figure skating judging at the Olympics.
Nancy Kerrigan recovered from a vicious physical assault, kept calm in a news-media storm and came back to skate better than ever.
It took the judges to deck her and deny her the gold medal she deserved.
MICKEY FRIEDMAN  New York


BENEFITS
Chinese Dance  TODAY -- The Chinese Folk Dance Company of New York, with its fans, flashing swords, swirling silks and bright costumes, will hold a benefit performance at 2 P.M. at the Arts Connection, 120 West 46th Street.
After the performance, which is for children 5 years and older, refreshments will be served.
Tickets, $35 for adults, $25 for children 5 to 12, at the door.
Helping Ill Children  MONDAY -- The Starlight Foundation of New York, which seeks to comfort seriously ill children and their families by granting youngsters' wishes and entertaining in hospital pediatric wards, is holding a black-tie dinner-dance with entertainment at the Marriot Marquis Hotel.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 354-2878.
For African Women  MONDAY -- A reception, auction of design works and clothing and a performance by Batoto Yetu, an African children's dance group, will be held at Christie's East.
The event, from 6 to 10 P.M., will benefit Maendeleo ya Wanawake, the official women's group of the ruling Kenyan African National Union, in its campaign to halt female genital mutilation.
Tickets, $50, from (201) 744-4482, or $75 at the door.
Auction for Nursing Students  TUESDAY -- The student scholarship fund of the Columbia University School of Nursing will benefit from the Ultimate Health-Care Auction at Christie's East, 219 East 67th Street.
Visits to a health-care spa in the Berkshires and sessions with a private trainer are among the health experiences to be auctioned at a cocktail reception from 7:30 to 9:30 P.M.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 879-5317.
Preventing Blindness  TUESDAY -- The 86-year-old National Society to Prevent Blindness will hold its annual Celebrate Your Sight Night at Tavern on the Green.
Cocktails and a buffet start at 7.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 980-2020.
Cocktails at '21'  TUESDAY -- The Associates Division of the Jewish Guild for the Blind will hold a fund-raising party at "21" for the guild's programs to help the blind or visually impaired lead independent lives.
From 6:30 to 9:30 P.M., there will be an open bar, hors d'oeuvres and music.
Tickets, $85 from (212) 769-6239, or $100 at the door.
The Arts for Young People  TUESDAY -- The Billy Taylor Trio will perform at a benefit for Young Audiences-New York, which introduces musical and other artistic programs to school audiences.
A buffet at 6 P.M. opens the evening at the New York Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street.
Tickets, $75, at the door.
Information: (212) 319-9269.
For Children and Parents  TUESDAY -- Whimsical characters in costumes and other entertainers will swarm through F.A.O.
Schwarz on Fifth Avenue at 58th Street at a benefit party for the renovation of the pediatric playroom at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
From 7 to 9 P.M., children and parents will be entertained in the world of make-believe.
Tickets, $40 for children 12 and under, $80 for others, from (212) 639-7972.
Surviving Cancer  TUESDAY -- The National Alliance of Breast Cancer Organizations will pay tribute to survivors of the disease at a lunch at the Plaza.
Cocktails at noon will be followed at 12:45 by lunch and the program.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 921-9070.
For Arts and Public TV  WEDNESDAY -- The National Arts Club and WLIW-TV, Channel 21, a public television station, will benefit jointly from a black-tie evening at the club, 15 Gramercy Park South.
Cocktails at 5:30 will be followed by a panel discussion on arts in education, which will include the mystery writer Mary Higgins Clark, the artist Larry Rivers and Schuyler Chapin, Commissioner of New York City's Department of Cultural Affairs.
An awards presentation and dinner follow.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 475-3424.
Interfaith Concern for AIDS  WEDNESDAY -- AIDS Interfaith New York, a multifaith pastoral care network for people with AIDS, will benefit from a St.
Patrick's Day dinner from 5 to 9:30 P.M. at the Five Oaks restaurant, 49 Grove Street at Bleecker Street in Manhattan.
Tickets, $45, from (212) 255-6731.
Help for Mother Nature  WEDNESDAY -- Peter Matthiessen, the author and naturalist, will be honored at a benefit for the Rainforest Alliance in the Terrace Room of the Plaza.
George Plimpton will be the master of ceremonies.
Cocktails at 7, dinner at 8 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 921-9070.
Funds for Cancer Research  WEDNESDAY -- The Young Women's Committee of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine will hold its annual spring benefit at Rouge, 131 East 54th Street, to raise funds for cancer research.
Cocktails and hors d'oeuvres will be served from 8 to 11 P.M.
The Knick City Dancers will perform.
Tickets, $95, at the door.
Information: (718) 430-4242.
Harlem Dance Anniversary  THURSDAY -- The Dance Theater of Harlem will hold its 25th-anniversary benefit at the New York State Theater.
The 7:30 P.M. performance will be followed by a black-tie dinner and dance on the Promenade.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 598-5674.
For the Military  THURSDAY -- The Soldiers', Sailors', and Airmen's Club, which has provided low-cost accommodations for the American military and its allies around the world since World War I, is holding a benefit at its New York headquarters, 283 Lexington Avenue near 36th Street.
There will be an open bar, hors d'oeuvres, a buffet and Irish music from 7 to 11 P.M.
Tickets, $50, or $35 for those 35 and younger, from (212) 683-4353.
Irish Fling for Charity  FRIDAY -- The annual New York St.
Patrick's Ball for Charity, which benefits several organizations, including hospitals in Harlem and Dublin, will be at the New York Hilton.
The black-tie evening starts with cocktails at 7:30, followed by dinner and entertainment by Niamh Kavanagh, an Irish singer.
Tickets, $150, from (718) 626-2265.
On Broadway for Off  FRIDAY -- The Manhattan Class Company, an Off Broadway theater group, will hold a fund-raising party at Sardi's, 234 West 44th Street, with cocktails and hors d'oeuvres from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M.
Guests will then walk to the Palace Theater, at Broadway and 47th Street, for an 8 o'clock preview performance of the musical "Beauty and the Beast." Tickets, $150, from (212) 727-7722.
Skating Fund-Raiser  SATURDAY -- The Children's Hope Foundation, a Manhattan group dedicated to helping children with AIDS, is holding an ice skating party from 5 to 8 P.M. at Sky Rink, 450 West 33d Street.
There will be an exhibition by top-level skaters, refreshments and skating for all.
Tickets, which include skate rentals, are $35 for adults, $15 for children 12 and under or $30 for groups of four or more, from (212) 941-7432.
New Group of Volunteers  SATURDAY -- A group of 40 men and women from 22 to 32 years of age have formed the New York Benevolence Council, whose goal is to raise money for charities.
Its first event will be an all-night affair starting at 9 at the Madison, 29 East 32d Street.
The dance party will raise funds for the City Kids Foundation, which promotes youth programs for city children.
Tickets, $45, at the door.
Information: (212) 758-3680.
Hadassah Benefit  MARCH 20 -- The Business and Professional Women of Hadassah, the largest women's Zionist organization in the United States, will hold an evening of gambling, dancing, music, prizes, raffles and an auction of dates with eligible men and women at the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza in Manhattan.
The evening starts at 7.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 765-7050, or $75 at the door.
Dining Out for 'God's Love'  MARCH 20 -- Sixty-five Manhattan restaurants will participate in a gastronomic benefit for God's Love We Deliver, which has provided some 750,000 meals to homebound people with AIDS over the last eight years.
The restaurants, including notable ones like the Four Seasons, will offer prix-fixe dinners for $25 to $200.
Some of the restaurants will donate all the proceeds from the dinners to the charity, while the others will donate all monies above cost.
Reservations from (212) 865-6500, extension 142.


Sports of The Times; Let's Watch Mets' Deeds, Not Words
IN the matter of what Nelson Doubleday may have said, I am taking my cue from Fred Wilpon, the eminently decent part owner of the New York Mets.
Fred Wilpon says he does not believe his partner Nelson Doubleday would ever use a term like "Jew boys" about several owners, as a forthcoming book contends in a relatively minor passage.
I have no idea whether Fred Wilpon really believes that.
I'm not sure I believe it myself.
But in the complicated grown-up world in which Fred Wilpon lives and works, there is room for a sophisticated maneuver of saying, let's cool it; there are more serious things to do.


Gaining Discipline and a Dream
IN a small gymnasium here, Police Officer Sal Corrente trains boxing champions -- 23 of them so far, the number of Golden Gloves champions he has taught since he began the Yonkers Police Athletic League boxing program 18 years ago.
Douglas Gray, a 140-pound 20-year-old from Yonkers, has won two championships during his five years in the program.
Mr.
Gray, who plans to become a professional boxer, worked out on the heavy bag one recent afternoon at the Alexander Street Gym.
"It is an excellent program," he said between punches.
"It keeps kids off the streets and in school. If not for the P.A.L., a lot of these young people would be in jail. Sal doesn't just teach boxing, he teaches morality and how to live and how to be responsible."


All There From the Start
To the Editor:
I am disappointed that in his otherwise sympathetic essay on the late Gorky paintings Michael Kimmelman chose to reiterate the canard of Gorky's early lack of originality and achievement  [ "Arshile Gorky: Late Years of a Tragic Figure," Feb. 6 ] .


Advertising Critics' Hidden Agenda
To the Editor:
Bruce Silverglade and his fellow anti-advertising crusaders may have a small "truth in advertising" problem of their own ("To Stop Sneaky Ads, Stir Up the F.T.C," Viewpoints, March 6).
Are they fighting deceptive and misleading ads?
Or do they simply want to do away with advertising they dislike for products they do not approve of by imposing their views on the marketplace?


Yoko Ono, Optimist-Pessimist, Writes a Musical
She is every woman's worst nightmare.
Her first two marriages ended in divorce.
Her second husband took their daughter from her custody in 1970 and she never saw her again.
Her third husband was shot and killed in front of her.
Her art was ridiculed for decades.
Her music was reviled while her husband's was celebrated.
She was also accused of single-handedly destroying the most popular music group of the century.
Her greatest achievement, it would seem, came from brainwashing that third husband into marrying her in the first place.
He was, in the end, a god.
She was, all along, the Devil.
It appears she is every man's worst nightmare, too.
Yoko Ono is 61 years old.
She still lives in the Dakota, where Mark David Chapman killed John Lennon on Dec. 8, 1980.
Their son, Sean, now 18, is a freshman at Columbia University.
Lennon would have been 54.


Airwaves' Delight
Imagine a personality every inch as provocative as Howard Stern (though maybe a foot shorter in body and hair and much longer on compassion and musical eclecticism).
Imagine Mr.
Stern's employer giving this person the same freedom -- and the same cramped studio -- to say and play anything he chooses for at least six hours every Sunday night.
Welcome to "Idiot's Delight," Vin Scelsa's nine-year-old program on WXRK-FM (92.3, "K-Rock").


Prosecutor Differs on Maier's Death
Ulrike Maier, the Austrian skiing star, did not hit a timing device when she was fatally injured during a downhill race Jan. 29 in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, a prosecutor said Friday.
The statement appeared to contradict television images of the crash, which seemed to show Maier plunging head-on into a timing device.
Maier broke her neck in the crash and died later in a nearby hospital.
The Munich prosecutor, RUDIGER HODL, said his investigation team had examined the videotape of the crash and other evidence and concluded that Maier did not die as a result of hitting the timing device.
But the prosecutor could not say what caused Maier's death.
"We have to wait for the final report of forensic experts," he said.
"We expect it within 14 days." (AP)


What the Counsel to the President Is and Isn't
To the Editor:
Your lead editorials March 4 ("White House Ethics Meltdown") and March 6 ("Repairing the White House Mess") criticized the ethics of Bernard W. Nussbaum, counsel to the President, and called for his dismissal.
I believe you were wrong.


For Michael Kidd, Real Life Is Where The Dance Begins
YOU DON'T HAVE TO BE AN expert to recall Michael Kidd's smashing, usually high-octane, choreography in "Seven Brides for Seven Brothers," "Guys and Dolls" and "The Band Wagon," among other films.
The dances Mr.
Kidd has created in Hollywood since the 1950's are quite simply unforgettable, and, aptly, he is the latest to be honored in the series "Capturing Choreography: Masters of Dance and Film."
The Film Society of Lincoln Center will screen clips from movies he has choreographed and directed in a tribute at the Walter Reade Theater on Tuesday (8 P.M.) and Wednesday (8:30 P.M.) Like earlier programs devoted to Herbert Ross and Jack Cole, the two evenings -- with Mr.
Kidd on hand -- will focus on a choreographer for musicals who started out in either ballet or modern dance.


POSTINGS: A 5-Story Building for SoHo; Capturing the Spirit Of the Cast-Iron Era
Down on the corner of Prince and Mercer Streets, a much-trafficked spot in the SoHo-Cast Iron Historic District, sits a parking lot that has long awaited a better use.
Now it is to get one.
The 26- by 101-foot lot is to be the site of a five-story office building, with retail on the street floor and art galleries above (this is, after all, SoHo).
The building itself, although sheathed in a contemporary metal skin, will be reminiscent of the cast-iron spirit of the neighborhood.


Chairs, Windows and Other Surprises by Wright
FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT LOVED A party -- especially if he was the focus.
So he would probably cheer the cavalcade of exhibitions, lectures, symposiums and films underway in Manhattan, an unprecedented celebration of his work that has been sparked by the landmark retrospective "Frank Lloyd Wright: Architect," at the Museum of Modern Art.
Complementing the museum's show of 500 items -- mostly drawings and photographs of Wright buildings -- are two smaller exhibitions: "The Decorative Arts of Frank Lloyd Wright at the Metropolitan Museum of Art," which remains through Sept. 4, and "The Art of Frank Lloyd Wright," at the Barry Friedman gallery on Madison Avenue, through May 7.
Both span the architect's career from the 1890's to the 1950's, and each includes unexpected surprises.


Lawyers Can Lead the Fight Against Harassment of Women
To the Editor:
Sexual harassment is one of the most insidious and serious problems in the workplace today.
Lawyers should take the lead in combating sexual harassment because adherence to the law by law firms must be the rule, not the exception.


EXIT THE CRITIC
As one who read Frank Rich religiously and disagreed with him as much as I agreed, I will sorely miss him.
And let's face it: Theaterphiles enjoyed -- often looked forward to -- using his reviews for timely cocktail/dinner party banter.
CHARLES C. REELY Alexandria, Va.


Amy Rosenkrantz, Daniel L. Cantor
Amy Rosenkrantz, a daughter of Stanley and Helene Rosenkrantz of Roslyn, L.I., was married last evening to Daniel Lucas Cantor, the son of Michael and Rosalie Cantor of Syosset, L.I.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Great Neck, L.I.
The bride, 29, graduated from the University of Michigan and received a law degree from Hofstra University.
She is a lawyer for the Petrie Stores Corporation, a women's retail clothing company in Secaucus, N.J.


For the Giants of Retail, the Rules of the Game
New York is one of the last frontiers for modern megastores, partly because of zoning restrictions dating back 20 years.
Now the Giuliani administration is wrestling with whether to lower those barriers to draw more of the giant stores to the city.
The barriers originated in a 1974 zoning law intended to curb the loss of hundreds of thousands of factory jobs.
That law bars stores larger than 10,000 square feet in manufacturing zones, to keep retail development from driving up real estate prices and factory overhead.


Manager's Profile
Jerome L. Dodson  Fund: Parnassus Fund, $116 million in assets.
Manager since inception in 1985. (Sponsor: Parnassus Financial Management, San Francisco).


Mutual Funds; Invoking a Muse to Explain Markets
FEW mutual fund shareholders are as privileged as those whose portfolio managers have a flair for words as well as investing.
Their fund reports can delight, calling upon history, politics, personal experience and humor to educate and inform their customers.
But just a handful of fund managers stand out for their light touch (interestingly, all run superior funds).
Among them, Ralph Wanger, who manages the Acorn Fund (up 18.7 percent a year, on average, over 10 years), is modest about his status as the industry's court jester.
He likens it to being "the best offensive tackle in a Catholic girl's school," an accomplishment for which there has been little competition.


Radio Show Offers Live Classical Music Live
To the Editor:
With reference to your March 6 article "Listen Up!" and Alex Ross's statement that the best regularly scheduled classical music program is National Public Radio's "Performance Today," I would like to put in a word for American Public Radio's "Saint Paul Sunday Morning," heard on WNYC on Sunday evenings.


Streetscapes/The 'Washington Irving' House; Why the Legend of Irving Place Is but a Myth
ONE may have faith that truth will triumph over deceit, and still believe that myth is stronger than both.
In the case of the famously misidentified "Washington Irving House" at the southwest corner of 17th Street and Irving Place, the Irving myth is tenacious.
But it is hard to see how the picturesque little house can survive.
Washington Irving was one of the pre-eminent cultural figures of early 19th century New York, author of "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" and "Rip Van Winkle" and influential in the creation of Central Park.
In the 1840's he began spending most of his time at Sunnyside, his country seat in Tarrytown, N.Y., where he died in 1859.


Givers Are Choosers: A New Food Voucher Plan
East Side Volunteers Against Crack, a nonprofit organization known as Evac, says it will start selling food vouchers on April 1 for distribution between Houston and 14th Streets, from First to Eighth Avenues.
The vouchers, to sell for 25 cents each, provide a way to give to beggars without fear that the money will be used for alcohol, illegal drugs or tobacco.
Supermarkets redeem the vouchers for food and other necessities, then are reimbursed by Evac, which is starting the program with a $3,000 grant.
Charles Dworkis, Evac's executive director, says he plans to enlist 10 stores.
The East 14th Street Superette, at Second Avenue, is the first to join the program.


THE WORLD: Teaching Tolerance in Israel; Today's Lesson: The Massacre in Hebron
ACROSS 30 years of teaching history and civics at the Beit Hinuch high school in Jerusalem, Yitzhak Komem has had no shortage of horrors to ponder with his students.
Arabs killed Jews, Jews killed Arabs, then they fought over who had more casualties, deeper wounds, greater grievances.
Now, for a teacher whose life's work has been a struggle to make this psychic desert bloom with tolerance, comes Hebron.


Irish Pizza Just for St. Patrick's Day
IRISH pizza for St.
Patrick's Day?
At Truffles, a much acclaimed restaurant in Sligo, Ireland, that is what customers will be eating this holiday.
The pizzas are topped with spinach and leeks, cabbage and Parma ham, or blood sausage with pears.
"We don't look up the old textbooks for Irish cooking anymore," said the chef and proprietor, Bernadette O'Shea.
"In the 70's in Ireland they began to revive the past. Then in the 80's they realized they had more to offer than that. Since then the face of Irish cooking has been significantly and permanently changed."


Finding the Right Plant for the Right Place
FOR many, this has been a winter of discontent.
Thoughts are turning toward the closed toolshed door, the any-minute-now warmth of spring and getting the garden in order.
One common approach in this season is to wait for a fine sunny day and head off to the local nursery or well-stocked garden center, or both.
There, the plants desired can be selected.
If a particular plant can't be found, substitutes might be made.
Or rather than select one of a certain plant, maybe three or four would do.
There is no reason to plan ahead, everything can be completed in a day's journey.


Corrections
A review on page 25 of the Times Book Review today, about "The House That Roone Built: The Inside Story of ABC News," by Marc Gunther, misattributes a quotation from the book.
It was not Roone Arledge, the president of ABC News, who said, "It's not arrogance. . . . I truly do regard it as God's gift to me . . . that I'm good at what I do"; it was Ted Koppel, the host of ABC's "Nightline."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 13, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
2
10
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
3
3
SAVING GRACE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) The romantic problems of a 13th-century English widow.
4
4
JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star Wars" saga.
5
3
THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran solve a mystery.
6
5
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A servant hopes to win an heiress's heart in Victorian-era Minnesota.
7
8
WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The families of law officers are besieged by violence in Los Angeles and Montana.
8
7
RUBY, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in New Orleans.
9
2
WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lucas Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in Wisconsin's cold woods.
10*
3
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The final volume in a series about a fantasy land.
11
11
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
12
7
PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of murders in a small California town vexes a temporary district attorney.
13
2
THE TEN THOUSAND, by Harold Coyle. (Pocket, $6.50.) American troops have to fight German forces after a mission in Ukraine.
14
1
THE THROAT, by Peter Straub. (Signet, $6.99.) The vicious attack on a woman in a small town leads to the reappraisal of past crimes.
15
56
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
9
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
540
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
56
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
4
9
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
5
1
CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture and murder.
6
126
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
41
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
8*
19
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
9*
26
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.
10
6
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day battle in Vietnam in 1965.
11*
140
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
12*
15
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
13*
15
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy.
14
7
A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine, $8.99.) Government waste.
15*
13
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
16*
17
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
17*
45
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
156
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
163
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
21
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Advice.
4
2
THE ERNST &amp; YOUNG TAX GUIDE 1994. (Wiley, $13.95.) Ways to cope with the I.R.S.
5*
1
MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $11.) How to teach children about spending.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 26, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Soprano Withdraws From a Performance
Aprile Millo has withdrawn from tonight's performance of "Caterina Cornaro" with the Opera Orchestra of New York because she is recovering from injuries received in an automobile accident in Turin, Italy, on Monday.
The soprano was on her way to the airport for a flight to New York when her taxi was struck by another car.
An orchestra spokeswoman said that Miss Millo was in New York and recovering, but could not perform.
Martile Rowland, who was the scheduled understudy, is to replace Miss Millo tonight at Carnegie Hall.
Information: (212) 799-1982 or (212) 247-7800.


Lemieux's Return Gives the Rangers a Reason to Worry
At this late stage of this Ranger joyride, some troubling questions must be creeping into the minds of their fans, including: What happens if Mario Lemieux's back stays healthy for the Pittsburgh Penguins in the Stanley Cup playoffs?
What if he teams up with Jaromir Jagr, his dynamic understudy, to frustrate and embarrass the Rangers, the way they did today, showing no respect for the team with the best record in the league?


It's Been a Hard Winter in Meteorology's Home Town
STATE COLLEGE, Pa., is to weather what Hollywood is to movies: the place for interpretive reality.
Accu-Weather Inc., which bills itself as the nation's largest private meteorological agency, has 65 forecasters grinding out predictions for television stations from Philadelphia to the Philippines.
Penn State University, which confers bachelor's, master's and doctorates in meteorology has a five-person weather communications group that prepares forecasts for newspapers and produces a 15-minute cable-television show.
And the National Weather Service, which has been far away in Harrisburg, is moving to town.


Fears of Kidnapping Spur Effort on Education
THE video begins benignly a small boy bounces a ball somewhat aimlessly down a suburban sidewalk, sunlight filtering through the trees that line the street.
The mood quickly shifts as a deep voice poses the question: "How do we protect our children from criminals?"
Soon the screen is covered with such headlines as "10-Year-Old Girl Abducted and Sexually Molested" and "11-Year-Old Girl Strangled." There ensues a scene of an anguished father holding a news conference and pleading for his son's safe return, which is followed by a headline of the child's fate: "Boy's Severed Head Found in Creek."


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Business inventories, Jan., pct. change
0.0
0.2
Tuesday
Producer prices, Feb., pct. change
0.2
0.3
Industrial production, Feb., pct. chg.
0.5
0.0
Capacity utilization, Feb., percent
83.1
82.9
Wednesday
Consumer prices, Feb., pct. change
0.0
0.3
Housing starts, Feb., millions, ann. rate
1.29
1.36
Housing permits, Feb., millions, ann. rate
1.36
1.38
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
346
340
This Week's Developments
Wednesday
2- and 5-year Treasury note auction announcement
Thursday
Philadelphia Fed survey on business outlook
Bundesbank council meeting


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Dr. Henry A. Coleman; Helping Government Run Efficiently
IN one way or another, all of New Jersey's 567 municipalities, 21 counties and the state government itself have been touched -- probably for the better -- by the Center for Government Services at Rutgers University.
It is one of the few departments at the state university that combine teaching, research, continuing education, technical assistance and public service -- all aimed at making local government units operate more professionally and more efficiently.


A Nuclear Deal for North Korea
International inspectors are now scouring North Korea's nuclear sites for signs of any recent diversion of nuclear material to the making of nuclear arms.
If they find none, Washington will soon resume talks with Pyongyang on gaining even greater access to determine how much material, if any, it may have diverted before inspections began and whether that was enough to make a bomb.
To win such inspections, President Clinton needs to put together a package of inducements that addresses North Korea's diplomatic, security and economic concerns.
He also needs to quiet the loose talk of war in Washington.


14-Karat Spray
As an aerosol spray, it's quite a puzzle.
The label of the product, commonly sold in bodegas and delis, reads Money House Blessing Gold Spray With Indian Spirit.
What?
The label is cryptic and obscure, but it certainly seems to suggest that using the spray will bring a blessing or money.
Telephone pursuit of the makers of Money House Blessing led to E. Davis Inc., of Piscataway, N.J., a spokesman and the following interview:


Subway Repairs Slog On Along Lenox Ave.
Lenox Avenue has wound its way through Harlem these last months in a series of yawning craters filled with metal, mesh, lumber and the gray leftovers of a harsh winter's snow.
The disorder was mirrored in the subway stations below, where people waited on platforms made shadowy-narrow by more construction.
Now, things are looking up.
The renovators have returned after a delay of nearly four months.
But no residents think they have seen anything like the end of the turbulent history of construction and reconstruction on the Lenox Avenue portion of the West Side IRT.


Court Ruling Undercuts Rent Control
A Federal appeals court has undercut one of New York State's most contentious sets of regulations with a ruling that says rent protections for some apartments are not absolute.
In a March 2 ruling in a case involving nine rent-regulated apartments at 444 East 57th Street, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan said a tenant's right to occupy an apartment was based on a contract or a lease and was not a statutory right, or a right based on law, as state officials have claimed.


Don't Blame The Customers
To the Editor:
Michael Eric Dyson's essay "Black or White? Labels Don't Always Fit"  [ Feb. 13 ]  ignores the controlling impact of record companies, record stores and radio stations on how pop music is perceived.


Leslie Kalick, Alan P. Wolfe
Leslie Kalick, a daughter of Rosanne Kalick of White Plains, and Perry Kalick of Leonia, N.J., was married yesterday evening to Alan Peter Wolfe, a son of George and Fran Wolfe of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
Rabbi Shira Milgrom performed the ceremony at the Harrison (N.Y.) Jewish Center.
The bride, 28, graduated from Cornell University and cum laude from New York University.
She is a physical therapist at Piedmont Hospital in Atlanta.
Her father is a professor of education at Lehman College in New York.
Her mother is the chairwoman of the library at Westchester Community College at Valhalla, N.Y.


Sure, and That's A Dear Sum, Lads
COME Thursday, the pints will be hoisted, the shamrock saluted, the pipes sounded, the blarney spun and spun some more.
Throngs will strut and dance down Fifth Avenue in the curious rite of spring known as the St.
Patrick's Day Parade.
Then, thousands of Irish and temporarily Irish will go to the Irish bars that have become a slowly fading feature of the New York City scene -- but on this emerald day are the only place to be.
What to do but make these exuberant pilgrims pay a bit extra for the full Irish experience?
Ten dollars -- each of them appropriately green -- is the going cover charge to get in Manhattan Irish bars that would never think of charging a penny any other day of the year.


Susan Silverstein and David H. Scott
Susan Gail Silverstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard L. Silverstein of Bethesda, Md., was married on March 5 to David Hoyt Scott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Scott of Garland, Tex.
Betty Skelton, clerk of the probate court in Montgomery County, Md., officiated at the Chevy Chase (Md.) Club.
Mrs.
Scott is the director of public programs at the Navy Museum in Washington.
She graduated from Chatham College and received a master's degree in museum education from George Washington University.
Her father is a partner in Silverstein &amp; Mullens, a law firm in Washington, and the vice chairman of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington.


Critics Question Ethics of U.S.-Sponsored Vaccine Tests in Italy and Sweden
Tests of a new type of whooping cough vaccine being conducted in Italy and Sweden under United States sponsorship may be unethical, critics say, because the trials deny thousands of infants vaccines that would protect against the disease.
The studies, sponsored by a unit of the National Institutes of Health, involve more than 25,000 babies, with more than 4,000 of them receiving vaccinations that do not include protection against pertussis, or whooping cough.
Smaller trials suggested that the vaccines being tested may not only be effective but have fewer side effects than the whooping cough vaccine currently in use in the United States.


Pavement, Sidestepping to Soft Rock, Is as Oblique as Ever
PERHAPS THE MOST frequent complaint about Pavement, a high-concept, low-profile rock quintet that has become one of the most critically celebrated bands on the alternative scene, is that its music is too difficult to penetrate.
It's an understandable grievance, especially since the group's early singles and EP's were characterized by pop melodies buried beneath rumbling tape machines and distorted guitars.
Its 1992 debut album, "Slanted and Enchanted," was rooted in the new wave of early 80's British bands like the Fall and Echo and the Bunnymen.
On its second full-length album, "Crooked Rain, Crooked Rain," the noise that endeared Pavement to fans of difficult rock has been stripped away, revealing coherent song structures and comparatively gentle arrangements.
But the music remains just as oblique, mainly because of the stream-of-consciousness poetry of the singer and songwriter Stephen Malkmus.


N.F.L. Properties Chief Is Dismissed
For the second time in six months, a president of National Football League Properties, the league's licensing and sponsorship arm, is out of a job.
JOHN FLOOD, who replaced JOHN BELLO on Labor Day, was dismissed Friday for a personal investment in Pro-Set Press, the printing division of Houston-based Pro-Set, a trading card manufacturer that is an N.F.L.P. licensee.
JOE BROWNE, a league spokesman, said Flood made the investment through his own company in 1990 but never disclosed it to league management.
At the time, he was the N.F.L.P.'s executive vice president and general counsel.


Enlightenment
To the Editor: About the article on bedside lighting ("Reading in Bed: Europe Takes a Dim View," Feb. 13), I had a similar experience.
Hearing that the bulbs in China were very low wattage, I brought a 60-watt bulb with me.
In Xian, I screwed it into the lamp, turned it on, and blew out every light in the entire hotel.
I was so embarrassed that I pretended to be one of the victims instead of the culprit.
I carefully packed the blackened bulb and took it away with me.


Waking the Neighbors?


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER WEST SIDE  Irving Berlin Celebration Offers Little-Known Songs
Twenty Irving Berlin songs that have never been publicly performed will be included in Symphony Space's 12-hour musical celebration of the songwriter on Saturday.
Over the last two decades, the composers honored have ranged from Bach to Duke Ellington to John Cage.


THE GOOD SON
I cast my vote mentally for Bill Clinton the day I saw the headline that said he had picked Al Gore as a running mate.
In any case, it will not make me lose any sleep to know that Gore has been reading a "how to" book on leadership or that he has hired a consultant to help facilitate relations among his staff.
Too often I have seen brilliant minds become undermined by the draining effect of some emotional conflict that no one has been willing to acknowledge.
SARAH CHACE Cambrdige, Mass.


A World of Dancers on the Move
ONE of the joys of travel is blending the known with the unknown -- returning to beloved cathedrals, castles and landscapes as well as visiting previously unexplored places.
So, too, jaunts to European dance festivals make it possible both to see favorite companies and to discover new ones.
Although some of this summer's festivals feature such renowned choreographers as Merce Cunningham, Maurice Bejart, Trisha Brown and Pina Bausch, Americans may not recognize the names of others.
Yet these choreographers' creations may turn out to be as compelling as more familiar offerings.


A Richness Of Galanos
You can't rush James Galanos.
While designers in Europe are showing their fall collections and designers on Seventh Avenue are putting the finishing touches on their fall collections, he is just now showing his spring collection to buyers.
Galanos likes to have the last word.
And that's not the only thing that sets him apart.
In some ways he is an anachronism.


INSIDE
Sharing the Burden
Women who once went to work to buy extras are becoming the bulwarks of the family income as their husbands' earnings fall.
Page 24.
Trade Pact With Japan
The United States announced a pact with Japan on cellular phones, but it does not address major trade issues between the countries.
Page 8.
Murderous Voices
Ricardo S. Caputo gave extensive accounts of the killings of four women to a lawyer and a psychiatrist in Argentina.
Page 29.
Cubicles Called Home
In many areas of New York City, tiny basement spaces created by flimsy partitions house immigrants in violation of safety codes.
Page 29.


Winners, Losers and Bankruptcy
To the Editor:
In "Beware Management Talking Poor" (Wall Street, Feb. 13), Alison Leigh Cowan exposed a slick method to pay certain creditors far more than 100 cents on the dollar in today's large Chapter 11 cases, while sticking other creditors with larger losses.
Peter C. Browning, National Gypsum's former chief executive, and John H. Laeri Jr., the financial adviser to National Gypsum's asbestos committee, contend the column was wrong (Letters, March 6).
I represented a committee of bond and trade creditors in the National Gypsum bankruptcy, and I found the column was on target.


THE SOUND OF NON-MUSIC
Jon Herington has the most comfortable job on Broadway, but he wasn't happy when it was offered to him a year ago.
He had just auditioned to join the orchestra of "The Who's Tommy" and he still naively believed that he wanted to spend his evenings playing electric guitar at the St.
James Theater.
"They told me someone else got the spot, but there was another position I could have," he recalls.
"They said I could be a walker. I was disappointed. I told them: 'I came to audition for the second guitar chair and that's what I want you to give me. I'll have to think about this.' I didn't really understand the concept of the walker."


A Quartet of Pianists, A Trio of Concertos
FOUR pianists are in the orchestral spotlight this week.
Rebecca Penneys and Robert Levin play concertos by Mozart with the Eastern Connecticut and Greenwich Symphonies while Jean-Yves Thibaudet and Janina Fialkowska perform Ravel's Concerto in G Major with the Hartford Symphony and the Fairfield Orchestra.
At the 8 P.M.
For information, the Bushnell box office is 246-6907.


Not the Shrinking Violets: N.Y.U. Reaches a Final 4
With time running out in its N.C.A.A.
Division III sectional final here against SUNY-Albany tonight, New York University found itself on the other side of a very familiar situation.
In Friday night's semifinal against Rowan (N.J.), the Violets trailed by 3 points with 3.5 seconds remaining in the second overtime, when they used a free throw, an intentional miss, a missed jumper and a tip-in at the buzzer to force a third overtime in a game N.Y.U. would eventually win.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 16 about Ukraine's relations with Russia misidentified Zaporozhie Sich.
It was the Cossack headquarters destroyed by Catherine II's army in 1775, not a Ukrainian leader.
Readers' letters reporting the error were mislaid, delaying this correction.


Some Rooms With Vrooms On Crowded Nascar Circuit
If you plan to attend a Winston Cup stock car race and haven't made hotel reservations, you may not want to bother.
Simply show up after the final qualifying session of race weekend; several rooms should be available.
More and more teams are going home early from Winston Cup races this season, as the burgeoning success of Nascar's top series has drawn more teams, more sponsors and more promising young drivers.
The only problem is, the number of starting positions has stayed the same.


Big Sur
To the Editor: Susan Spano provides a feast of useful tidbits for the frugal traveler in Big Sur, a part of the country that has been on my itinerary back-burner for some time.
But like many otherwise good articles, this suffers from a denial of the possibility of using human-powered transportation.
This is explicitly stated early on: "From May to October, a local bus plies Highway 1 between Monterey and the south end of the Big Sur River valley (a trip that costs $2.50 each way), but to see Big Sur's myriad sights at your own pace, a car is required."
Cars are required for people who have never considered bicycle touring.
Granted, it is more taxing and takes longer, but the size of the area -- 90 miles of coastline -- is well within the range of a few days' tour for most cyclists.
What about information on the size of the shoulder, the amount of climbing, etc., for the growing fringe who don't do internal combustion?
Did Ms.
Spano spot any cyclists?


Highlighting Hair, Women's Ultimate Crowning Achievement
RAPUNZEL let hers down.  Delilah had Samson's cut off. Medusa's was turned to serpents.
"A woman's hair, which completely replenishes itself, is a powerful symbol defined by myth, traditions, modern concepts and media hype, which influences colors, style and care," Dr.
Connie Koppelman of Setauket said.
"It can signify age, conformity, mourning, rebellion, punishment, servitude and sex appeal. How can the acceptance of a variety of hair styles move society toward the acceptance of a diversity of life styles?"


This Bulletin Just In: The Big East Is Back
Now this was basketball.
Not "Big East" basketball, or "look what a great conference we are" basketball.
But solid, hardcore and even breathtaking basketball.
Deep in the second half, Providence, a team on a roll for the last two weeks, was challenging top-seeded Connecticut, a team on a season-long roll, in a fluid, breathtaking conference semifinal game at Madison Square Garden.


Razorbacks Continue Streak
The University of Arkansas men won their 11th straight National Collegiate Athletic Association indoor championship tonight at the Hoosier Dome.
The Razorbacks came into the meet's second day with a 27-point lead and wasted no time salting their victory away.
Erick Walder completed a triple-double by winning his third straight N.C.A.A. triple jump with 56 feet 6 3/4 inches and his third straight long jump title by leaping 27-8.
Arkansas wrapped it up with a collegiate record and world best of 9:30.07 in the distance medley relay.


Ms. Frimmet, Mr. Scherl
Marcella Lynn Frimmet, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Frimmet of Teaneck, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Jonathan Daniel Scherl, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Burton Scherl of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Rabbi Stephen C. Listfield officiated at the Fair Lawn (N.J.) Jewish Center.
Rabbi Louis Siegal took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Scherl, 27, was until recently a marketing consultant at the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her father is a textile management consultant in Teaneck.
Her mother, Sandra M. Frimmet, is a paralegal in the city attorney's office in Hackensack, N.J.


A Song Remade
To the Editor:
In his review of "Cocaine True Cocaine Blue" (Feb. 6), Brent Staples cites the song "Cocaine," saying, "By now  [ Eric ]  Clapton's song seems almost grotesquely lighthearted." But "Cocaine" was written and originally recorded by J. J. Cale.
DANIEL FISHER  Seabrook, Tex.


Outed by His Bishop
IN THE COURTS OF THE LORD A Gay Priest's Story.
By James Ferry. 231 pp.
New York:  Crossroad.


Raze the Roof, Fix a Pothole
At 15 snowstorms and counting, this has been Brian H. Howland's best winter ever.
His company, Reclaim Inc., makes a material to fill potholes, so every time the streets thaw and then freeze, there is more demand for his product.
But there is more reason to like the bad weather: it generates more supplies of Reclaim's unusual raw material.
While other paving supply companies use asphalt, his uses old roofs.


Bride and Gloom
CONJUGAL BLISS A Comedy of Marital Arts.
By John Nichols. 304 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company.


2 Killed and 2 Hurt in Shooting
Four youths driving through an intersection in a drug-infested area of East New York, Brooklyn, ran into a spray of bullets early yesterday morning, leaving two dead and the other two wounded, the police said.
They said the shooting appeared to have been drug related although they had so few details that they could not even identify one of the dead.
The slain youth who could be identified, the police said, was Jermaine Lee, 15, who lived on Atlantic Avenue.
At the address the police gave, no one yesterday afternoon said they knew of him.
The other dead victim was a 17-year-old, the police said, but one of his companions knew only his first name, Anthony.


Bosnian Factions Discuss Joining Forces
The commanders of Bosnia's mostly Muslim Government forces and the militia of Bosnia's Croats agreed today to take steps toward forming a joint army for a nascent federation.
The agreement, reached after two days of negotiations in the Croatian city of Split, follows nearly a year of warfare between the two forces, which has dwindled to desultory bursts of small-arms fire since a cease-fire between the two parties took effect on Feb. 25.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE HIDDEN CHILDREN By Howard Greenfeld.
Illustrated. 144 pp.
New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $15.95. (Ages 8 and up)


Corrections
An article on Feb. 20 about "Party Talk," a cable-television talk show, gave an incorrect listing for broadcasts of it on Tuesdays at 8 P.M. in New York.
They are on Channel 16, not Channel 17, and are carried on Manhattan Cable as well as Paragon Cable.


'What Should I Do Now?
PETER B. remembers the last time he waited for the results of his H.I.V. test as "15 days of hell." He had taken the test four times before, prompted by instances of carefree sexual behavior he blamed on a drinking problem.
The tests always came back negative.


Two Artists Known for Their Photographs and Paintings
AT the moment, Iona College and the College of New Rochelle here have in common shows by photographers known also for their paintings.
The one at Iona is a sampling of black-and-white prints by Barbara Morgan, who died in 1992 at the age of 92.
Morgan, who was born in Kansas and lived in California before coming to Westchester in 1940, spent her 20's and 30's as a successful painter and printmaker.


Where Cocoa Is King
ON the Sunset Park waterfront, alongside the 110 acres that make up the South Brooklyn Marine Terminal, waters are still and twisted steel piers are burned out and littered with garbage.
The streets nearby are deserted, except for the occasional patron sliding into the local topless bar.
Empty warehouses stand as ghostly relics of an age when New York boasted one of the busiest ports in the world.
But behind the high wire fences on 39th Street the other day, 100 longshoremen were unloading almost 8,000 tons of Nigerian cocoa from a freighter.
As the sun beat on the wharf, 140-pound bags were piling up quickly, 15 feet high, in the half-mile-long warehouse.
Soon trains would rumble on the tracks that curve around the warehouse and transport cocoa beans to the factories of Nestle, Hershey and other chocolate makers.


John Kelly; Union Leader, 66
John Kelly, president of the Office and Professional Employees International Union, A.F.L.-C.I.O., died on Thursday at his office in the union's Manhattan headquarters.
Mr.
Kelly, who lived in Tenafly, N.J., was 66.
The cause was a heart attack, said Gwen Wells, a spokeswoman for the union.


He's No. 1
THE HOUSE THAT ROONE BUILT The Inside Story of ABC News.
By Marc Gunther.
Illustrated. 381 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company.


Abigail Littman, Alan Spierer
Abigail Joan Littman, the president of the Seaward Corporation, a printing and graphic arts company in West Orange, N.J., was married last evening to Alan Spierer, a vice president at Paine Webber, investment bankers, in New York.
Rabbi John Schechter performed the ceremony at Temple Sharey Tefilo-Israel in South Orange, N.J.


At Work; The I.B.M. Circle: Still Unbroken
IN the years of its dominance, the International Business Machines Corporation was a one-of-a-kind behemoth employer, an elite, life-long womb to which only the best and brightest aspired and were granted entry.
So it's not surprising that the 150,000-plus employees who did not survive into the company's post-dominance era would be inclined to stay in touch with each other.
That at least is what Alexander Auerbach, a public relations executive who once covered I.B.M. as a financial journalist, figured as he was driving down the Ventura Freeway in Los Angeles one day last year listening to a National Public Radio story on downsizing at the Armonk, N.Y.-based company.
As the story came over the air, he hatched the idea of a publication that would provide news, advice and contacts for the thousands of employees who had been and would be nudged and pushed off the I.B.M. plank.
"Two exits later, I had a business plan," Mr.
Auerbach joked.


'Amiable Child' Buried Near Grant's Tomb in 1797
To the Editor:
Your brief item, "Worth's Tomb" (March 6), reminded me of another burial on public ground that is less well known.
Near Grant's Tomb is an inconspicuous memorial to a child who fell off the nearby cliffs in 1797.


Pete Postlethwaite Turns a Prison Stint Into Oscar Material
PETE POSTLETHWAITE'S last name is Anglo Saxon, the actor says, for "a plot of fallow land." But the name -- it's pronounced with the short "o" of "apostle," not "postal" -- belies the man.
At the age of 48, the veteran character actor is anything but fallow.
As Guiseppe Conlon in "In the Name of the Father," the actor, who is from a large working-class family in Lancashire, provides the anguished heart to a turbulent film.
His performance as a quiet Belfast man wrongly jailed in England alongside his son has brought him an Oscar nomination for supporting actor.
His is one of seven nominations for the film, directed by Jim Sheridan and starring Daniel Day-Lewis as Gerry Conlon, who served 15 years in jail for a bombing he did not commit.


Technology; New! Improved! Laptops Change the Art of the Pitch
WHEN Eddie Paul, an inventor from El Segundo, Calif., hit the sales circuit last spring to pitch a new kind of pump compressor motor to some of the country's largest companies, he soon discovered that he had a serious communications problem.
Simply explaining his complex new invention was taking Mr.
Paul two eye-glazing hours.
After generating more yawns than licensing agreements, Mr.
Paul went back to his lab -- this time to develop a sales presentation combining graphics and animation that told his pump's story in four minutes or so.
And the whole song and dance would be carried on his laptop computer.


In America; What Recovery?
Joan Rivers lives in Sandy, Ore., a small town in the foothills of Mount Hood, not far from Portland.
She's not the comedian, although she's blessed with an abiding and often therapeutic sense of humor.
She's a divorced mother of six who is trying to make her way in the treacherous new world of work in the United States.
Ms.
Rivers is not impressed with the current economic recovery.
The wonders of the resurgent economy are proclaimed most loudly by those with good jobs and no fear of unemployment.
Ms.
Rivers is a college English instructor who has been unable to find work in her field.
She makes ends meet (barely) by selling ice cream and espresso from a converted vacation trailer.


Business Diary: March 6-11
COMPANIES Grumman as Cinderella: From Loser to Belle of the Ball  With arms spending way down, the folks at the Pentagon certainly don't want a lot of huge, hobbled weapons makers littering the land, like rusting hulks of old war planes.
So it fit their vision nicely last week when Martin Marietta agreed to buy Grumman for $1.9 billion.
As its Pentagon contracts dried up, Grumman tried to make it in the real world, but could never quite manage.
It can't be that much of a loser, though, because suddenly Northrop got into the act, raising the ante by offering $2.04 billion for it.
That's $60 a share, but Grumman stock leapt to $64.75 on Friday -- yes, a bidding war's brewing.
What's up?
Clearly, even with shrinking budgets, there's still money in high-tech weaponry, and Grumman can be a big plus.
But one thing doesn't change: whoever wins, a lot more jobs will disappear at Grumman, Long Island's largest corporate employer.


Discovering Himself
To the Editor:
In his energetic review of "The Edge of Night" (Feb. 6), John Sutherland claims that I call T. S. Eliot a "faggot." In fact, I surmise that in the neighborhood where I grew up, that word might have been applied, had we known it.
In the paragraphs immediately following the so-called "faggot" episode, my reader may learn that as an adult, I discovered dimensions in myself that our culture would never define, or wish to honor, with the word "masculine."  FRANK LENTRICCHIA  Hillsborough, N.C.


Board Rejects Delay in Coffey Park Renovation
The restoration of Red Hook's battered Coffey Park will proceed as scheduled, now that the local community board has decided to obey one of the most practical of political axioms: don't sit waiting for money you may never get.
The project, which is estimated to cost $500,000, calls for an expanded, modernized playground with new equipment and the replacement of an abandoned park house that is now a boarded-up shell, said Michael Siegel, director of capital projects for the Parks Department in Brooklyn.
The building has become a haven for drug peddlers and users, making the park unsafe for children.


Cuteness Unleashed
To Brandy, the champagne poodle in the red cape ("Fashion Unleashed," Feb. 20):


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Old Salts and New Salts
IT was hard to tell which was more exciting for John Wellbrock, 74, the meal or the midshipmen.
Seated at a table in the dining room of the Merchant Marine Academy in Kings Point, Mr.
Wellbrock was surrounded by uniformed young men and women and plates of cheeseburgers and french fries.
A disabled veteran living in the Veterans' Hospital in Northport, Mr.
Wellbrock is used to a fairly bland diet.
"And I'm a man who loves his chow," he said.
Midshipmen's chow is a bit more adventuresome than hospital fare.
That suited Mr.
Wellbrock just fine.
"Would you pass the pickles?" he asked Mike Smith of Jacksonville, Fla.


INTO THE WHITE IVORY TOWER
I found the attack on Saul Bellow by Brent Staples, in his article "Into the White Ivory Tower" (Feb. 6), a misreading of fiction.
Staples has written strongly enough about the book "Monster," gangster rap and the self-degradation of black videos to understand what kind of a symbol the well-dressed mugger represents in "Mr. Sammler's Planet."
He represents the professional intimidation of the white middle class by saber rattlers like Malcolm X and penis wavers like Eldridge Cleaver. (You do remember those pornographic pants Cleaver tried to market, don't you?)


Finding the Right Plant for the Right Place
FOR many, this has been a winter of discontent.
Thoughts are turning toward the closed toolshed door, the any-minute-now warmth of spring and getting the garden in order.
One common approach in this season is to wait for a fine sunny day and head off to the local nursery or well-stocked garden center, or both.
There, the plants desired can be selected.
If a particular plant can't be found, substitutes might be made.
Or rather than select one of a certain plant, maybe three or four would do.
There is no reason to plan ahead, everything can be completed in a day's journey.


When Communities Are No Longer Islands
TOWN Supervisor Paul A. Daronco describes Pelham as a peaceable community where all the children walk to school -- and where, when he walks down the street, every face is familiar.
For the most part, his job has focused on the day-to-day affairs of a small-town government, shutting out worries of a changing world outside.
Yet increasingly in recent months, Mr.
Daronco has had a change of heart about some long-held principles.
He grudgingly concedes that the future of Pelham's 2.45 square miles, with its tree-lined streets and old-fashioned ways, may hinge in part on the shifting fortunes of bigger neighbors -- Mount Vernon, New Rochelle and the Bronx -- in the southern part of the county.


Nasdaq Needs Some Trading Reforms
To the Editor:
Regarding "Nasdaq Defends Its Trading Practices" (Letters, Feb. 20), there is nothing inherently wrong with market makers earning the spread for risk positions -- provided the interests of the public are protected.
But when they hold limit orders for the public and trade for themselves at prices through those limits, they and the brokerage houses placing the order abdicate their responsibilities.


Irish Pizza Just for St. Patrick's Day
IRISH pizza for St.
Patrick's Day?
At Truffles, a much acclaimed restaurant in Sligo, Ireland, that is what customers will be eating this holiday.
The pizzas are topped with spinach and leeks, cabbage and Parma ham, or blood sausage with pears.
"We don't look up the old textbooks for Irish cooking anymore," said the chef and proprietor, Bernadette O'Shea.
"In the 70's in Ireland they began to revive the past. Then in the 80's they realized they had more to offer than that. Since then the face of Irish cooking has been significantly and permanently changed."


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $545,000
830 Broadway (12th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; 2 elevators, dining room, eat-in kitchen, library; maintenance $1,163, 67% tax-deductible, listed at $569,000, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Corcoran Group)


The Rise and Swift Fall of Cyber Literacy
IN the early days of the information revolution, writers, readers and book lovers of all sorts ominously predicted that the rise of technology would spell the death of literacy.
Then they discovered the word processor, and the typewriter went the way of the quill pen.
Maybe technology wasn't so bad after all.
When the literati discovered they could use modems to link their computers to networks and send their words flashing around the world, acceptance gave way to ecstasy.
In a world increasingly dominated by MTV, Nickelodeon and CNN, people began to speak of a new literacy.


Where Grape Leaves Grace the Table
LEBANESE cuisine is one of the liveliest in the Middle East.
Unfortunately, it is rarely found in the United States outside major urban centers.
Danbury, with its sizable Lebanese population, is an exception.
Now, with the arrival of Hanna's Mid-Eastern Restaurant, the city can boast of not one, but two full-fledged Lebanese establishments (Roland's of Lebanon opened several years ago) as well as the long-established Sesame Seed, which also serves Middle Eastern dishes.
One feels the spirit of Lebanon on arrival in small, tidy Hanna's (the owner's last name), with the rhythms of taped Middle Eastern music in the background.
The dining room is simple but attractive with white stucco walls, natural pine wainscoting, comfortable modern chairs and well-spaced tables covered with pink cloths and dubonnet napkins.


Judith Goodman, Scott Moskowitz
Judith Amy Goodman, a daughter of Bernard Litoff of Bergenfield, N.J., and the late Sandra Goodman, is to be married today to Scott Robert Moskowitz, the son of Elaine and Herb Moskowitz of Edison, N.J.
Cantor Mordecai M. Goldstein is to perform the ceremony at the Richfield Regency, a caterer in Verona, N.J.


Donna Shakin, Howard Gershen
Donna Jane Shakin, the daughter of Doris L. Shakin of Silver Spring, Md., and the late Alvin Shakin, is to be married today to Howard Gershen, the son of Shirley and Bernard Gershen of Centerport, L.I.
Rabbi Laurence A. Sebert is to perform the ceremony at the Manhattan Penthouse in New York.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is the director of the metropolitan campaign for the United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University and received a master's degree in social work from Yeshiva University.
Her father was an accountant for the Army Audit Agency.
Her mother retired as an education program specialist in the United States Department of Education in Washington.


High Wind on Last Four Blows Away Lietzke's Lead
When he designed the golf course at Weston Hills Country Club, architect Robert Trent Jones Jr. saved his best -- some would say his most brutal work -- for the last four holes.
Dubbed "the Final Four," this stretch of water, wind and sand is probably the toughest closing march on the PGA Tour.
It was on those four holes today that the Honda Classic turned into a tournament of attrition.
Bruce Lietzke arrived at the 15th tee with the lead and, after four straight bogeys, left the 18th green trailing leader Brandel Chamblee by three strokes.  'Real, Real Tough'
"When you turn into those holes in this wind, well, it's just real, real tough," Lietzke said.
"You can lose some strokes there in a hurry."


Cynthia R. Farber, Kenneth M. Wolf
Cynthia Robin Farber, a daughter of Susan and Neil Faber of Hillsdale, N.J., was married last evening to Kenneth Malcolm Wolf, a son of Debra and Ellis Wolf of Fort Lee, N.J.
Rabbi Matthew Kanig performed the ceremony at the Woodcliff Lake (N.J.) Hilton.
The bride, 28, uses an earlier spelling of the family's name.
She is an assistant product manager at Clairol, the hair-care company in New York.
She graduated from Rider College and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL Umps Escorted After Carew Erupts Police were needed to escort the umpires out of Tempe Diablo Stadium when California Angels hitting coach Rod Carew challenged plate umpire Mark Johnson after a 7-6 loss yesterday to a Colorado Rockies' split squad.
The game ended with a heated exchange after California's Gary DiSarcina was ejected by Johnson for arguing a called second strike in the bottom of the ninth.
As DiSarcina was leaving the field, Carew came out to challenge Johnson, and Angels Manager Buck Rodgers entered the dispute.
Carew and Johnson had to be separated by players and the other umpires.


Expos Need Someone to Step Into Leadoff Spot
The Montreal Expos have a hole at the top of their lineup and, worse, a vacuum on their team.
Both problems are the result of the absence of Delino DeShields, the team's second baseman, whom the Expos traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers four months ago.


Opinionated Guidebooks
AS guidebooks proliferate, those with a sharp point of view, whether or not one agrees with it, can seem as refreshing as a cold drink of water at midnight after a supper of salami.
Here are brief reviews of a few in this category and two other new guidebooks of note.
"Rum and Reggae, the Insider's Guide to the Caribbean," by Jonathan Runge, issued in a revised paperback edition by Villard Books in December ($17), is perhaps an extreme example of the opinionated guidebook: There are no entries on St.
Thomas or St.
Croix.
The absence of those two Virgin Islands is not specifically noted in the text, but the author explained in an interview that he did not feel compelled to be comprehensive but preferred to pick and choose. (The Cayman Islands are also omitted, Mr. Runge said, but that was for lack of time to visit, and they will be added in the next edition.)


Nancy Ehrlich and Philip Blazar
Nancy Jean Ehrlich, the daughter of Leon Ehrlich and Judge Elizabeth Ehrlich of Wyomissing, Pa., was married last evening to Dr.
Philip Edward Blazar, the son of Drs.
Andrew and Beverly Blazar of Providence, R.I.
Rabbi Alan Weitzman officiated at Temple Oheb Sholom in Reading, Pa.
Ms.
Ehrlich, 27, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at Clark, Ladner, Fortenbaugh &amp; Young, a law firm in Philadelphia.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is a partner in Ehrlich &amp; Ehrlich, a law firm in Reading.
Her mother is a judge of the State Court of Common Pleas in Reading.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'ORLANDO' IN RIDGEFIELD
"Orlando," based on the Virginia Wolff novel that traces the ageless, endless, gender-bending life of the title character, will be shown today at the Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art at 258 Main Street in Ridgefield.
It will be introduced by Quentin Crisp, the British actor who portrays Queen Elizabeth in the film.
Orlando, played by Tilda Swenson, is first encountered as a young nobleman in Elizabethan England, and followed through her amorous adventures to present day London.


2 Churches Named Landmarks
Two churches in central Harlem were designated landmarks last week.
The First Corinthian Baptist Church, at Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard and 116th Street, was once the luxurious Regent Theater.
It was finished in 1913, at the time when the film industry was making the transition from nickelodeons.
Its terra cotta facade, modeled after the Doge's Palace in Venice, was designed by Thomas W. Lamb, who went on to specialize in lavish movie theaters across the United States.
It became a church 30 years ago.


Blowback From the Afghan Battlefield
UNDER A RELENTLESS SUN, NOOR AMIN traverses the lunar terrain of Afghanistan.
A commander of the Islamic Party, Afghanistan's best-armed and most radical political faction, he has just finished a two-month stint running a military training camp outside the ruined village of Jaji.
Battling the wheel of his four-wheel-drive truck, he drives past miles of poppy fields where boys scrape brown opium into burlap sacks.
To the east, inside mud forts in the mountains, laboratories turn the opium into heroin.
He crosses the rutted highway running from the Khyber Pass to Kabul, the capital, past checkpoints manned by soldiers of the Islamic Party, their posts adorned with the grim image of their leader, Prime Minister Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.


Monte Carlo
To the Editor: After reading "Monte Carlo: It's a Rich Experience" by Alan Riding (Feb. 13), we thought your readers might also be interested in Loews Monte Carlo Hotel as another lodging option.
The resort and convention complex has 639 guest rooms and suites, each with a private balcony or terrace, seven restaurants and lounges, and function space that can accommodate more than 2,000 people.
The hotel also features a casino and slot machines, state-of-the art fitness center, and year-round heated rooftop swimming pool.


Explosive Memories
ANCESTRAL TRUTHS By Sara Maitland. 295 pp.
New York: A John Macrae Book/Henry Holt &amp; Company. $22.50.


Ewald T. Grether; Business Educator, 94
Dr.
Ewald T. Grether, a leader in the development of business education at the University of California, died on Friday at his home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 94.
The cause was complications of a stroke, the university said.


Economic Snake Oil
PEDDLING PROSPERITY Economic Sense and Nonsense in the Age of Diminished Expectations.
By Paul Krugman. 303 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.


Lending Is Easy, But Will They Pay It Back?
"CREDIT," as Tom Paine, the American revolutionary, once wrote, "is suspicion asleep."
Nowhere is the snoring louder than in the market for foreign debt.
To be sure, there is some evidence that the public is not quite as enthusiastic as the investment bankers, but a lot of it is selling quite well.


VIRGINIA APPROVES DISNEY SUBSIDIES
By large majorities in both houses, the Virginia Legislature tonight approved subsidies that the Walt Disney Company had demanded as a condition for building a history theme park 35 miles southwest of Washington.
The incentives, which were enacted hours before the General Assembly was to adjourn for the year, have been the most hotly debated issue of the two-month legislative session.
Disney opponents who live near the site of the proposed park, Haymarket, marched outside the Capitol with effigies of Mickey Mouse and "Make the Mouse Move!" posters.


Female Agents Sue F.B.I., Alleging Discrimination
Two female agents have sued the Federal Bureau of Investigation for sexual discrimination, charging that their superiors at the male-dominated agency have sexually harassed them and then retaliated against them for making formal complaints.
In what was the latest of a series of discrimination complaints against Federal law-enforcement agencies, the two agents, based in Santa Ana, 25 miles south of downtown Los Angeles, described a history of crude behavior and intimidation in papers filed on Friday in Federal District Court .


American Plays Join New 'Lear' in London
THERE will, let us hope, be plenty of upbeat, cheerful moments on the London stage to lift our spirits this summer; but already it is possible to predict the one most likely to wrench our hearts.
It will come from Robert Stephens's King Lear, bent over the corpse of Cordelia, the daughter whom he rejected and with whom he has been reconciled after undergoing sufferings galore.
"Thou'lt come no more," wrote Shakespeare with awful simplicity, "Never, never, never, never, never." From Mr.
Stephens those last five words choke abjectly out, an expression of grief so total it makes you want to look away, embarrassed to eavesdrop on emotions so dreadfully private.
Robert who?
Nobody would have asked that question 30 years ago, when Mr.
Stephens seemed the most talented of the young men gracing the newly formed National Theater and was even regarded as Laurence Olivier's natural heir at the head of the acting trade.
But he gradually faded, the victim of serious personal problems.
But in 1991, almost out of the blue, the Royal Shakespeare Company cast him as Falstaff in "Henry IV," and he rose to the challenge, creating a fat knight who roistered and gourmandised with the best of them but was most himself when ruefully contemplating his own self-indulgent, half-wasted life.
Once again Robert Stephens was a major actor.


After 460 Years, The Anglicans Ordain Women
Thirty-two women knelt this evening in Bristol Cathedral for the laying on of hands by the Bishop and became the first women ordained as priests in the Church of England's 460 years.
The ordination of women, which seemed inevitable since it was found to be theologically unobjectionable by the General Synod of the Anglican Church in 1975, has prompted a bitter debate for almost 20 years.


Mayor's Response On School Vouchers
I would like to respond to Elizabeth DiSavino's Feb. 6 letter to the New Jersey editor, which says that school voucher programs are "unequivocally unconstitutional."
I agree that direct government support of religious instruction in our schools is a violation of the First Amendment.
However, my voucher proposal does not seek to do this.


Dept. of Horse Before the Cart
To the Editor:
In light of the television audience's apparently insatiable appetite for docudramas based on real-life crime, it is not surprising that two different networks are making movie versions of the Menendez murder case  [ "Hung Juries or No, It's Lyle &amp; Erik I Vs. Lyle and Erik II," Feb. 20 ] .


March 6-12; Don't Smoke! That's an Order!
What would Gen. Douglas MacArthur have said?
The Pentagon's decision last week to tighten existing rules against smoking in the military workplace would have given the old soldier a golden opportunity to be insubordinate.


Leslie Goldfarb, S. S. Weisglass
Dr.
Leslie B. Goldfarb, a dentist in New York, and Dr.
Stephen S. Weisglass, a periodontist in Forest Hills, Queens, were married last evening.
Rabbi Balfour Brickner officiated at the Hotel Macklowe in New York.
Dr.
Goldfarb, 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Queens College and received a dental degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Benjamin and Roslyn Goldfarb of New York.
The bride's father is an architect in New York.
Her mother is the president of Roz Goldfarb Associates, executive recruiters in New York.
She is also a writer.


More Women Take Low-Wage Jobs Just So Their Families Can Get By
Women who once went to work to buy the extras for their families are paying for more and more of the basics, piling job upon job as their husbands' earnings fall.
About 15 million working wives hold well-paid executive or professional jobs, anchoring their families to the middle or upper classes.
But far more -- 37 million -- are working for lower wages as clerks and cashiers, nurses' aides and bank tellers, secretaries and maids.
Their wages serve as a cushion between welfare and getting by.


African Austerity
A comprehensive study of the economies of 29 African countries by the World Bank showed that those that carried out tough austerity measures during the 1980's improved their growth while those that did not became further mired in recession.
Article, page 18.


THE GOOD SON
As a college student working as a reporter at the Indiana Statehouse, I've learned a few things about the importance of politics and posturing.
But it troubles me that the greatest failure Berke can find about Al Gore is a failed photo opportunity.
I understand you need to give the piece some balance, but couldn't you come up with something stronger?
LOUIS M. BUBALA 3D Carmel, Ind.


An Exhibit in L.A. of Inner Mongolia's Treasures
More than 200 artifacts from Inner Mongolia, an autonomous region of China, are currently on display at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County through May 22.
According to museum officials, the exhibition is the first collaboration between an American museum and the Government of the People's Republic of China.
The exhibition, titled "Genghis Khan: Treasures from Inner Mongolia," spans 3,500 years of Mongol history from the second millennium B.C. to the 14th century, culminating with the reign of Genghis Khan.


For Times Square Couch Potatoes . . .
Sony's Jumbotron, the symbol of Times Square in the 90's, has been dark for two weeks.
But mobile monitor watchers need not despair.
A new, more refined model, the JTS-17, will be making its debut in Times Square this week, possibly on Tuesday.
The screen, which has been showing electronic fare like travelogues and music videos since November 1990, had outlived its 8,000-hour life expectancy.
"We turned off the screen on March 1, before it was expected to turn blue," said Rich Suarez, production and control room manager.


On Sunday; Gay and Green And the Gulf In Between
MILDRED S. Kennedy was flabbergasted when she first came to America six years ago on a desperate alms-seeking mission to stabilize her pioneer integrated public school for Protestant and Catholic youngsters living along Belfast's violent sectarian divide in Northern Ireland.
She was shocked, first, to see Irish Republican Army slogans scrawled in an Irish neighborhood in Boston, as if it were the Falls Road.
"Can't they come and live in another world and forget about it?" she asked then in a conversation.
But even more, Ms.
Kennedy had virtually no success in tapping into the fabled generosity that Irish America likes to celebrate of itself at this time of the year as it gets ready to parade along Fifth Avenue and other showcase Main Streets.


March 6-12; Nixon Returns To Russia (And a Crisis)
Perhaps in the spirit that all pardoned offenders are brothers, Richard M. Nixon went to Moscow and met last week with Alexander V. Rutskoi, the former Vice President who led an armed insurrection against Russia's President, Boris N. Yeltsin, in October and was set free under a general amnesty only two weeks ago.
And perhaps in the spirit that a friend's enemies list should be respected, Mr.
Yeltsin said he was "deeply, personally offended" by Mr.
Nixon's encounters with his foes.
He angrily canceled his own appointment with the former President and took away his bodyguards.


Balancing Act for Violinist And Soloist
WHEN Kurt Masur wants a warmer string sound from the New York Philharmonic, he may sing a bit, use his arms as a violin or speak imploringly to the orchestra.
If a passage goes astray during a concert, the conductor is also apt to glance to his left, where his right-hand man, Glenn Dicterow, is seated in the concertmaster's chair.
It falls to Mr.
Dicterow, who has held the concertmaster's post since 1980, to see to it that the orchestra follows as one being whoever is at the podium.
Since 1991, that person has most often been Mr.
Masur, the orchestra's music director, and during rehearsals -- which are occasionally open to the public -- the tall man with the fringe of gray-white hair can often be seen conferring with the goateed violinist.


A la Carte; A Ceremonial Japanese Tasting Dinner
KAISEKI is the ultimate Japanese tasting meal.
This multicourse 16th-century ceremonial dinner originated in Buddhist temples, and was served to the Imperial Empire's dignitaries on important occasions.
Kaiseki is now found in Japan's most expensive sophisticated restaurants and on Long Island at Heisei in Patchogue.


Amid a Victory, Knicks Learn of the Loss of Starks
John Starks, one of the Knicks' most important players, will miss the next three to eight weeks because of torn cartilage in his left knee.
Starks will undergo arthroscopic surgery tomorrow, and the length of his absence will be determined more specifically following surgery.
The surprising announcement concerning Starks was made immediately following the Knicks' 96-86 victory last night against the Cleveland Cavaliers.
It was New York's sixth consecutive victory, but after the game, Starks's condition was of greater concern.
A magnetic resonance imaging test done yesterday revealed the cartilage damage in Starks's knee.
He suffered the injury Wednesday night in Atlanta, when he slipped and twisted his knee as he fell.


Everyone Wants Lopez's Attention
Of the hundreds and hundreds of letters and phone calls received this year at Rice High School concerning Felipe Lopez, who today is named the best high school basketball player in the country in the annual Parade Magazine all-America ratings, one letter Thursday caught the attention of the basketball coach, Lou DeMello.
"It's from a teacher at East Side High School in Newark," said DeMello, in his office at Rice in upper Manhattan.
"She says her class of 40 Hispanic students study English by reading all the articles about Felipe. She's requesting a field trip for her kids to come here and meet him.
"And here, here's another letter from Iowa! Iowa! Just sending congratulations to Felipe. Imagine this!"


The Sunshine Plate
My first memory of Florida was a pink motel on a dead-end street in Hollywood Beach.
I was about 10, it was Christmas and my brothers and I learned how to body surf, spot jellyfish ("Gross!") and, thanks to the retired couple from Iowa who ran the motel, use a Ouija board. (They worried about the future; we wallowed in it.) After dinner, when the sun splashed orange and purple across the water, Mr.
Pink Motel would get out his ukulele and serenade us:
Enjoy yourself, it's later than you think!
Enjoy yourself, while you're still in the pink!


POSTINGS: Potential for Improvement; Poll Finds Confusion On Getting a Mortgage
The process of getting a mortgage is perceived as confusing and sometimes discriminatory by both those who have bought homes in the last five years and those who don't own homes, according to a study by the Gallup Organization for the Mortgage Bankers Association of America, released last week.
The poll found that blacks and Hispanics who had been through the mortgage lending process were far more likely than whites to believe they had been discriminated against.
Sixteen percent of blacks, 7 percent of Hispanics and 3 percent of whites said they believed they had been discriminated against.
Many more said they found the process formidable and believe some kind of discrimination exists.


What the Counsel to the President Is and Isn't; Not Like Watergate
To the Editor:
It is unfortunate that a President with a beneficial social agenda is being likened to a scoundrel who held the highest office in this land without any conscious effort to uphold the rule of law or the honor of the position and certainly with no egalitarian thought in mind.


Hampton, a Town Where Crime Stays on Holiday
THE town of Hampton, tucked away in the hills of Eastern Connecticut, is one of the state's lesser-known assets.
The small community -- about 25 square miles, about 1,560 people -- still lists agriculture as its principal industry.
You have to work to find it on Route 97, a former Indian path known as the Nipmuck Trail that curves and dips through the area.
But Hampton's main street is a scene out of a Currier &amp; Ives lithograph: graceful 18th- and 19th-century homes, some with big attached barns, the Grange Hall, the general store, the Congregational Church with its steeple pointing to the sky.
It is a pretty place.
It is also -- in an era of drive-by shootings and other random and rampant violence -- the safest town in Connecticut.


Major Pianists Offer Concertos and More
THIS is one of the busiest musical days of the year in Westchester, and one of the most remarkable, too, with five major personalities in the arts appearing at 3 P.M.
One of these artists won't play a note, but Kurt Masur, music director of the New York Philharmonic and one of Rye's most distinguished residents, will be speaking about his life in music at Wainwright House.
While donations are welcome, the event itself is free.


Learning to Balance Work and Family
To the Editor:
Work-family issues must be added to professional curriculums ("Coming Soon: Get a Life 101?," At Work, Feb. 27).
I am a lawyer and a new mother who is currently practicing motherhood rather than law.
There are life issues I avoided as a young, unmarried, childless and endlessly ambitious adult.
I don't know that a textbook would have helped me establish a program for balancing family and professional life, but discussion with peers, professors and professionals might have made me examine the matter more realistically.
No student can afford to be unconcerned about the juggling act.
Professional schools aim to teach students what they must know to be successful members of a profession.
If a life issue affects professionalism, it's hard to see why a curriculum shouldn't cover it.
NICOLE BELSON GOLUBOFF  Bronx, Feb. 27


World Cup Alcohol Ban Is Requested
The American organizers of the World Cup have urged the authorities in the nine host cities to impose restrictions on the sale and consumption of alcohol.
The first reactions have been less than encouraging.
Alan Rothenberg, the chairman of World Cup USA '94, made the suggestion in a letter to the authorities of the nine cities.
In the letter dated Feb. 14 that came to light last week in USA Today, Rothenberg asked for an outright ban in each stadium and in liquor stores and bars before games.


Finding the Right Plant for the Right Place
FOR many, this has been a winter of discontent.
Thoughts are turning toward the closed toolshed door, the any-minute-now warmth of spring and getting the garden in order.
One common approach in this season is to wait for a fine sunny day and head off to the local nursery or well-stocked garden center, or both.
There, the plants desired can be selected.
If a particular plant can't be found, substitutes might be made.
Or rather than select one of a certain plant, maybe three or four would do.
There is no reason to plan ahead, everything can be completed in a day's journey.


Free Visits to Epcot
Certified schoolteachers and principals can visit Walt Disney World's Epcot Center in Florida as often as they wish free of charge this year.
To qualify for an Epcot '94 pass, teachers must bring a copy of an active teaching credential, verification of current employment and a photo ID on their initial visit.
Pass holders also can take advantage of special room rates at nearby hotels.
Information: (407) 560-7277.
TERRY TRUCCO


Marjorie Glasser and Samuel Ticknor
Marjorie May Glasser, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald J. Glasser of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Samuel Howe Ticknor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur W. Ticknor of Sewickley, Pa.
The Rev.
Arthur A. McNulty, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Church Center for the United Nations in New York.
Mrs.
Ticknor, 29, is the marketing manager for fragrances at Christian Dior Perfumes in New York.
She graduated from New York University.


Acrobats on Ice
To the Sports Editor:
Lisa Luciano failed to distinguish the difference between skillful acrobats on ice (Elvis Stojko and Surya Bonaly -- both technically strong, but artistically, and therefore, visually, quite burdensome) and skillful athletes with the most wonderful artistic qualities (Russian and Ukrainian skaters as well as Chen Lu of China and Katarina Witt).
If Luciano's point was meant to condemn the skating style endorsed by the fallen Soviet bloc -- perfection of expression via passion and mastery of lyrical movement on ice, compounded with high standards of technical performance -- then perhaps she should petition for the permanent abandonment of figure skating at future Olympics, in favor of "ice acrobatics."


Untruth And Truth, The Games People Play
"DECEPTION is delicious." That catchy possibility, as the Hartford Stage Company's brochure for "False Admissions" puts it, captures the spirit of the surface dalliances of the privileged classes and the persistent climbers in the generation before the French Revolution.
But the games -- the duplicities, the scheming, the concealments -- the characters play in the comedies of Pierre Carlet de Marivaux are but the means to test sincerity.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about radio in New York City misstated the time of the program "Afropop Worldwide." The program, on WNYC-FM, is heard from midnight Wednesday to 1 A.M.
Thursday.


World Cup Cities: Flights Are Filling Up
The 1994 World Cup soccer tournament is still several months off, but travelers should note that flights into the nine American cities playing host to the matches are filling up for the days just before the games.
Major airlines said that some travelers might find that seats allotted for advance-purchase discounts are largely booked on certain flights throughout the World Cup schedule, which runs from June 17 to July 17.


Hope Starts to Bloom in the Motor City That No Longer Builds Many Cars
The economic ministers of seven nations convening here on Monday at the invitation of President Clinton will have a chance to see what Detroit residents have known for years: a strong recovery by the automotive industry no longer guarantees boom times for the Motor City.
In fact, only three automobile assembly plants are left in Detroit, where the public sector is the top employer.
Second is the health care industry and the auto industry ranks third.


'What Is Found There'
To the Editor:
In his review of Philip Levine's "Bread of Time" (Feb. 20), Dana Gioia inaccurately represents my book "What Is Found There" as "autobiographical literary essays." As its subtitle, "Notebooks on Poetry and Politics," indicates, my book is a prose reflection on poetry in our current state of national crisis, and autobiographical material appears only where it pertains to this theme.
ADRIENNE RICH  Santa Cruz, Calif.


IN SHORT: FICTION
HISTORICAL NOVEL  AIR &amp; FIRE  By Rupert Thomson. Knopf, $23.


Who's Hoodwinking Whom?
To the Editor:
In his review of Scott McCloud's "Understanding Comics," Garry Trudeau opens with remarks about the inauthentic professional cartoonists' jargon that appears in the visual glossary "What's What." He then segues into the review itself by suggesting that a leading suspect in perpetrating this hoax would be Mr.
McCloud.
Sounds reasonable, but your readers may be interested to know that the actual source of this whimsy is a fellow even more familiar to readers of the funnies than Mr.
Trudeau.
Mort Walker, the creator of "Beetle Bailey," concocted these terms for what he described as "a rather pedantic presentation" to the members of the National Cartoonists Society.
He listed the forms and definitions in his book "Backstage at the Strips" (1975).


Sound Bytes; A 'Seer' Peers Ahead
SEYMOUR MERRIN, a consultant, likes to describe himself as the "seer" of the personal computer distribution channel.
His most notable call was the prediction of Businessland's bankruptcy a full two years before the retailer was bought in 1991 by JWP Inc. in a distress sale.
But he also accurately predicted the powerful influence of superstores like CompUSA Inc., the consolidation of PC retailers and the growing power of unconventional sales settings like warehouse clubs and consumer electronics stores.
Mr.
Merrin's nonlinear career led through mining and industrial geology, semiconductor engineering and management positions at I.B.M. and Sperry before he founded Computerworks, one of New York State's first PC retailers, in 1978.
He sold that chain five years ago, and founded a consulting firm, Merrin Information Services in Palo Alto, Calif.


Caught Between 3 Community Boards
Boundaries of the city's community boards, set up in the late 70's, are due for reconsideration under the terms of the City Charter.
And in the first wave of what could become a flood of border wars, Westchester Square is trying to redefine itself.
The area -- with a residential section characterized by single-family homes peppered with high-rise buildings and a flourishing commercial section that is also a transportation hub -- is split between Community Boards 9, 10 and 11.
Some merchants and other residents there are urging that it be included entirely in either Board 10 or 11 so it would benefit from the unified lobbying of one community board.


5 Are Killed in Attack on a Coptic Monastery
Gunmen believed to be Islamic militants shot and killed two priests and three other Christians outside a Coptic monastery in southern Egypt Friday night, security officials said today.
The attack was one of the bloodiest against Christians since Muslim militants shot and killed 13 Christian farmers in the southern village of Manchiet Nasser nearly two years ago.


Where Some West Siders Used to Buy Their Meat
To the Editor:
In "Surf 'n' Turf . . . 'n' Nova, Too" (Feb. 27), you say that until Citarella opened its meat department last year, "customers in the West 70's and 80's had nowhere to go."


'The Paper' Replates 'The Front Page' for the 90's
FIRST, A DISCLAIMER.
It would not be proper to write about Ron Howard's new movie, "The Paper," a romp through 24 hours in the manic life of a New York tabloid, without noting up front that the film takes an extremely dim view of The New York Times.


Reviews/Music; Mann's Magician, Soul Forever Sold
The magician in Thomas Mann's remarkable story "Mario and the Magician" is an artist who has gone over to the other side, an Aschenbach who has not died, but has sold his soul for power and knowledge.
He can control forces "stronger than reason or virtue," hypnotize any listener to follow his will.
He is also, as Mann implied in this 1929 story, a representative of Fascism, able to command the dark impulses that lie under the bourgeois life of a small Italian town.
While watching a new opera based upon "Mario" on Saturday night, presented by the Brooklyn College Opera theater at the George Gershwin Theater, I felt some inkling of the magician's power.
The music, composed by Francis Thorne, and the libretto, by J. D. McClatchy, were so intelligent and coherent that the steadily accumulating evidence of the magician's abilities left me as uneasy as the members of his onstage audience.


A Seven-Month Lockout Ends at Chinatown's Only Unionized Restaurant
Cries of "We won! We won!" echoed down the Bowery yesterday as a seven-month lockout in Chinatown's only unionized restaurant ended in victory for the workers, in what union supporters hope will be a historic day for long-suffering and often powerless Asian immigrant employees.
"This is a good, good day," said a union adviser, Wing Lam, rejoicing with hundreds of other sign-waving, chanting, singing union supporters outside the Silver Palace, a 900-seat dim sum parlor at 50 Bowery.


Review/Theater; In 'Marathon Dancing,' Only Anger Is the Victor
As the film "They Shoot Horses, Don't They" made thunderingly clear 25 years ago, it isn't too hard to find metaphors for the sickness of the American soul in the dance marathons of the Great Depression.
A disparate group of desperate, impoverished losers dancing themselves into exhaustion for a monetary prize, a cynical master of ceremonies manipulating them into increasingly humiliating exhibitions and his repeated glib assurances that these plucky demonstrations of perseverance are what the country is all about: the elements seem made for bald American fables of illusion and exploitation.
Audiences who remember the 1969 Sydney Pollack movie may experience an acute sense of deja vu watching "Marathon Dancing," the director Anne Bogart's fiercely cynical, one-note treatment of the same subject.
But though the essential themes of the works are similar, Ms.
Bogart takes a far more detached, typically Brechtian view of the phenomenon.
And while "Marathon Dancing" offers a host of elaborate visual and musical flourishes, it all seems designed to ballast, quite numbingly, a premise that is established very early on.


In New Jersey, I.B.M. Cuts Space, Frills and Private Desks
Walter P. Barlow, a sales executive at I.B.M., punched his name into the computer under the high steel beams of the old Universal Corrugated Box Machinery Company.
After a brief pause, the screen informed Mr.
Barlow that he would be assigned today to desk No. 106, an anonymous, empty cubicle like all the others with no walls and no adornments -- just a telephone, a jack for his laptop computer and a black plastic tray with a highlighting pen and a stack of Post-It notes.
"I can't imagine why anyone would want to come here just to work," Mr. Barlow said.


Conservationists Divided Over How to Protect Sea Mammals
As Congress revises a law that controls the killing of whales, porpoises and other marine mammals by the fishing industry, the debate among conservationists seems at times more intense than the one among lawmakers.
Groups that together made "save the whales" one of environmentalism's best-known slogans are now divided over how far to accommodate the needs of the fishing industry in a new version of the law, the Marine Mammal Protection Act.


Why Do We Still Play This Dirty Spy Game?; Pattern of Abuse
To the Editor:
Aldrich H. Ames, news reports say, was known as a heavy drinker.
"Spooked Again" by Ronald Kessler (Op-Ed, Feb. 27) writes of previous employees who have compromised the Central Intelligence Agency: Edward Lee Howard had a drug problem, and so did William P. Kampiles.
James Jesus Angleton, C.I.A. counterintelligence chief, according to "The Mole Who Never Was Takes On Flesh and Blood" (The Week in Review, Feb. 27), "shut himself away in his office most afternoons, a brace of martinis in his bloodstream."


New Yorker Publisher
Lawrence C. Burstein, publisher of Self, has been named to the newly created position of senior vice president and publisher of The New Yorker, Thomas A. Florio, president of the magazine, announced last week.
Mr.
Burstein will be succeeded at Self by Beth Fuchs Brenner, the magazine's advertising director.


Failure to Replace Trustees Weakens CUNY, Critics Say
The mayor and the governor have not appointed any new trustees of City University for years.
The board held only eight regular meetings last year, and just one of the five borough hearings it is supposed to hold every year.
And at committee meetings, where most of the work is conducted, there are often only two trustees at the big table.
A majority of members of the City University Board of Trustees are holdovers whose terms of office expired as long ago as 1988, an unprecedented situation that educators and local officials say has weakened the leadership of the nation's largest urban university.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
O'Neal Attack Foiled  Charles Barkley and Kevin Johnson scored 19 of Phoenix's 21 points in the fourth quarter to finish with 30 each as the Suns withstood a 39-performance by Shaquille O'Neal to beat the Magic, 100-93, yesterday in Orlando, Fla.
Johnson's jumper broke an 89-89 tie with six minutes left, and he also scored the Suns' last 4 points. (AP) GOLF  Albus Wins the Vantage  Jim Albus of Oyster Bay, L.I., shot a one-over-par 73 yesterday but maintained his wire-to-wire lead to win the Vantage PGA Seniors tournament in San Antonio.
Albus finished at eight-under-par 208 to win his third Senior Tour event, his first since the 1993 GTE Suncoast Classic.
The 53-year-old Albus won $97,500.
He finished one shot ahead of the two-time tournament champion, Lee Trevino, Graham Marsh of Australia and George Archer, who each won $47,666.67.
Albus increased his earnings to $159,843, moving into third place on the money list. (AP) ALPINE SKIING  Moe Snakes the Slalom  Tommy Moe of Palmer, Alaska, who won two medals at the Lillehammer Games, captured his first World Cup victory when he won the super giant slalom yesterday in Whistler, British Columbia.
Moe covered the course in 1 minute 31.22 seconds.
Marc Girardelli of Luxembourg was second in 1:31.93, and Werner Perathoner of Italy was third in 1:32.05. (AP) Turgeon Wins Third Medal: Melanie Turgeon of Quebec captured the giant slalom yesterday and won her third medal at the world junior Alpine championships at Whiteface Mountain outside Lake Placid, N.Y.
Turgeon, 17, had times of 1 minutes 8.29 seconds and 1:11.
TENNIS  Martin and Lendl Out  Seventh-seeded Todd Martin and No. 13 Ivan Lendl were eliminated in third-set tie breakers yesterday at the Lipton Championships in Key Biscayne, Fla.
Martin lost by 4-6, 6-2, 7-6 (7-5) to Byron Black of Zimbabwe in the second round.
Lendl squandered two match points and lost to Jan Siemerink of the Netherlands, 3-6, 7-5, 7-6 (7-5).
In women's play, top-seeded Steffi Graf, No. 3 Gabriela Sabatini and No. 7 Lindsay Davenport advanced. (AP) SOCCER  Bad Tempers and a Tie  The United States played to a disappointing 1-1 tie with South Korea in a bad-tempered international yesterday in Fullerton, Calif.
Marcelo Balboa scored the United States goal.
In a match in which saw five yellow cards handed out, Balboa scored in the 65th minute from close range after Alexi Lalas's header from a Hugo Perez corner was blocked by a defender. (Reuters) HORSE RACING  Two in a Row for Fraise  Fraise, the 6-year-old turf champion, won the Pan American Handicap at Gulfstream Park in Hallandale, Fla., for the second year in a row yesterday, on the same track where he also won the Breeders' Cup Turf in 1992.
He was chased home by Summer Ensign, who edged the 6-year-old mare Fairy Garden for second place by a neck.
Fraise ran the mile and a half in 2:243/5 under a high weight of 124 pounds, paid $4.20 for $2 to win and earned $180,000 of the purse of $300,000.


The Plot to Recapture Ukraine
Ukraine is an independent country, though many Russians are reluctant to recognize that fact.
Hard-line remnants of Russia's military and K.G.B. are eager to recapture it.
Their strategy is to stir up civil unrest, beginning in Crimea, which is part of Ukraine.
By undermining Ukraine's territorial integrity, hard-liners hope to destroy the republic's independence.
That strategy could lead to civil war and could erode the power of Boris Yeltsin and his fellow reformers in Russia.
Obviously, they cannot afford to play along.
Obviously, too, Washington needs to help them.


INSIDE
Ripples From a Massacre
Years after a white mob destroyed a Florida town and killed six black residents, a move to compensate the victims divides state officials.
Page A12.
An Unspectacular Suspect
For a Lebanese cabdriver, a murder charge in the Brooklyn Bridge shooting was a sharp turn from his protected family background.
Page B1.
A Whitewater Figure Speaks
The Clintons' business partner in the Whitewater land venture spoke out, and Hillary Clinton acknowledged mistakes in the affair.
Page B6.
A2 Arts


Dance in Review
'Echo' and 'Evoe'  Feld Ballets/NY Joyce Theater 175 Eighth Avenue (at 19th Street) Chelsea
Eliot Feld's "Echo" and "Evoe" were choreographed five years apart, but they belong to the genre of tethered dance Mr.
Feld has specialized in: choreography that keeps the dancer on a short rein, with moves, gestures and ornamentation developing out of the most rigid and circumscribed of structures.
Performed consecutively, as they were by Feld Ballets/NY on Thursday night, the two dances are also provocative counterparts for each other.


Toddler Is Wounded in Crossfire
A 2-year-old boy was gravely wounded and a woman was shot in the leg yesterday when they were caught in a shootout on Staten Island, the police said.
A confrontation between two groups of people at the Stapleton Houses, a housing project in the Stapleton section, escalated into gunfire at 6:02 P.M., said Detective Sonia Burgos, a spokeswoman for the Housing Authority police.
Investigators did not know what the subject of the dispute was, she said, but neighborhood residents said drug-dealing and drug-related shootings are relatively common there.


Sophomore Wins Indoor 800
Milt Campbell, who had the country's fastest 800-meter high school indoor time this season, surrendered that honor today to a sensational sophomore, Michael Granville, at the National Interscholastic Indoor track and field championships in the Carrier Dome.
Granville, holder of the national freshman class outdoor record at 1 minute 51.03 seconds, caught Campbell, who took the lead with 300 meters remaining, on the backstretch and blew by him off the final turn to win in 1:51.11.
It was a national sophomore record, a meet record and the third-fastest time run indoors by a high school runner.


Mayor's Job Austerities Take the Ax to New York's Poorest; Wasting Our Resources
To the Editor:
Two articles March 1 underscore New York City's nonsensical approach to finding jobs for people on public assistance.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani endorses a program to pay America Works $5,500 per client, whether or not a welfare recipient gets a job, yet he imposes a $68 million spending freeze on the Board of Education.


No Headline
Only a few years ago, I thought that maybe it would not be necessary to outlaw Kach because Israeli democracy should make the effort to let that despicable thing called Kach stay alive.
I was wrong, as were others.
Now it may be late, but not too late. -- YOSSI SARID, Israel's Environment Minister.  [ A6:1. ]


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the independent black homeland of Bophuthatswana referred incorrectly to the citizenship of residents of South Africa's 10 so-called homelands.
Residents of the four "independent" homelands, including Bophuthatswana, lost their South African citizenship under apartheid but regained it in January; residents of the six other homelands never lost their citizenship.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10 ISRAEL BANS RADICAL GROUPS
The Israeli Government outlawed two organizations of radical settlers, branding them terrorists on a par with Islamic militants.
A1


Chinese Puzzle; After Months of Dialogue on Human Rights, Beijing Takes Harder Line Toward the U.S.
From the outset, Warren Christopher's first visit here as Secretary of State has been a diplomatic mugging.
Today he and his aides were trying to understand why.
But instead of answers, what Mr.
Christopher got was a philosphical discussion punctuated by aphorisms in a meeting with President Jiang Zemin:


WGBH Takes Its Shows to the Stores
In their constant search for new sources of money, public television stations have exhausted a laundry list of ideas, from auctions to telethons.
But now one of public television's most prominent and innovative stations, WGBH in Boston, is entering new and potentially lucrative territory by starting a series of toys, games and other products based on some of the station's popular programs, including "Nova," "This Old House" and "The Victory Garden."


Loans to Build S.R.O. Units May Be Ended
The Giuliani administration plans to stop financing the construction of single-room apartments for homeless people, a program widely acknowledged to be the most successful and cost-efficient for moving single people out of shelters, off the streets and into permanent housing.
A provision in Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposed capital budget for the next three years would eliminate $89 million in city spending for a program that provides money for nonprofit groups that develop housing with special support services for homeless people.


Will Mets Have Kent Playing in Circles?
Jeff Kent thought this had all come to an end last season.
He thought the Mets had decided to make him their starting second baseman and that all the uncertainty concerning his future -- should he play second? third? shortstop? -- had been put behind him.
Apparently, it has not.


Treasury Lists Sales For Week
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.48 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.76 percent.


ISRAEL VOTES BAN ON JEWISH GROUPS LINKED TO KAHANE
The Israeli Government today outlawed two radical Jewish groups rooted in the Arab-hating doctrine of the late Rabbi Meir Kahane, branding them terrorist organizations on a par with Islamic militants like Hamas.
It was a Kahane disciple, Dr.
Baruch Goldstein, who massacred at least 29 Muslims at prayer in a Hebron mosque on Feb. 25, turning the territories into a seething caldron and halting the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.


Patents
CLOSE to 10 million people in the United States and Canada seek emergency-room care for chest pains every year.
About half of those people are admitted to cardiac units for several days of tests to diagnose heart attack, angina or causes less troubling like indigestion.
In the end, fewer than half those hospitalized are found to have heart disease.
These statistics seem to indicate that lives might be saved, patient comfort improved, and time and money conserved if doctors were able to immediately diagnose heart trouble.
A patent awarded to a Canadian company for a chest-pain analysis kit that works like a home pregnancy test may give physicians that power.


People
*
Lloyd Jacobs, executive vice president of McKinney &amp; Silver, Raleigh, N.C., was promoted to the new position of vice chairman. *
Jonathan B. Cranin was named to the new position of executive vice president and deputy creative director at McCann-Erickson New York.
He was previously an executive vice president and group creative director of Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York.


Paying for Racial Attack Divides Florida Leaders
More than 70 years after one of the grisliest episodes of racial violence in Florida history, a move to compensate its black victims has deeply divided state government here, with some officials arguing that Florida has no obligation to the survivors and that any redress would encourage a flood of similar claims.
In a bill filed by sympathetic state legislators, a group representing 11 survivors and 45 descendants is seeking $7.2 million as compensation for the state's failure to protect the black hamlet of Rosewood during a rampage by a white mob in 1923.
In a week of shooting and burning, the mob killed six residents and destroyed the town.
A companion bill would also build a $1 million memorial at the site, a swampy area on Florida's Gulf Coast about 40 miles southwest of Gainesville.


Kohl Party Suffers Setback In North German State Vote
Voters in Germany's fourth-largest state handed Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Party a sharp setback today in the first of 18 electoral contests around the country that will end with a national election Oct. 16.
The Chancellor had campaigned heavily across the state, Lower Saxony in northern Germany.
His party has trailed for months in public opinion polls, but he said a few days ago that he thought the national mood was swinging back toward the Christian Democrats.


Providence Is Top Shelf in Big East Tournament Final
At those colleges where the basketball teams have the highest of expectations, maybe the effort necessary to win a conference tournament is just too much to ask at this time of year.
Maybe the motivation that determines the difference, when the prize is a Big East championship rather than the final outcome of the National Collegiate Athletic Association season, has more to do with an empty trophy shelf.
Rick Barnes was thinking about that shelf after his Providence Friars won their first Big East tournament, after they matched the physical play of the Georgetown Hoyas in a 74-64 victory, and after Rob Phelps, in his weekend of redemption, grabbed the last rebound and claimed the ball as his own.


Mayor's Job Austerities Take the Ax to New York's Poorest
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has promised that his proposed reduction of the New York City municipal work force by 15,000 jobs will not affect "essential services." Yet the real question appears to be not if these cuts will affect essential services, but whose services they will affect.


Walter M. Hutton, 81, Jordan Army General
Maj.
Gen.
Walter Morland Hutton, a Briton who was Chief of Staff of Jordan's Arab Legion in the 1950's until he was dismissed by King Hussein, died on March 5.
He was 81 and had moved to Cornwall, in southwestern England, after living in retirement in Spain.
General Hutton was an Arabist and a highly decorated veteran of World War II.He was Chief of Staff of the Arab Legion, as the Jordanian army was then known in English, from 1953 to 1956, when he was dismissed along with the force's British commander, Lieut.


34 Years, And N.Y.U. Goes Back To a Final 4
Adam Crawford's name will never be confused with Satch Sanders's.
But both can say they led New York University to a Final Four.
Crawford, the Violets' 6-foot-3-inch senior captain, scored 19 points Saturday night as N.Y.U. (24-4) held off host State University New York-Albany, 67-65, in an National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III regional final for the right to go to the national semifinals in Buffalo this weekend.
It will be the Violets' first appearance in a Final Four at any level since the 1959-60 season, when Sanders led Coach Lou Rossini's charges to the Division I version.


Montana Meets the Middle Ages
If we were to put our faith in the West Valley School Board of Kalispell, Mont., we might be convinced that there are witches in that part of the state.
Certainly, there is one woman who has handed out books and knowledge, to mere children, and it looks as if some may consider such acts black magic.
In following the American Library Association policy that librarians are duty bound to obtain requested material without regard to bias or personal judgment, Debbie Denzer, an assistant librarian who had worked at the West Valley School for a little more than a year, made the sort of mistake you can't afford to make around there.
In early December, she assisted two seventh grade girls with their research for a class report, giving them information from encyclopedias and lending them two books of her own after making sure that they had their parents' and teacher's approval.


Baseball's Conscience
To the Editor:
The owners of the major league baseball teams have again demonstrated that their heads are in the sand.
They have cut $500,000 from umpire development.
They don't seem to realize that the integrity of the game rests on the shoulders of the umpires and that the integrity of the game is the No. 1 issue for fans.


Disruption of London Air Schedules Is Minor
A mortar attack on Heathrow Airport yesterday and the temporary closing of Heathrow and Gatwick airports led to the cancellation of some New York-London flights and left hundreds of passengers stranded for hours.
But airline officials said they did not expect any interruptions today.
Several British Airways planes flying into Heathrow were diverted to other British airports, forcing the cancellation of four flights headed to John F. Kennedy and Newark International airports from London, John Lampl, a British Airways spokesman, said.


CHRONICLE
The National Council of Negro Women's campaign to establish a National Center for African-American Women in Washington received a major boost today: the donation of a historic landmark building in downtown Washington.
The building, valued at $1.8 million, was donated by BILL COSBY , the entertainer, and his wife, CAMILLE COSBY , an educator and lecturer.
"This center will give African-American women a new technological capability to bring forth creative solutions that merge the accomplishment of our past with the unbounded possibilities of the future," DR.
DOROTHY I. HEIGHT , president and chief executive of the council, said in a statement.
"We are delighted that Bill and Camille Cosby share this vision and have given us significant momentum in making it a reality."


Dividend Meetings


CHRONICLE
RICHARD LEAKEY , the conservationist and paleontologist, has been reinstated as Kenya's wildlife guardian and is calling his resumption of duty a victory over forces of hate intent on destroying the country's natural heritage.
"Let us not hate them in return; we never fought them back," Dr.
Leakey told clapping, cheering and dancing employees at his Nairobi offices on Friday, Reuters reported.
"We have overwhelmed those who hated our glowing work."


From Bullet Wounds to Wedded Bliss, the Bride Gets a Happy Ending


Rice and Lopez Grab Title
Several hours before Rice defeated St.
Raymond, 79-53, to capture the Catholic High School Athletic Association championship game at Fordham University yesterday, droves of fans seeking tickets were being turned away at the door.
Inside, the flags of the Dominican Republic and Rice High School were being unfurled, and as the clock crept closer toward the opening tipoff, those flags were being paraded wildly around the tiny gymnasium.
Hero in the Community
By the time the horn sounded, indicating the start of the fourth and most-anticipated matchup between the two best teams in the city this season, each of the 3,300 seats was filled, and television crews, reporters and photographers had already jockeyed for position to get a closer look at Felipe Lopez, the nation's top high school basketball player, who also happens to be a hero in the Hispanic community.


For an Envoy, Home Turf Is More Appealing
From a continent away, Boston's former Mayor, Raymond L. Flynn, who is now Ambassador to the Vatican, is once again befuddling, bemusing and maddening enthusiasts and critics from here to Washington.
St.
Patrick's Day is extremely important to voters and politicians here, and the politically ambitious Mr.
Flynn had no intention of sitting it out in Rome.
He had planned to devote an entire week to the holiday, marching at the head of parades from Miami to Holyoke, Mass., going to ceremonial dinners and possibly testing the waters for a run for governor of Massachusetts.


Cleaning Up the Trash Racket
Trash hauling is a big, competitive business almost everywhere.
But in and around New York City, the trash business is just big.
Racketeers and ancient family enterprises dominate the trade; consumers and commercial enterprises suffer.
Instead of competing, haulers operate in market-allocating cartels while mob enforcers help keep the competition out, robbing the public of efficient, economical service.
This is a well-documented disgrace that deserves far more official attention that it has received.
Mark Green, the city's Public Advocate, now advocates changes aimed at introducing price competition into a strangled market.
His suggestions deserve the careful attention of Mayor Giuliani, who is a fan of competitive enterprise and built his career fighting racketeers.


From the Bubble to the N.I.T.
Georgia Tech, Villanova and Oklahoma, three "bubble teams" left out of the N.C.A.A. tournament, head 32 teams invited last night to the 56th annual National Invitation Tournament.
Games begin Wednesday and Thursday at campus sites in the nation's oldest post-season tournament with the semifinals and final in Madison Square Garden.
There are 10 teams with at least 20 victories, including Murray State (23-5).
There are three teams from both the Pac-10 (Arizona State, Stanford, Southern Cal) and the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference (Canisius, Manhattan, Siena).
Impressive records include Bradley (21-7), Brigham Young (21-9), Canisius (22-6), Davidson (22-7), Gonzaga (21-7), Old Dominion (20-9), Siena (21-7) and Xavier, Ohio (20-7).


Finally, Sarajevo Visits Its Lonely Graves
Bare Cemetery, the city's main graveyard, opened today to visitors for the first time since the war began, and Hajro Hadzanovic, 63, a retired bus dispatcher, was out pulling weeds from his parents' plot.
On this, the first day of Bajram, a three-day Islamic holiday that follows Ramadan, Muslims here traditionally tend the graves of their relatives, and they were out at dawn laying plastic and silk flowers on mound after mound of crumbly dirt.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Business Inventories . . .
Jan.
Tuesday  Industrial Production . . .
Feb.
Producer Prices . . .
Feb.
Wednesday  Housing Starts . . .
Feb.
Thursday  Consumer Price Index . . .
Feb.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Why Do We Still Play This Dirty Spy Game?; Lie Detector's Flaws
To the Editor:
In "Spies, Lies, Averted Eyes" (Op-Ed, March 8), Ronald Kessler resurrects a tiresome unscientific argument for the accuracy of polygraph tests.
He maintains that if the Central Intelligence Agency had faith in polygraph tests, the accused spy Aldrich H. Ames would have been caught years ago and that it is "arrogant" of R. James Woolsey, Director of Central Intelligence, to refuse to take a polygraph.
Such views are fanciful.


Review/Pop; Miriam Makeba and Hugh Masekela Sing of Hope for South Africa's Future
Miriam Makeba and Hugh Masekela spent years speaking out against apartheid, within and outside their music.
Now, with elections on the way in South Africa, they are looking ahead.
During their concert at Manhattan Center on Saturday night, their first shared headlining appearance in New York since the 1960's, Ms.
Makeba drew cheers when she announced, "After years of living in exile, I am happy to know that now, at 62, I will be able to vote." She then reminded listeners that South Africa's problems weren't over.
"We need your investments, we need your skills," she said.
"Please don't abandon us."
In the 1960's, Ms.
Makeba and Mr.
Masekela were South Africa's two most famous expatriate musicians; for a short time, they were also husband and wife.
With hits like Ms.
Makeba's "Pata Pata" and Mr.
Masekela's "Grazing in the Grass," they brought township rhythms to American listeners.
Mr.
Masekela blended South African music with modal jazz; Ms.
Makeba made African songs part of her international repertory.


Wells Fargo to Offer Funds Designed for Baby Boomers
Wells Fargo Bank will introduce today an innovative family of mutual funds in an attempt to reach affluent baby boomers who never enter its branches and may not even live in the bank's home state of California.
The products are a series of five asset allocation funds, which switch a customer's money among stocks, bonds and short-term money market investments.
Each of the funds has a target date, from 2000 to 2040, representing the approximate year the investor will need the money, most likely for retirement.
The further off the investment goal, the more aggressive the investment strategy will be.


Dance in Review
Anthony Dance Theater  Church of the Holy Trinity
Ever since she founded the Mary Anthony Dance Studio 40 years ago, Ms.
Anthony has been one of New York City's leading modern-dance teachers.
A pedagogue who believes in creativity as well as in technical expertise, Ms.
Anthony not only presents her own choreography but also encourages that of her students.


Virginia Legislature Approves Subsidies To New Disney Park
By large majorities in both houses, the Virginia Legislature on Saturday night approved subsidies that the Walt Disney Company had demanded as a condition for building a history theme park in Haymarket, 35 miles southwest of Washington.
The incentives, which were enacted 45 minutes before the General Assembly adjourned for the year, have been the most hotly debated issue of the two-month legislative session.
Disney opponents who live near Haymarket marched outside the Capitol with effigies of Mickey Mouse and posters that read "Make the Mouse Move."


Health Plan Account Is Won by Saatchi
Secure Horizons, a division of Pacificare Health Systems in Cypress, Calif., said it had selected Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/Pacific in Torrance, Calif., to handle its $10 million account, which had been handled by Stein Robaire Helm Inc. in Los Angeles for the last 10 months.
Saatchi was awarded the account after a six-month review that also included the incumbent, Stein Robaire, which continues to handle various projects; Baxter Stone Advertising in Santa Ana, Calif., and Ketchum Advertising in Los Angeles, which handles Pacificare's account.
A new campaign for the division, which offers health plans for older patients, is expected to begin in April.


House Takes Up Measures to Provide Billions More to Fight Crime and Build Prisons
Faced with a hawkish Senate bill and a public alarmed about violence, the House this week is to take up crime legislation that includes a number of provisions tougher than lawmakers were considering when they left the issue last fall.
Crime bills have been blocked in Congress for several years by a standoff between liberals opposed to moves to expand the death penalty and conservatives who are against expensive measures like expanding drug treatment.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; Big East Mergers and Hostile Takeovers
SOMETIMES I worry that our fine young scholar-athletes are not getting a fair educational shake what with all these tournaments and road trips and practices.
But lately I have come to realize they are getting a first-hand lesson in contemporary economics and business by watching their schools and their conferences play their own big-buck games.
Lately I watch colleges break up traditional loyalties by switching conferences.
I watch conferences swelling to the size of mammoth multinational corporations.
I watch schools bust television alliances for a few more million dollars.


Family Circle's New Editor
Susan Kelliher Ungaro has been named editor in chief of Family Circle magazine.
The announcement was made by Charles H. Townsend, the president and chief executive of the Women's Magazines Group of The New York Times Company.
Ms.
Ungaro, 40, has been the deputy editor of Family Circle since 1991.
She has been with the company since 1976, when she joined Family Circle as editorial assistant.


Nick Price Displays Perfection (Almost) to a Tee
Nick Price, playing nearly perfect golf, came from three strokes behind today to win the Honda Classic and forcefully state his case for consideration as the world's best golfer.
In a display that was as close to an airtight round of golf as anyone has played in a final round since David Graham hit every fairway and every green in the final round of the United States Open at Merion in 1981, Price, 37, hit all 18 greens and missed only one fairway.
He shot 66 for a total of 276, eight under par, and beat Craig Parry, who shot 67, by one stroke.
"All I tried to do was not make any mistakes," said Price, who only made one, three-putting the 15th hole.
"I got off to a good start and never looked back. I just kept hitting the ball in the fairway and on the green." Threatened a Bit
It was a frighteningly precise display by Price, who has won 12 tournaments since his breakthrough victory at the PGA Championship 18 months ago.
He began the day with birdies on the first two holes, took the lead with a birdie at the sixth hole and never relinquished it.


Why Do We Still Play This Dirty Spy Game?
To the Editor:
The reactions of the mass media and prominent senators to the Aldrich H. Ames spy allegations are little short of ludicrous.
The very articles that profess shock about Mr.
Ames's presumed sellout to Russia's Government point out that his alleged crime consisted of exposing 10 Russian citizens whom the United States Government had co-opted or, in the vernacular, turned.


Accounts
*
Cornnuts Inc., Alameda, Calif., to Ketchum Advertising, San Francisco, to handle the snack food maker's account, previously handled by Flying A Advertising, San Francisco.
Billings were estimated at $1.5 million. *
Ameritech Corp., Chicago, to Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis, as the first agency to handle its enhanced business services marketing unit.
Fallon already handles the Baby Bell telephone company's corporate account.
Billings have yet to be determined.


Executive Changes
CELGENE CORP., Warren, N.J., named Richard G. Wright chairman and chief executive.
PACE AMERICAN GROUP INC., Tucson, Ariz., said it had dismissed its chief executive and president, Don Pace, and its chief financial officer, Greg Kaplan.
The two officers had been on leaves of absence while the company investigated accusations of improper personal financial arrangements with two of Pace American's insurance agents.


Mexican Conflict Heats Up, With Peasants Seizing Land
As Mexico waits for peasant rebels to decide on a proposed settlement to their 10-week-old uprising, political conflict is again deepening across the southern state of Chiapas.
Despite Government promises of generous economic aid and agrarian reforms in the draft peace accords, Indian and peasant groups have stepped up their push for land, seizing tens of thousands of acres.
Cattle ranchers and other landowners have lashed back, pressing for the squatters' eviction and threatening violence if the Government does not intervene.


Why the Plug Was Pulled at Lear's Magazine
When Lear's magazine closed shop last week after six years of publication, its death was attributed to many forces that have killed magazines in recent years: a decline in advertising, the difficulties of a stand-alone magazine in an industry dominated by multimagazine companies, and a seeming lack of funds.
But, the fact is, none of these caused the death of Lear's.


Laughing and Crying and Heading to the Show
After beating Holy Cross on Saturday, the Fordham women's team cut down the nets at Rose Hill Gym in the Bronx and ran outside to ring the victory bell, an upstanding tradition.
They talked on the post-game radio show and replayed the game over and over in their minds.
This season has been special, to no one more than center Tammilyn Borkowski, the team's captain and only senior.
She has spent three of her five seasons at Fordham rehabilitating a series of leg injuries and recovering from knee surgery.
The team has rallied around her.


Press Notes
WHAT is black and white and technicolor and digital and read all over?
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution hopes the answer will be the electronic newspaper that it began offering yesterday.
Called "Access Atlanta," the service is one of the most sophisticated electronic newspapers yet.
Backed by a news and production staff of 25 people, it is also one of the most ambitious.
Access Atlanta is available over the Prodigy Services Company's computer service for $6.95 a month, with additional charges for services like electronic mail.


I.R.A. Forces 2-Hour Closing of London Airports
The Irish Republican Army closed down London's two main airports for two hours tonight, delaying thousands of travelers and disrupting international air traffic through much of Europe and beyond.
In the morning, Heathrow airport was hit by another mortar attack, the third in five days, but the four shells that struck did not explode and no injuries or damage were reported.


Networks' New Cable Channels Get a Big Jump on the Competition
Six months after a showdown with the nation's cable television industry over the right to retransmit their signals, three broadcast networks are finding the potential for big rewards.
As a result of the deals that ended the dispute over "retransmission consent," one network has a cable channel up and running and two others are promising strong start-ups for their own channels in the next few months.


Appointment At Bertelsmann
Peter Olson, chief administrative officer for the Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, has been named head of the North American book division of Bertelsmann A.G., Bantam Doubleday Dell's parent, company executives announced last week.
The change is effective on July 1.
In his new post, Mr.
Olson, who is 43, will be chairman of Bantam Doubleday Dell and will oversee all of Bertelsmann's book publishing and book club activities in the United States and Canada.
Bertelsmann is an international media company based in Germany.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the use of church parking lots by Long Island Rail Road commuters misstated the first name of the pastor of the Cure of Ars Roman Catholic Church in Merrick.
He is the Rev.
James Swiader, not George.


Researcher Falsified Data in Breast Cancer Study
A Federal investigation has found that a Canadian researcher falsified data in a study that helped change the way breast cancer is treated.
The study concluded that full mastectomies were not always necessary to prevent the spread of early forms of the disease.
The implications of the investigative finding for the treatment of breast cancer are not immediately clear.
Cancer experts, moving to reassure women today, said there were other studies that supported the original research.


It's Surgery For Starks But Knicks Carry On
For the next three to eight weeks, the Knicks must play without their second-leading scorer.
And coping with the absence of John Starks presents New York with a critical challenge at a crucial stage of the season.
A more definitive timetable for Starks's return will be set after he undergoes arthroscopic surgery today to repair cartilage damage in his left knee.


Sir Vincent Wigglesworth Is Dead; Insect Physiology Expert Was 94
Sir Vincent Brian Wigglesworth, a British biologist who did pioneering studies of the physiology of insects, died on Feb. 12 in Cambridge, England.
He was 94 years old and lived in Cambridge and in Lavenham in Suffolk County in southeastern England.
Sir Vincent, who was knighted in 1964, was Reader in Entomology at Cambridge University from 1945 to 1952; Quick Professor of Biology there from 1952 to 1966, when he retired from that chair; and a longtime Fellow of Cambridge's Gonville and Caius College.


Osaka Journal; Japan's Big Rice Scare (Let Them Eat Californian)
The word rippled through this giant industrial city on Friday night, first through the back streets around the sprawling railroad station, then into the well-heeled suburbs.
Be at Hankyu Department Store, everyone said, 10 A.M.
There will be a shipment of pure Japanese rice, only 4,400 pounds, but the real thing -- no blending of grains from Thailand or California.
So with the press declaring a national emergency at hand -- the first serious rice shortage since the bleak days of the late 1940's -- the line started forming at 6 in the morning in this city about 250 miles southwest of Tokyo.
Twenty-three minutes after the doors opened, the whole shipment was gone, rationed out in five-kilogram bags -- about 11 pounds -- to the first 400 customers.


Review/Music; Herbert Blomstedt in Debut With the Philharmonic
If Nielsen's Fourth Symphony is not played as often as it deserves and is very seldom played well, the composer must take some of the blame.
This ever-astonishing score demands arduous athletic feats from soloistic instrumental groups, beginning with unison fortissimo winds in the very first bar.
It often functions like a relay race: sections pick up onrushing rhythmic figures in split-second shifts, then sprint in the open air.
Yet the musical surface must unfold with an unmechanical, spontaneous motion.
The conductor who succeeds in holding this difficult fabric together has little use for conventional podium bravura.
There are many tempting opportunities for broad, clarifying gestures, but Nielsen's all-important forward momentum must be maintained in strict, businesslike fashion.
Thus it is that certain star conductors on the order of Karajan and Bernstein have floundered with this music; the definitive accounts remain those recorded several decades ago by lesser-known Danish conductors who understood Nielsen's idiom intimately.


Serbian Gunners Slip Away as U.S. Planes Await U.N. Approval
American warplanes were poised to make the first NATO air strike of the Bosnian war Saturday night, but were thwarted when United Nations commanders took hours to approve the raid, allowing Serbian forces who had been shelling French peacekeepers to slip away in the darkness, Western officials said today.
The episode raised questions about the efficiency of the chain of command created to protect United Nations peacekeepers and about the willingness of some senior United Nations officers to order attacks.


Connecticut Women's Post-Season Drive Begins With a Top Seeding
He says it's crazy, out of control in Storrs, Conn.
And Connecticut Coach Geno Auriemma wouldn't trade it for anything.
"But I'm a nervous wreck," he adds.
It's March Madness for the women, too.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association women's tournament expanded from 48 to 64 teams this year, and the Northeast has sending several quality teams included: No. 3-ranked Connecticut, No. 5 Penn State, No. 14 Seton Hall, Rutgers and Fordham.
All first-round games begin Wednesday and will be played at campus sites of the higher-seeded team.


A Better View in Better Weather


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; California enlists ethnically diverse agencies to try to persuade teen-agers to abstain from sex.
THE scene was a kitchen in a Los Angeles house.
The action was between two Hispanic actresses playing a mother and a teen-age daughter in turmoil over the sexual demands of the daughter's boyfriend.
The dialogue explained for Hispanic parents the way to talk to their children about postponing sex.
That is until Patricia Perez, who has no credits as a commercial television director, called "cut."


In Quest to Stay at Top, Rangers Get a Breather
Mike Keenan sounded sick, croaking his words through a sore throat, the skin on his face pale, his eyes watery.
His Ranger players looked weary, too, having played 14 games in the previous 23 days and preparing to play three more in the next five, beginning tonight against Florida.
"They're a little bit tired," Keenan said.


Michigan Debates Best Tax to Finance Schools
For weeks, the talk in this rural town surrounded by poplars and pines has centered not on the snow or the spring fishing but on schools and taxes.
This is the town that drew nationwide attention last March by closing its schools three months early when it ran out of money after voters refused to raise taxes.
Its decision led to one of the nation's most sweeping proposals to change the way schools are financed.


World Economies


Bridge
Winners of major titles usually have solid partnerships backed by years of discussion and practice, but the Open Pairs competition that ended here Saturday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals represented an exception.
Allan Falk of Okemos, Mich., and Lloyd Arvedon of Medford, Mass., formed an impromptu partnership shortly before play began on Friday, and they surged to victory in the two final sessions.
Falk is the Commissioner of the Michigan Court of Appeals and the author of three books.
Arvedon does fund-raising work for schools in the Boston area.


Clinton Partner Denies One Allegation
As Democrats and Republicans continued bickering on television this morning over whether Congressional hearings should be held on the Whitewater case, Bill and Hillary Clinton's business partner in the Arkansas land venture that gave the case its name said that one main instance of supposed wrongdoing never occurred.
The former partner, James B. McDougal said on the ABC News program "This Week" that "in no way, shape, form or fashion" did any money from a savings and loan he headed go "into a Clinton campaign."


World War II Army Found Use for Nisei
To the Editor:
Lucille A. Harrison (letter, March 1), responds to a review of "On Familiar Terms," a memoir by Donald Keene, the critic of Japanese culture and literature.
She suggests that, after Pearl Harbor, President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Congress overlooked the thousands of Japanese linguists who languished in the "relocation centers" that held United States citizens of Japanese ancestry.


Ames Case Poses Task for C.I.A.: A Microscopic Search of Decades
The Central Intelligence Agency has suspended some operations abroad, told many clandestine operatives to lie low and begun a microscopic review of some of the most difficult intelligence cases of the last decade as a consequence of the case against Aldrich H. Ames, the Central Intelligence Agency officer accused of spying for Moscow, Government officials said last week.
The arrest of Mr.
Ames, a former Soviet counterintelligence branch chief, has forced the agency to reopen its files on hundreds of cases covering drug operations, a duplicitous defector and even the death of one of its own officers, they said.
Years of Backtracking
In scores of overseas stations and in its own labyrinthine corridors, the C.I.A. is "walking the cat back," spy argot for the difficult business of understanding a disaster and dealing with its aftermath.
Government officials said the agency must take numerous steps, with these among them:


Where Are the Jobs?
Finance and labor ministers from the Group of Seven industrial democracies are meeting in Detroit to discuss the deteriorating job market around the world.
The problem: Economies are growing after the long recession, but good jobs are still hard to find.
Article, page D1.


GUNS
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has announced a campaign to reduce the number of illegal guns in New York City by vigorously investigating gunrunners.
Although fewer than 64,000 New Yorkers have valid city firearms permits, the police estimate that up to two million guns are in circulation in the city.
Nationwide, private citizens own more than 211 million firearms, 71 million of which are handguns.
The easy availability of firearms has affected the nature of violent crime.
Murder rates in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut have remained fairly steady, but the percentage of murders committed with firearms has risen -- up nearly 10 percent in New York since 1989.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
AK Steel Holding Corp., Middletown, Ohio., an initial public offering of 15.75 million shares.
Brookstone Inc., Peterborough, N.H., two million shares. Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.


Israel Clarifies Troop Order, Saying Jews Can Be Fired On
Embarrassed by disclosures of orders that restrict shooting at Jews who open fire in the occupied territories, the army said today that it had clarified to its forces that the orders do not cover murderous settler attacks.
Existing orders have been "refreshed and reiterated" to soldiers, military officials said.


Don't Look, Rangers, But Devils Are Gaining
Even though the Devils have lost all five games against the Rangers this season, they are now only 4 points behind their archrivals.
They edged closer to the team with the most points and best record in the National Hockey League with this evening's 4-0 victory over the Dallas Stars before a crowd of 16,137 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Martin Brodeur, the rookie goaltender, earned his third shutout of the season, with Tom Chorske, Bruce Driver, Slava Fetisov and Stephane Richer scoring.


Why Do We Still Play This Dirty Spy Game?; Terrorism Studies
To the Editor:
Terrorism studies, a think-tank mainstay of the 1970's and 80's, are among the industries that have declined with the end of the cold war.
For more than two decades, this was an academic growth industry, sucking huge sums from Federal agencies into such enterprises as the Rand Corporation, George Washington University and the Institute for Foreign Policy Analysis -- represented by Mark D. W. Edington in "Terror Made Easy" (Op-Ed, March 3).


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CUNY'S CRITICS URGE A MORE ACTIVE BOARD
A majority of the members of the City University of New York Board of Trustees are holdovers whose terms of office expired as long ago as 1988.
Educators and local officials say this has weakened the leadership of the nation's largest urban university.
Herman Badillo, a governor's appointee whose term expired last June, said this was a critical time for the university, which is undergoing sweeping academic consolidation, budget cuts and a changing student population.
A vigorous board is needed, he said.
B3.


1,000 Feared Slain as New Strife Hits Burundi
Ethnic violence in the small Central African nation of Burundi has erupted again and may have killed more than 1,000 people in the past 10 days, relief agencies and diplomats say.
Since fighting began five months ago, after a failed military coup, more than 100,000 people may have been killed, they say, but no one has been able to provide definitive figures.


Medical Ethics in the Dock
A troubling ethics case at the University of California at Los Angeles has cast doubt on the elaborate protective devices set up to guard the subjects of medical research from unjustifiable harm.
The case suggests that "informed consent" documents signed by patients can be a charade -- and that review boards set up to monitor the projects can be rubber stamps.
The U.C.L.A. researchers sought to determine what would happen if patients under treatment for the early stages of schizophrenia were taken off their medication after a year.
Would some, for example, do as well or even better without it, thus avoiding the potentially serious side effects of continuing on medication for long periods?


Big East Turns Draw Into Festival
Seton Hall was invited, Connecticut gained a No. 2 seeding rather than a No. 1 and 6 of the Big East's 10 teams were included, the most for any other conference save the Big Ten, which had 7.
Those were among the many decisions made by the selection committee of the National Collegiate Athletic Association yesterday in choosing the 64-team field for the tournament better known as March Madness.
The selections came early in the evening, not long after Providence had downed Georgetown at Madison Square Garden to win the Big East title.
In this instance, winner and loser were rewarded with an invitation to basketball's second season, which begins Thursday and concludes with the championship game on April 4 in Charlotte, N.C.


Books of The Times; When Lenin Had His Way: Portent for Disaster
Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime  By Richard Pipes  Illustrated. 587 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $35.
In "Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime," Richard Pipes attempts to disabuse his readers of any lingering notion that the early years of Communist leadership in Russia were somehow more benign and well-intentioned than the later ones were or that there was a fundamental change in the regime following the transition from Lenin's leadership to Stalin's.


Ferraro Campaigns for Rostenkowski


Review/Music; A Violinist Interprets The Past
The questions of how to play old music boil down to two: Do its interpreters belong to the past, or does the past belong to them?
In both content and execution Dmitry Sitkovetsky's Saturday evening at the 92d Street Y with the New York Chamber Symphony tended toward the second and more acquisitive alternative.
Playing the violin, conducting, or else doing both at the same time, Mr.
Sitkovetsky brought a 20th-century frame of mind (not to mention its weaponry) to a program largely of Bach and Vivaldi.
Mr.
Sitkovetsky's ally here was the music of Respighi: the third Suite from his "Ancient Airs and Dances" and an exceedingly curious arrangement of Bach's E-minor Sonata for violin and continuo.
In them, Respighi does not recreate the past; he dreams about it.
Old practices and instruments (as far as he knew them in 1932) are glimpsed through the haze of several centuries.
Indeed, the "Airs and Dances" represent the Baroque as a 20th-century Romantic wished it had been.
In the sonata arrangement, strings and small organ appropriate the continuo part, making from Bach's gritty whole-grain flavors a soup of incomparable sweetness.


So Portable That You Can Play Almost Anywhere


World's Big Economies Turn to the Jobs Issue
When recession pushed up unemployment in all the major industrial democracies a few years ago, the conventional wisdom was that the upturn in the business cycle would solve most of the problem.
But now that the upturn has arrived in the United States, and the worst of the recession is over in Europe, new high-wage jobs remain scarce in both places, and many governments are beginning to fear that the shortage may be permanent.
"We used to think that jobs and the economy were the same thing," the United States Secretary of Labor, Robert B. Reich, said.
"But we have learned in recent years that the paper economy and the people's economy are not always the same thing."


Friars Are Surprise Big East Champions


America as Trade Micro-Manager
In its new agreement with Japan on cellular telephones, the Clinton Administration has achieved virtually everything it hoped to accomplish in broader trade talks that collapsed last month.
Indeed, the cellular phone settlement offers a ray of hope that part of the deadlock will be broken in overall trade negotiations.
In these broad talks under the so-called trade framework, the United States has been seeking agreements that include benchmarks for measuring progress in opening Japanese markets in cars, insurance and other products.
Japan has resisted such requests for quantifiable targets, saying that such an approach amounts to "managed trade." Revenue in Urban Japan
But the cellular telephone agreement, which is separate from the broader trade talks, calls for a Japanese company to accelerate its construction of a mobile-phone system in the densely populated corridor between Tokyo and Nagoya, about 175 miles to the southwest, using equipment developed by Motorola Inc.
The agreement includes specific goals as to how many base stations and channels will be constructed and by what date.


The Failure in Our Success
The Council on Foreign Relations in New York City held a party for the diplomat and author George F. Kennan in celebration of his 90th birthday on Feb. 15.
His remarks, excerpted, follow.
I am reminded that it was 47 years ago that my involvement with the Council on Foreign Relations began in earnest.
At the end of 1946, I had attended and addressed, in this very room, a dinner at which I spoke about the Russia of that day.
This led to a further meeting, in January, this time with the council's newly established Discussion Group on Soviet Foreign Policy.


Xerox Choice Near on Data Contract
After a yearlong competition, the Xerox Corporation is close to reaching a landmark deal to farm out its data processing, having winnowed the field on Friday to two rival bids, one from Electronic Data Systems and the other a joint entry from I.B.M. and A.T.&amp; T.
The I.B.M.-A.T.&amp; T. bid is the likely winner, Howard Anderson, managing director of the Yankee Group consulting firm, predicted late last week.
The two companies' computer and telecommunications expertise form a powerful combination, and they can deliver considerable research prowess.


Miscellany
*
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, reported that magazine advertising pages in February declined by 0.6 percent, to 13,640.93, from February 1993.
For the first two months of 1994 total magazine pages were down 0.1 percent, to 24,138.89, from the corresponding period a year ago. *
The tennis player Mary Joe Fernandez has teamed with the Burger King Corporation and the Coca-Cola Company to become the national spokeswoman for the Cities in Schools/Burger King Academy program aimed at drop-out prevention.


U.S. Sets Voluntary Standard in Teaching the Arts
Education Secretary Richard W. Riley today announced a program of voluntary national standards for art education intended to reverse a steady decline in the teaching of the arts.
Voluntary national standards for math teachers were established by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics in 1989 and are being used in 40 percent of the nation's schools, Secretary Riley said.
But the new goals for dance, music, drama and the visual arts mark the Federal Government's first foray into the difficult arena of prescribing learning in the arts.


Deaths of Youthful Athletes Raise Questions Over Testing
Susie Gary sat in her North Chicago home and recalled how her grandson, Devon Mills, would transform the living room into a basketball arena.
With imaginary fans cheering, Devon would do his own play-by-play as he hit the winning shot on a makeshift goal.
Mills told his grandmother that he was going to be a star one day and predicted that television crews and reporters would flock to their home.


Yankees Bring Out the Big Guns
It was not a crucial game in September, it was not the Skydome and talk of a pennant race was only talk, premature talk that had been saved all winter.
The Yankees played the Blue Jays today for the first time since they crumbled and stumbled behind them in the final two weeks of the season and the harsh memories trickled forward.
Remember how the Yankees were tied for first-place in the American League East with Toronto eight different times?
Remember how the three-game series in Toronto in late September looked as if it might mean something in early September?
Remember how New York's pitching fizzled and the Jays won their second straight World Series title?


Market Place; An untraditional retailer in Japan is on a roll and gains influence.
ISAO NAKAUCHI is by Japanese standards a frightening revolutionary he wants retailers to be retailers.
Those are fighting words in a country where, in stark contrast to the situation in most industrial countries, manufacturers and not retailers have controlled which products make it to market, how they are sold and how they are priced.
Retailers have generally done as they are told.


'What Are You, Rashid?'; Uncovering the Many Layers of a Murder Suspect
Within the communal world of Middle Eastern livery drivers in New York, Rashid Baz stood out for a certain edginess and volatility, qualities not at all eased by his evident drug abuse, according to acquaintances sifting for motive now that the 28-year-old Lebanese national has been accused of the deadly Brooklyn Bridge shooting spree.
But even with those traits established, investigators searching for the full life and motivation of Mr.
Baz can appreciate the mundane characterization offered by his lawyer.
"He is an unspectacular individual," the lawyer, S. Michael Musa-Obregon summarizes, "other than the fact he is an Arab-American charged with a violent crime."


Sega to Introduce Cartridge For Improved Video Games
Sega of America on Monday will announce an add-on cartridge for computers that is intended to sharply increase the performance of its Genesis video games while increasing the games' realism.
The machine, which is expected to cost less than $150 and reach the market in the fall, is intended to ease the transition to 32-bit software from 16-bit software.


Nets Go West, Hoping for Higher Standing
It is time for the Nets to take their show on the road.
New Jersey (32-29) begins its road trip on Wednesday in Sacramento, and then plays the Lakers in Los Angeles Friday and the Suns in Phoenix on Saturday before returning home to play the Clippers on March 22.


The Banned Parties: Anti-Arab Oratory And Zionist Fervor
Leaders of Kach and Kahane Chai, the two virulently anti-Arab groups outlawed today by the Israeli Government, describe themselves as ideological heirs of the militant rabbi, Meir Kahane, who was assassinated in New York in 1990.
Rabbi Kahane, who founded the Jewish Defense League in New York, established Kach, which means "thus" or "this is the way," after he immigrated to Israel in 1971.
Advocating the expulsion of Arabs from Israel and its occupied territories, and railing against what he called "gentilized, Hellenized foreign culture," Rabbi Kahane made his first foray into Israeli politics in 1977, when he ran unsuccessfully for Parliament.


Review/Pop; Two Bands Appear Live With Surprising Results
Pop music comes from so many directions, technologically, intellectually and emotionally, it's sometimes a wonder that half of it makes it to a stage at all.
Cocteau Twins and Luna performed at a sold-out Roseland on Saturday night.
They are two bands that couldn't be farther apart, and they're two bands that, from their recordings, shouldn't have been able to put on a convincing show at all.
Cocteau Twins, from Scotland and a product of the early 1980's, headlined the concert and were the young crowd's favorites.
The band is a pure studio creation, and its recordings are all about obscurantism and distance.
The band makes recordings drenched in echo.
Referents -- like instruments, for instance -- hardly exist.
The music has a soft metallic drone to it that floats and is all suggestive and never declarative.
The band's singer, Elizabeth Fraser, emotes songs that at times sound completely made up of aimless vowels and consonants, with rhythms that imply words, but never actually form them.
The music is all gesture, a great dramatic exhalation.


Newark vs. Trenton: Fight for a City's Schools
Having grown up in this city, Donna Jackson knows that Newark can be angry.
She says a little constructive anger might be good right now.
Ms.
Jackson, an unemployed mother of three, has been battling the Newark school system since her daughter Ericka, now 11, was three years old.
She considers the district corrupt, anti-parent, and largely unconcerned about its students.
Yet she passionately opposes the State Department of Education's proposed takeover of the schools.


Holy Bull Is Wholly Sound
On the day after he won the Florida Derby by nearly six lengths, Holy Bull was frisky and sound.
"He came out of this race the best he has ever come out of a race," said his trainer, Jimmy Croll.
"The Blue Grass looks like the logical place to go."


Beethoven Symphony for 3
Beethoven's Second Symphony reduced to a piano, a violin and a cello is a thing of interest, though not a thing of beauty.
The arrangement, made by the composer himself and played by the Beethoven Trio, Wien, on Thursday night at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater, is the kind of 19th-century house music meant more for the enjoyment of performers than for the pleasures of an audience.
This much-used and highly profitable do-it-yourself way of reproducing concert experiences is almost no more.
Recording technology has rendered it obsolete.


Claims Fraud For Buildings Is Suspected
An investigation into systematic payoffs to apartment-house managers by contractors has been broadened to include fraudulent insurance claims, investigators in the Manhattan District Attorney's office say.
Just as work contracts were inflated to pay for kickbacks from contractors to the managers of hundreds of condominium and cooperative apartment buildings, so were some insurance claims, the investigators said.


Review/Dance; A Company Still in Search Of a Repertory
Dance Theater of Harlem's 25th anniversary season, which opened on Friday night at the New York State Theater, promises less of a retrospective view of the company than a celebration of its current talent.
Arthur Mitchell, the troupe's director and founder, has instilled a special commitment and discipline in his dancers, and these hallmarks of company style were evident in the first of five programs to be presented through March 27.


G.O.P.'s Cuomo Rivals: Shared Views Amid Squabbling
They squabble like a dysfunctional family, accusing one another of dark intrigues and impure motives.
But when the Republicans seeking to run for governor talk about how to defeat Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, they harmonize like the Vienna Boys Choir.
Crime?
The six most active candidates advocate the death penalty, which Mr.
Cuomo has blocked for 11 years.
Taxes?
All support deep cuts in the personal income tax and many business taxes.
Welfare reform?
All would fingerprint welfare recipients and require able-bodied ones to work.
Big government?
All talk about slashing the state work force, privatizing services and instituting some form of school voucher program.


Simpson and Bruckheimer, Part 2
Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer, the archetypal Hollywood producers of the 1980's, are back, and Walt Disney, of all people, has them.
After a prolonged hiatus, the flamboyant partners, who produced such blockbuster films as "Flashdance," "Top Gun" and "Beverly Hills Cop," have returned with a low-budget movie that would have seemed improbable for the Don and Jerry (as everyone calls them) of the 1980's.
The film, "The Ref," a bleak and irreverent comedy that has earned first-rate reviews and is No. 4 at the box office this weekend, is a far cry from the slick, big-star, high-concept movies that made both men multi-millionaires.


Legislative Fight Looms on Limiting Right to Sue
A fight over placing restrictions on the right to sue -- with supporters saying that would reduce frivolous lawsuits, and opponents contending it would shield businesses from paying for legitimate damages -- is shaping up in the State Legislature.
The drive for making the first changes in seven years in laws regulating civil torts, cases in which an individual sues because of alleged harm received, reflects a debate going on nationwide.
To Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate, the six bills introduced in the Senate Commerce Committee to restrict the right to sue "are among the most Draconian I've seen in any state legislature in the country."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economy is beginning to feel the pinch of rising interest rates, which have climbed more than a percentage point in five months.
The rush to refinance mortgages has slowed, and bank loans to individuals and companies are no longer rising.  [ Page A1. ]


U.S. Gains On Japan In Patents
For the first time in almost a decade, an American corporation has dislodged a Japanese company from first place in the top-10 list of companies receiving patents in the United States.
While the Japanese still held 6 of the top 10 positions on the list announced last week by the United States Patent and Trademark Office, I.B.M. jumped into first place with 1,085 patents in 1993, up from sixth place in 1992.


Tengiz Abuladze, 70, Soviet Movie Director
Tengiz Abuladze, a Georgian who became one of the Soviet Union's most highly regarded flm directors, died on March 6 in Tbilisi, Georgia.
He was 70.
Mr.
Abuladze was best known for his 1984 film "Repentance," a fierce satire of Stalinism that won the special jury prize at the 1987 Cannes International Film Festival.
It was withheld from the Soviet public for two years before being released in the new climate of openness.
The film, which uses fantasy, surrealism and caricature in its portrayal of a dictatorial mayor, has been praised as a complex, coherent metaphor of the evil of tyranny.


Essay; Fear Of Hearings
Non-independent counsel Robert Fiske, the Democrats' favorite Republican lawyer, is doing the job the Clinton Administration hired him to do: keep the Congress from holding public hearings into the 80's wrongdoing in Arkansas and 90's cover-up in Washington.
The White House strategy is to raise the criteria for wrongdoing to the criminal level, thus sealing all evidence of statehouse sleaze and Presidential abuse of power.
If wrongdoing by Democrats is not prosecutable, goes this curious argument, it should be kept secret.


After Six Years of Scandal, Senator Seeks Redemption
When he was a burr-headed Marine in the mid-1960's, Chuck Robb won medals leading an infantry company into Vietnam firefights.
Today, an older and very different Senator Charles Spittal Robb, Democrat of Virginia, began a new round of combat by shelving the armor and instead working to win the hearts and minds of the villagers.
Facing the most perilous battle of his 17-year political life, Mr.
Robb opened his bid for a second Senate term not with a bang, but with a heartfelt town hall speech and a tea in southwestern Virginia, a land of bucolic scenery and Democrats whose party loyalties go all the way back to Jefferson.


At Home Abroad; 'More Of Itself'
When Lyndon Johnson was struggling in the quagmire of Vietnam, he took comfort from his favorite ally in the war: Australia.
Australian troops were there from 1966 to 1972, almost to the final American withdrawal.
Next month the Australian Prime Minister, Paul Keating, will fly to Hanoi.
His visit is a symbol of the most important trend in this country.
Australia is intent on finding a place for itself in Asia.
And part of that is a greater willingness to differ with the United States.


Islanders Still in Playoff Hunt
The Islanders did little to hurt their chances of making the National Hockey League playoffs when they completed a four-game road trip with a 1-2-1 record.
The club, which trails the Philadelphia Flyers by 5 points for the final Eastern Conference playoff berth, tied the Blues, 5-5, Saturday night in St.
Louis.
Florida, which is 2 points ahead of the Islanders, plays the Rangers tonight in Miami.
The Devils next play tomorrow night when the Devils, who are unbeaten in nine games, visit Nassau Coliseum.


Rebound in Interest Rates May Hinder the Recovery
Interest rates have climbed by more than a percentage point in five months, and the American economy is beginning to feel the pinch.
The great rush to refinance mortgages at lower rates and lower monthly payments -- a big source of extra cash for consumer spending -- has slowed sharply, the Mortgage Bankers Association reports.
Bank loans to individuals and companies are no longer rising.
And many families are rushing to buy houses before mortgage rates go any higher, a flurry of activity that probably will not last, some economists say.


Christopher Ends Beijing Talks Citing Modest Gains
Three days of talks between Secretary of State Warren Christopher and China's leaders ended today with Beijing making modest gestures on human rights that had been sought by Washington.
Mr.
Christopher's talks, which both sides said were quite blunt, marked the highest-level visit to Beijing since the Clinton Administration took office and had been planned as the high point of the Administration's six-month-long strategy of intensive engagement with the Chinese.


Dance in Review
'Aurora'  Feld Ballets/NY Joyce Theater
The dancers of Feld Ballets/NY took to the slopes on Saturday night in "Aurora I," set to music by Steve Reich, as 12 men and women moved across steep inclined planes created by Mr.
Feld and Mark Mongold.
Dressed in white track shoes and satin jogging suits designed by Willa Kim, the performers look like jaunty athletes.


Motorola
Shares of Motorola, the leading American maker of cellular telephone equipment, rose solidly on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, following the agreement reached with Japan on Saturday that gives the company more access to Japan's mobile phone market.


Clintons' Ex-Partner Seeks Help
A former partner of the Clintons in the Whitewater real estate venture appeared here today to solicit donations to cover her legal expenses in the investigation of the venture.
The partner, Susan McDougal, said during a news conference that neither she nor her former husband, James B. McDougal, violated any laws when they invested in the Whitewater Development Company with President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, or managed a failed savings and loan, Madison Guaranty.


Of Course They Manipulate Cigarette Nicotine; Decrease in Levels
To the Editor:
"Addiction by Design?" (editorial, March 6) discusses the implications of a letter by David Kessler Food and Drug Administration commissioner, to the Coalition on Smoking or Health, on the handling of nicotine in cigarette production.
At several points, Dr.
Kessler's letter and your editorial misrepresent the facts.


By Design; Walking Bare-Back
Remember mules and scuffs?
Backless slippers you simply slide your foot into?
Nothing could be more comfortable.
Well, they've taken a giant step into fashion.
Some of the newest shoes for spring are backless versions of classic pumps and oxfords.
With closed toes and high insteps, they look like regular shoes when viewed from the front but are a breeze to slip into and out of.
Casual slides with a strap or two across the front are fine for the beach, but these shoes can go to the office or to dinner.


For Fall, Paris Flash or Milan Style
There was plenty of sound and fury on the Paris runways last week, as models danced, vamped and preened when the fall and winter designer collections were introduced.
The elaborateness of the clothes was stimulated by two factors.
First, these were the first ready-to-wear collections to be introduced at Le Carrousel, the mall below the Louvre, with its state-of-the-art theater equipment (couture collections had been introduced there in January).
The largest room rented for $30,000 and had seats for 1,500 people; the others weren't far behind in terms of rent or seating.
The designers wanted to be sure their clothes stood out in these vast, expensive arenas.


Sotheby's Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Art and vegetables will be on the menu when PRINCE PHILIP visits Be nihana, on West 56th Street, tomorrow.
ROCKY AOKI, the owner of the Japanese restaurant, met the Prince in London last month and introduced him to the work of OHGEN HAMANAKA, a Japanese artist.
Mr.
Hamanaka will demonstrate the ancient art of "suiboku," painting with black ink made from wood ashes.
Then the Benihana chefs will demonstrate their own art form, slicing through meats and vegetables with reckless abandon.


Retribution for Agassi


CHRONICLE
Forget Whitewater.
The hot topic among New York journalists yesterday was "The Paper" -- and who was invited and disinvited to tonight's premiere.
"The Paper," starring Michael Keaton, Glenn Close and Robert Duvall, is Ron Howard's new film about 24 hours in the life of a fictional New York City tabloid.


Music Notes
Helping With a Hall
Many of New York City's small performing organizations have complained increasingly in recent years that high rental fees have driven them out of the main concert halls.
Some have moved their concerts to churches and community centers, some have found smaller, less expensive halls, and some have cut back on their activities.
But now Lincoln Center is addressing this complaint with a new program that will subsidize performances at Alice Tully Hall.


Kohl, Battered in Opinion Polls, Remains Buoyant
Chancellor Helmut Kohl has stood astride Europe for more than 11 years, but if current public opinion polls are accurate forecasts of the Oct. 16 national elections, his domination might be at an end.
If he should topple, it would send shock waves around the Continent and across the Atlantic, since for many of his fellow leaders he has become the very symbol of Germany, and all of his potential successors are little-known abroad.


It's the Latest Waive: Bargaining for Players
Everyone in pro football knew that the National Football League's new odd couple -- unrestricted free agency and a salary cap -- would create weird situations.
But weird enough for teams to shed players because they could not afford them?


SMALL LATIN LANDS FEELING SLIGHTED
Several Central American and Caribbean countries are angrily accusing the Clinton Administration of favoring the big over the small because it is backing the Colombian candidate, rather than his Costa Rican rival, as the next Secretary General of the Organization of American States.
Officials from Costa Rica, whose Foreign Minister, Bernd Niehaus, is running for the post, complain that the United States is being insensitive in favoring the candidate from a large country -- President Cesar Gaviria of Colombia -- when no one from Central America or the Caribbean has headed the O.A.S. since it was founded in 1948.


Manor Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Frequent Power Failures Bedevil Flight Controllers
Air traffic controllers were guiding airplanes in and out of Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport at 9:39 A.M. on Feb. 22 when they suddenly found themselves staring at blank radar screens.
The radios used to communicate with pilots had also gone dead.
A computer glitch had caused an extensive power failure, and backup systems, which are usually automatically activated at such times, had failed as well.


McCormick &amp; Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Ever-Changing Favorites on Road to Louisville
Bill Mott broke a record for trainers at Gulfstream Park today when he saddled his 32d winner of the meeting, Dahlia's Dreamer.
But the horse he really wanted to see win was Lahint, who ran 10th in the Florida Derby two days ago just when people were touting him as a major candidate on the road to the Kentucky Derby.
"He had his shot," Mott said, making no excuses for Lahint.
"It was the first time he faced horses who could really run. Maybe he got a little discouraged."


3 New York Students Win Westinghouse Science Awards
New York City was strongly represented among the winners of the Westinghouse Science Talent Search -- considered the nation's most prestigious science competition -- providing 3 of the top 10 finishers.
Winners from New York included the president of the student body of Hunter College High School, a Ukrainian-born student from the Bronx High School of Science, and Martin Luther King Jr.
High School's first entrant in the contest, whose success against heavy odds has already brought him book and movie offers for his life story.


Why Can Those Other Cities Put Public Toilets on the Streets?
To the Editor:
The strange case of New York City's attempt to install public toilets threatens to go on almost forever, mocking the workings of our government.
Three and a half years have passed since the Legal Action Center for the Homeless issued its public toilet report, to universal praise.
The report advanced a cost-free and sensible solution to a problem that has plagued most New Yorkers at one time or another by proposing installation of self-cleaning toilet kiosks, paid for by advertising revenue, on the streets of New York.


Q&amp;A
Bottoms-Up Insects
Q.  Why do insects turn over on their backs when they die?


METRO DIGEST
TUBERCULOSIS IN DECLINE
Federal health officials announced that New York City last year experienced its most significant drop in new cases of tuberculosis in 15 years.
Nationwide, the number of new cases dropped 5 percent last year, officials said.
But the decline was particularly steep in New York, where health officials have spent more than $70 million in the last three years to combat a resurgence of the disease.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  DOZENS ARE HURT IN RIKERS VIOLENCE
A brawl among some of the highest-security inmates at the Rikers Island jail left 16 correction officers and at least 19 inmates injured, in the worst disturbance at the jail in four years, correction officials said.
B3.


Haiti: The Plan No One Wants
On the face of it, U.S. policy toward Haiti makes no sense.
Administration officials insist that the main goal is to restore democracy and to return President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power.
But they have imposed ineffective sanctions that cause suffering mainly for the poor.
Last year the so-called Four Friends of Haiti -- the U.S., Canada, Venezuela and France -- pledged extra sanctions if no progress was made toward restoring Father Aristide by Jan. 15.
That date came and went without new sanctions.


Odd Biology: Sea Squirt Is a Three-in-One Creature
THE sea squirt, a slippery, little creature most familiar as the slime overgrowing boat bottoms and harbor outlet pipes, would seem to have little to offer toward understanding the mysteries of the human body.
But under the coaxing of one patient researcher, these inch-long marine invertebrates have begun revealing their strange secrets, which include organs full of humanlike kidney stones and a world of creatures socked away inside.
Researchers say that sea squirts are beginning to provide important clues to the painful problems of kidney stones and gout and to answer such tantalizing questions as why animals urinate and how symbioses evolve.


McMahon a Free Agent After Vikings Cut Him
JIM McMAHON was deemed too expensive by the Minnesota Vikings, who yesterday cut the quarterback they had hoped would put them in the Super Bowl.
McMahon, who will be 35 before next season, could still return to the Vikings but would do so on their terms.
Now an unrestricted free agent, McMahon could join his fourth team since the Chicago Bears traded him in 1989.


Woman Shot Flees Fire; One Person Found Dead
The police and fire investigators were left with a mystery yesterday after a woman who was shot in the eye escaped from a burning Harlem apartment building and the body of a second person was discovered inside, burned beyond recognition.
The five-alarm fire in the six-story building at 250 West 146th Street left 30 families without homes and caused extensive damage to the rear section of the building, which had yet to be completely repaired after a fire of suspicious origin in November 1992.
Six other tenants and 12 firefighters were treated for minor injuries.


Saints Acquire Haynes
MICHAEL HAYNES, one of the N.F.L.'s most dangerous wide receivers, officially became a New Orleans Saint when the Atlanta Falcons declined to match a $10 million, four-year offer.
Haynes had 72 receptions for 778 yards and four touchdowns in 1993.
Haynes was a transitional player for the Falcons, meaning after he signed the Saints offer sheet, the Falcons had the right of first refusal. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.17
3.16
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.57
3.48
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.85
3.76
3.12
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.51
6.44
6.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.95
6.90
6.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.78
7.74
7.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.05
6.05
5.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Amcast Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Packwood To Give Diaries to Committee Examining Conduct
Bowing to the inevitable, Senator Bob Packwood said today he would turn over his diaries to the Senate Select Committee on Ethics, a move that could set the stage for public hearings into his sexual and official conduct.
Senator Packwood, an Oregon Republican, has been under a cloud since November 1992, when the first of more than two dozen women accused him of grabbing them, groping at them and kissing them against their will.


Evans Spurns Oilers To Sign With the Jets
The Jets landed one of their main needs -- help on the defensive line -- by agreeing to terms today with defensive tackle Donald Evans, an unrestricted free agent from Pittsburgh.
Evans agreed to a three-year deal worth $3.45 million and became the Jets' first unrestricted free agent acquistion of 1994.
He expects to arrive in New York on Tuesday.


Medicinal Potions May Doom Tiger to Extinction
WHEN this reach of dry forest and lotus-covered lakes in central India was a private hunting reserve of the Maharajah of Jaipur, the beaters' cries of "Bagh! Bagh!" -- tiger! tiger! -- sounded the death knell for the animal considered by many as the greatest of the cats.
The tigers that fell here to the hunters' guns were among tens of thousands "bagged" during the period of British rule in India alone.
Now, in the forest stillness, it is the shrill calls of the langur monkeys and the sambar deer that signal a tiger's approach.
But the calls are increasingly rare, for Ranthambhore's tigers, like all India's tigers in the wild, are threatened more than they ever were in the era of the maharajahs and the British sahibs who made sport of shooting tigers from hunting towers and the safety of elephants' backs.


2 Youths Arrested In Shooting on S.I.
Two young men were arrested yesterday and charged in the shooting of a 2-year-old boy and a woman on Staten Island, and more arrests are expected, the police said.
Dante Hawkins, 2 years old, and Felicia Cook, 32, were caught in the crossfire between two groups Sunday night outside the Stapleton Houses, a public-housing project in Stapleton.
The boy was hit in the side and underwent surgery at Staten Island University Hospital, where he was in serious condition last night.
Ms.
Cook, who was struck in the leg, was treated at Bayley Seton Hospital and released.


Reviews/Dance; Denishawn Works Are Recreated
On Saturday night at St.
Mark's Church, it was the springtime of modern dance all over again.
This evening of time travel was brought about by a program of works created by Ruth St.
Denis and Ted Shawn for themselves and their pioneering Denishawn company between 1913 and 1929.
These dances, which retained their choreographic beauty, were lovingly staged by Jane Sherman and Barton Mumaw, two former Denishawn dancers, for the Denishawn Repertory Dancers, a division of the Trenton-based New Jersey Center Dance Collective.
Lyudmila Melerud was the able pianist and Jim Moody narrated.


CLINTON ASSOCIATE QUITS JUSTICE POST AS PRESSURE RISES
Webster L. Hubbell, one of the inner circle the Clintons brought from Arkansas, resigned abruptly today from a top Justice Department job in the latest of a string of Administration efforts to quell controversies over ethics.
Mr.
Hubbell said he was leaving his job as Associate Attorney General to spare the President and Hillary Rodham Clinton further embarrassment over accusations that he overbilled the law firm where he and Mrs.
Clinton were once partners.


Sniping at Republicans, Clinton Shows Temper
Hours after accepting the resignation of another old friend from a high Administration post, a visibly angry President Clinton tonight lashed out against Republicans, saying they were "dedicated just to being against whatever we were for and committed to the politics of personal destruction."
Mr.
Clinton appeared before a friendly crowd at a Democratic Party fund-raising event, where he was repeatedly cheered as he faulted his opponents for trying to derail his domestic policy program.


Hospital Questions Researcher
The Quebec Corporation of Physicians, which licenses the 17,000 doctors who practice in the province, has begun a formal inquiry into the case of a Montreal cancer surgeon who falsified information in a breast cancer study, the head of the group said today.
"We are trying to collect the data in the next few days about what has happened and will decide then what to do with the facts," the official, Dr.
Augustin Roy, said in a telephone interview from Montreal.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A growing number of media companies are trying to shake MTV's grip on the teen-age market.
TIME INC. has spent three years and more than $1 million on Mouth 2 Mouth, an in-your-face, graphically brash, celebrity-filled magazine for teen-agers that published its first trial issue yesterday.
Time, like other media companies, is rediscovering the teen-age and young adult market that was presumed to be dominated by Viacom Inc.'s MTV and VH-1 networks.
This demographic group of 30 million people, whose cutting-edge tastes for items like lug-soled boots crosses over into mainstream popular culture, has nearly $300 billion in buying power.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined Clifford Robinson, Portland Trail Blazers center, $7,000 for verbally abusing the officials and failing to leave the court quickly after being ejected from a game against Golden State on March 10.
Continental Basketball Association


President Clinton Promotes Ways to Create Jobs


Market Place; Sun Microsystems says reports of its demise are premature.
WHILE the technology world's focus has been on Apple's faster Macintosh line, which was displayed yesterday, and Intel's recently announced quicker Pentium chip, it has been easy to discount Sun Microsystems, the leading maker of computer work stations.
In fact, the common wisdom in Silicon Valley has been that Sun would simply be gored by the twin horns of ever-cheaper and faster personal computers and Microsoft's commercially oriented NT operating system.
But Sun, which prides itself at being both quirky and arrogant, has been counted out before.
"As usual, reports of our demise are premature," said Eric Schmidt, Sun's chief technology officer.
Now the computer maker is set to catch up in the work station business and may end up giving fits to its chief competitors -- Hewlett Packard, Digital Equipment, Silicon Graphics and I.B.M.
Sun, which introduced the $10,000 Voyager, its first "transportable" work station, yesterday, will soon add the Sparc 5 and Sparc 20, work station models designed to refresh the performance of Sun's desktop systems and put the company back "in the hunt" in the performance-sensitive work station market -- a market it created.
Several weeks ago the company, based in Mountain View, Calif., treated analysts to a sneak preview of its new product family scheduled to be introduced later this month.
Since then the buzz that the new products have created has begun turning some heads on Wall Street.
The word is, there has never been a better time to buy Sun's stock, which had been languishing in the $20 range since the beginning of January.
But the buzz has already prompted buying.
Yesterday the stock closed at $29.875, up 50 cents.
While the stock is still below its 1987 high of $45.75, it has risen 8 percent in the last five trading days.
But trading all year has been volatile.
The stock closed last year at $29.125.
"I don't always have kind things to say about Sun, but I do right now," Laura Conigliaro, an analyst at Prudential Securities, said.
"If you're going to buy Sun, this is the window."
What Sun did wrong in the past was essentially fumble the transition between one generation of its Sparc microprocessor and the next, when its ally Texas Instruments took far too long to complete designing a crucial new chip.
That could have been fatal, but during the period that Sun lagged in performance, none of its competitors could dislodge it from its 30 percent share of the work station market.
"Sun has been a company that is perceived to have lagged technically," said Doug van Dorsten, a stock analyst at Hambrecht &amp; Quist in San Francisco, "but they still have the largest market share, so they're doing something right."
That something, he said, was to develop systems that spoke directly to the needs of its core customers, who wanted to "downsize" -- move critical applications off expensive mainframes into the Unix work station market.
That, in turn, has protected the company's margins in the last year, because Sun's high-end server computers have sold better than the computer maker's internal projections.
"Any way you look at it, Sun is an inexpensive stock," Mr. van Dorsten said.
"You could make a credible case that Sun should be valued as high as Hewlett Packard." Currently Hewlett Packard is selling at $90, three times Sun's price.
In addition to getting higher marks from Wall Street analysts for getting its technology act together, Sun also has a solid business story.
A number of analysts said that Sun had managed its business efficiently in the last year, holding its inventories significantly below both Hewlett Packard and Silicon Graphics.
And the company recently restructured its distribution channels, cutting back from five or six to just two distributors, thereby halting price discounting and maintaining profit margins.
"To their credit, they've never been out of it," said Jeffry Canin, a financial analyst at Salomon Brothers in San Francisco.
"It's quite astonishing that they've done as well as they have."





Spring! The Newest Stop for Grand Central Commuters


6 Months Of Useful Software On a Disk
IF you have nothing else to do for the next six or seven months and can try out five programs a day, every day of the week, a $25 CD-ROM will fill the time.
The disk contains about 1,000 complete shareware programs, mostly for DOS systems but also for Microsoft Windows, of which the following is a bare sampling:


Police Sergeant Is Arrested in a Beating at a Store
A New York City police sergeant was arrested yesterday on an indictment charging him with beating up a Queens man in a 7-Eleven convenience store last month while off duty.
Two other police officers who were suspended as a result of the incident could face departmental charges.


Neglect of the CUNY Board
At a time when the City University of New York faces enormous challenges, there is no excuse for the failure of top state and city officials to make timely, high-quality appointments to its board.
Of the 15 appointed CUNY trustees, 8 are serving beyond the expiration dates of their terms.
Their extended stays have been made necessary by the failure of Gov.
Mario Cuomo and former Mayor David Dinkins to nominate new people quickly, and by the failure of the State Senate, which has consent authority, to approve some nominations.


How 2 Dealers' Squabble Broke a Scandal at Honda
The corruption scandal engulfing the sales organization of the Honda Motor Company began a year ago as part of a squabble between two Acura dealers in this quiet corner of New Hampshire.
Richard M. Nault, a car dealer from nearby Manchester, sued Honda in 1989 after his Acura dealership first foundered and then was canceled by Honda, which markets both Honda and Acura cars.
Mr.
Nault contended that one reason his Acura store had done poorly was that he could not get enough cars.


Observer; Mired in Stardom
A writer named Neil Postman published a book a few years ago arguing that America was entertaining itself to death.
It was an entertaining book, which undercut the force of its argument.
If Postman was really afraid we were being entertained to death, what was the idea of writing an entertaining book about it?
Was he trying to speed us into the hearse?
Still, he had a point.
Cassandras howl about drugs, tobacco and high-fat diet, but it's entertainment that has us all hooked.
Drug-free, tobacco-cleansed, dietetically approved by the American Dreary Dining Association millions of us may be, but cut off our daily entertainment fix and you will see an entire nation writhing in Promethean agonies.


Some Retired Teachers Evading Restrictions on Income
Long after they retired and began collecting pensions, more than 400 teachers and administrators are continuing to work in the New York City public school system, many of them classified as consultants and exempt from any restrictions on earnings, school officials say.
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said that while some of these consultants provide needed expertise, often the retirees are filling consulting jobs through "sweetheart deals" that have turned the school system into a "revolving door."


Paychex Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Sports of The Times; The Haunted Aspect of Coach Riley
PAT RILEY, typically the glass of fashion and the mold of form, was looking like something the cat dragged in.
For Riley, anyway.
And not surprising, since the news was about John Starks and the news wasn't terrific.
This was yesterday after the Knicks' practice at the SUNY-Purchase gymnasium, and their coach had a stubbled beard -- he either hadn't shaved for a couple days or had absently neglected to slip a blade in the razor -- and his eyes appeared troubled.
He wore neither the expensive suit nor the chic tie and classy kicks that are generally seen as he prowls the sidelines at Madison Square Garden, but a black gym shirt and black sweat pants and sneakers.


DNA Experts Expect to Identify Massacre Victims
FORENSIC scientists from the United States say they believe they have a good chance of identifying bodies of massacre victims recently exhumed by the Croatian authorities from a mass grave in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The scientists left the United States on Sunday for a stay in Split, Croatia, where they will examine bones and tissue taken from a mass grave in Kupres that contained the bodies of 50 people.


PENTAGON IS WARY OF ROLE IN BOSNIA
Three weeks after the threat of NATO air strikes quelled the fighting in Sarajevo, the Pentagon's top civilian and military officials have taken to the hustings, not to boast about their success but to slow the calls for further use of the United States military.
As the Serbs continued their attacks on other Bosnian cities and towns, and as calls from the Balkans for greater United States involvement grew louder, Defense Secretary William J. Perry delivered a speech last week in which he raised the specter of Vietnam and outlined the tests that should be satisfied before the threat of NATO air strikes was applied to other cities.


Luby's Cafeterias reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about Secretary of State Warren Christopher's visit to China referred incorrectly to the "most favored nation" trading status accorded to China by the United States.
It makes China eligible for tariffs that are the same as those imposed on most of the United States' trading partners, not lower.


Critic's Notebook; An Irish Parade of Up-to-Date Tradition
The Prime Minister of Ireland, Albert Reynolds, made a surprise appearance on Sunday afternoon.
He turned up at Carnegie Hall to introduce the Fureys, four brothers who have been making folk-tinged pop hits for two decades.
The Prime Minister's appearance -- something like having President Clinton as M.C. for Crosby, Stills and Nash -- was a measure of how important music is to the Irish, who have held on to their traditions as tenaciously as any people on earth.
Young musicians still work to become world champions on instruments like the tin whistle and the button accordion, and bands don't consider it old-fashioned to include fiddle or uillean pipes, the bellows-driven Irish bagpipes.
The Fureys' show was part of the annual incursion of top Irish bands.
For American fans of Celtic music, it's feast or famine, because every booking agent in the United States seems to get the same bright idea: March tours for Irish bands so every major city can have Irish music on St.
Patrick's Day.
Over the weekend, I heard Altan at Town Hall on Saturday night, the Fureys on Sunday afternoon and the Pogues at the Beacon Theater on Sunday night.
Still to come is the big night itself, Thursday, when the Chieftains play Carnegie Hall and New York's own Black 47 comes to the Academy.


Europeans Chase the Sun to Brazil's Northeast
Fleeing cold weather and seeking sunshine, Europeans are flocking to the white crystal beaches of Brazil's Northeast, making the region the fastest-growing center for international tourism in South America.
More and more Italians, French, Germans and Spaniards have begun to vacation along the 2,000-mile coast of Brazil's northeastern shoulder, where this continent reaches out toward Europe.


Sally Belfrage Dies; Writer Specializing In Memoirs Was 57
Sally Belfrage, who wrote nonfiction books about life in an Indian ashram and about the civil rights movement in Mississippi in 1964, died yesterday at Middlesex Hospital in London.
She was 57 and lived in London.
The cause was cancer, said her literary agent, Irene Skolnick.


Solectron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the wedding of a woman wounded by a gunshot last summer referred incorrectly to the presence of of Rabbi Israel Shemtov, who had driven her to the hospital.
He was a guest at the reception; he did not perform the ceremony.
In some copies the caption also omitted the bridegroom's first name.
He is Ernesto Rafael Ellis.


Washington Opera's Chief To Resign Next Year
Martin Feinstein, the general director of the Washington Opera since 1980 and architect of its expansion from a modest repertory troupe to a company that stages world premieres and tours internationally, announced today that he would retire after the 1994-95 season.
"I've been thinking about it for a long time," said Mr.
Feinstein, who will be 73 next month.
"I had become bored with the day-to-day details. I want to concentrate on new and bigger challenges."


Of Course They Manipulate Cigarette Nicotine; Not Addictive
To the Editor:
"Where There's Smoke," Anna Quindlen's March 2 column, states that speculation by David Kessler, Food and Drug Administration commissioner, that cigarettes "may be drug-delivery devices, subject to F.D.A. regulation," has taken "the debate over sale, use and regulation to a different and more honest level than it has been taken by government before." Ms.
Quindlen is half-right.


Historical Society May Put Holdings In N.Y.U.'s Control
The board of the financially starved New-York Historical Society is to vote this morning on an arrangement that would hand over to New York University effective control over nearly all of the society's holdings other than its art collection.
Much of the art collection is expected to be sold later this year to help raise money for the society.
Under the agreement, the university, which has been managing the society's research library for a $100,000-per year fee since August, would take charge of the society's book collection and also of its valuable collections of prints, architectural drawings, historical photographs and advertising ephemera.
While the collections, the heart of the society's holdings, would remain in the society's landmark building at 170 Central Park West, authority over them would revert to the dean of the New York University Libraries, Carlton C. Rochell.


Flawed Study Raises Questions on U.S. Research
Reports that a Canadian researcher falsified data in a major breast cancer study and that leaders of the study and Federal health officials delayed disclosing the situation are raising serious questions about the quality of medical research, the honesty of medical researchers and the various ways studies are done.
The investigation also raises issues of medical and academic politics, such as how soon medical practice should be changed by results of experimental studies.
Many practitioners prefer to wait for additional experience after initial reports in medical journals because they are aware that scientists are often under pressure to include enough patients to meet their quotas and face a need to publish to continue to get grants.
And they remember that results of some studies turned out to be flawed.


Trenton Seeks Pension Shift To Cut Deficit
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman proposed today to close a $2 billion deficit in the budget year beginning July 1 and wring another $300 million in tax cuts from that budget, in part by postponing for years hundreds of millions of dollars in pension and health care obligations.
State Treasurer Brian W. Clymer and Peter G. Verniero, the Governor's chief counsel, released today the broad outlines of a budget that suggests bad news in store for state workers, schools and municipalities.
The details, and any good news that may lie in spending details and future tax cuts, were left to the governor herself.
She is scheduled to disclose her administration's first budget in a speech before the legislature Tuesday.


Man Admits Firebombing Of Fire Truck
A Bronx man pleaded guilty in State Supreme Court yesterday to firebombing a fire truck during a night of unrest in Washington Heights last summer.
Three firefighters were injured in the attack.
The man, Jesus Corporan, 21, was originally charged with attempted murder, assault, arson and reckless endangerment.
After a psychiatric evaluation that determined Mr.
Corporan to be mentally fit to stand trial, he agreed to a negotiated plea to attempted arson in the first degree.


More Said to Leave Harvard Review
More people are leaving The Harvard Business Review, people inside and outside the management journal said yesterday.
The latest and most significant departure appears to involve Laurance Allen, publisher of The Review since the fall of 1992.


Stephen J. Pollock, Skiwear Importer, 97
Stephen J. Pollock, a retired New York importer of skiwear, died on Friday at his home on the Upper West Side.
He was 97.
He had a brief illness, his family said.


Sourly, Christopher's Talks in Beijing Come to an End
Three days of talks between Secretary of State Warren Christopher and China's leaders ended today with only token gestures by Beijing on human rights.
China's Foreign Minister blamed the United States for the lack of progress.
The two sides were so far apart that plans to hold a joint news conference after the meeting between Mr.
Christopher and the Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, were canceled and the two men conducted separate, simultaneous briefings.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Ametek Inc., Paoli, Pa., is selling $150 million of senior notes due in 2004 at 100 to yield 9.75 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Noncallable for five years, the issue is rated Ba-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BB- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Classical Music in Review
The Dessoff Choirs  Merkin Concert Hall
If thematic programming was last year's hot fashion, this year everyone has cottoned to the Eastern European mystical school, a kind of post-Minimalist Romanticism often put to the service of either sacred or philosophical texts.
It's not that this compositional movement is really so new: many of its composers have had substantial followings for more than a decade.
And as Amy Kaiser and the Dessoff Choirs demonstrated on Saturday evening, for all the style's vaunted novelty, it has deep but easily traceable roots.


Inner Circle Is Shrinking
It was a small, golden group, the Friends of Bill and the Friends of Hillary, and for a time it ruled supreme, operating almost as a White House within the White House.
But now, as the Administration reels from departure to sudden departure, there is an eerie sense of subtraction that recalls the Agatha Christie mystery "And Then There Were None."
This was the first Administration built on baby-boomer networking, with the primary example being Hillary Rodham Clinton's fief in legal affairs, where top jobs were given to her friends and former law partners.


Hints of Sea and Sky Amid Stillness
Merce Cunningham, one of the great abstractionists of modern dance, usually disdains choreographic depictions of any specific objects or beings.
Nevertheless, his dances do call attention to natural processes or phenomena.
Mr.
Cunningham appeared to be concerned with sea and sky this weekend at City Center.
On Sunday afternoon, the Merce Cunningham Dance Company offered "Beach Birds," along with repeat performances of "Doubletoss" and the exuberant new "Crwdspcr."


PROSECUTORS LINK HONDA FRAUD CASES TO U.S. EXECUTIVES
Federal prosecutors are uncovering a long-running fraud in which American executives of the Honda Motor Company pocketed more than $10 million in bribes and kickbacks paid by car dealers.
In return, the dealers received permission to open lucrative dealerships and obtained scarce Honda automobiles that they could sell at a large profit.
Some of the payments came in the form of college tuition for the son of one former Honda executive, as well as gifts like watches, jewelry and barbecue grills for other Honda officials.


26 Are Hurt, 2 Seriously, In Melee at Rikers Island
A melee involving some of the highest-security inmates at the Rikers Island jail left 13 correction officers and 13 inmates injured last night, in the worst disturbance at the jail in nearly four years, correction officials said.
The incident began at about 8 P.M. as a fight between inmates in the gymnasium of the Otis Bantum Correctional Center, the same unit that was the scene of a 1990 disturbance in which more than 100 inmates and guards were hurt.
Officers said that when they tried to intervene in last night's disturbance, inmates attacked them with weight-lifting equipment.


Government to Study Quality of Indoor Air
CONCERNED that poor indoor air quality is adversely affecting human health and productivity, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency is studying the general quality of the air in the nation's buildings.
Susan E. Womble, who is helping to coordinate the Building Assessment Survey and Evaluation project for the agency's Office of Radiation and Indoor Air, said about 200 "sick" and "healthy" buildings would be examined in the next three to five years.


House Panel to Vote on a Health Plan Alternative That Doesn't Raise Deficit
A Congressional subcommittee plans to begin voting on Tuesday on an alternative to President Clinton's health care plan that seeks to guarantee health insurance coverage for all Americans without increasing the Federal budget deficit.
The bill, sponsored by Representative Pete Stark, Democrat of California, would require employers to pay at least 80 percent of the insurance premiums for their workers.
It would, in addition, impose a new payroll tax on all employers.


GRIEVANCES AIRED BY U.S. AND RUSSIA
The United States and Russia aired their grievances about each other's approach to foreign policy today, and both acknowledged that they needed to cooperate better.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher flew to this military bastion of the former Soviet Union to try to reassure Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev that the United States does not take Russia for granted and to discourage him from diplomatic freelancing in places like Bosnia and the Middle East.


Eyes on U.S. to Save Tiger
BEGINNING next Monday, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt will meet in Geneva to discuss conservation of the world's tigers with representatives of 122 nations that have signed the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species.
So far, actions taken by signers of the accord have amounted to little more than gentle prodding to try to rein in the trade in tiger parts.
A conference on tigers was held this month in New Delhi, but no firm commitments were made on policy.


Blues Lose Janney
The St.
Louis Blues will have to send center CRAIG JANNEY and a No. 2 draft pick to the Vancouver Canucks as compensation for the Blues' signing of the free agent center PETR NEDVED, an arbitrator ruled.
The Canucks had asked for wing BRENDAN SHANAHAN instead of Janney.


M. Keith Irvine, Writer And Africa Expert, 69
M.
Keith Irvine, a writer, editor and publisher known for his expertise on Africa, died on Thursday at his home in Algonac, Mich.
He was 69.
He died of congestive cardiomyopathy, a disease of the heart muscle, his family said.


Ratings and Letters Don't Mix on CBS
The paradox of Winter Olympic viewing continues: CBS garnered record ratings, but the letters I've received are generally negative.
Of course, some of those negative comments were about my coverage of CBS's coverage.
Few letters revealed totally satisfied viewers.
So maybe this is true: CBS drew in the discontented in spectacular numbers and kept them for 17 nights.


Rapee Team Upset In Bridge Play
The Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship continued today at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals, with one high-ranked team already on the sidelines.
In first-round play Sunday, the 12th-seeded team headed by George Rapee of Manhattan, a former world champion, lost by 36 international match points.
His teammates included two other former world champions, Russ Arnold of Miami, a Vanderbilt winner a year ago, and John Solodar of Manhattan; Ron Andersen and Peter Nagy of Chicago, and Bruce Ferguson of Boise, Idaho.
The upset winners, originally seeded 73d in the field of 84 teams, were four English invaders from London, David Muller, John Bentley, Peter Lindon and Trevor Mathews.
Foreign contestants are regularly underestimated in the rankings because they lack an American tournament record on which the seeding is based.
They came from behind in the final 16 deals, gaining 60 points.


Along With the Bible, a Poetry Anthology; The Vision of 2 Unlikely Collaborators Places Books of Verse in the Hands of Travelers
In the musty confines of hotel- and motel-room night stands, where one book has long reigned supreme, the word of God is getting a run for the money these days from the words of Emily Dickinson, Walt Whitman and Robert Frost.
Over the last year thousands of anthologies have turned up, like mints on the pillow, in hotels and motels around the country as part of an attempt to do for American poetry what the Gideons have done for the Bible.


State Senator Pataki Formally Declares Challenge to Cuomo
State Senator George E. Pataki, a little-known Republican lawmaker from Putnam County who has emerged as Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's choice for Governor, formally announced his candidacy today in what he called "a great crusade to end New York State's 12-year nightmare."
At news conferences in New York City and Albany, Mr.
Pataki said he planned to keep the focus of the campaign on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who is seeking his fourth four-year term.
But for the time being, his candidacy is trapped in a political donnybrook between Mr.
D'Amato and the State Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, who adamantly opposes Mr.
Pataki.


SOCCER
Protecting Their Turf
The winter safeguarding of the natural grass that will be used at the Pontiac Silverdome, where World Cup games will be played indoors for the first time this summer, has come to a close.


Poll Finds Public Is Still Doubtful Over Costs of Clinton Health Plan
Six months after unveiling its plan with a flourish, the Clinton Administration has made almost no progress in convincing Americans that its approach will solve the nation's health care problems, the latest New York Times Poll shows.
Just as it did last September, the public overwhelmingly backs President Clinton's goals of providing health insurance for all and making sure it cannot be canceled.
But just as it did then, the public fears that the Clinton plan would raise costs, while many also expect it to expand an already excessive bureaucracy and decrease the quality of medical care.


Prices of U.S. Securities Down in Quiet Trading
Prices of Treasury securities sagged yesterday in very thin and quiet trading as investors and dealers nervously awaited the release of the first of February's key inflation reports today.
Traders said higher bond prices generated by last Friday's rally gave a few dealers, who did not bail out during the sharp declines earlier last week, the opportunity yesterday to sell before the release of the Producer Price Index today and the Feburary Consumer Price Index tomorrow.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location will be shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Breast Cancer Advice Unchanged Despite Flawed Data in Key Study
Following the disclosure that some data from a key breast cancer study were falsified, the principal researcher, Dr.
Bernard Fisher of the University of Pittsburgh, said yesterday that he had re-analyzed the data, excluding the falsified material, and that the study's conclusions remained valid.
Other experts and women's health activists say that until they are shown the re-analysis, they have to reserve judgment.
But even these skeptics are not at present advocating any change in the advice now offered to women facing breast cancer surgery: that for women with early breast cancer removing the tumor, followed by radiation therapy, is just as effective as removing the entire breast.


El Escorial Journal; Holy War: Virgin's Devotees vs. Doubting Mayor
Faces tense with expectation, hands nervously clutching rosary beads, some 1,500 men, women and children gathered in silence around the gnarled trunk of an ash tree to hear the message that the Virgin Mary delivers here punctually on the first Saturday of every month.
That it should come over the loudspeaker system puzzled no one.
As always, the pilgrims were told, Amparo Cuevas, a 64-year-old former cleaning woman, had gone into ecstasy earlier in the day and spoken in the voice of Mary.
And, as always, her assistants had recorded the message.


Saving Lawmaker on Labor Hit List
It was surprising enough for Vice President Al Gore to break an unspoken White House tradition by taking sides in a bitter primary fight between two party members.
But even more surprising was his decision to do so on behalf of a lawmaker who often behaves more like a Republican than a Democrat.
The candidate, Representative David Mann, voted against President Clinton's stimulus package and his budget proposal.
He does not much care for the President's remedy for health care.
And he thinks Congress should step in and get to the bottom of the Whitewater matter.


Knee Surgery Puts Starks on Sidelines for 6 Weeks
John Starks, the Knicks' All-Star guard, had successful surgery yesterday to repair a piece of torn cartilage in his left knee, but he is almost certain to miss the rest of the regular season, leaving the Knicks without his fiery, sharp-shooting presence as it battles for home-court advantage in the playoffs.
Dr.
Norman Scott, the Knicks' team physician who performed the operation at Manhattan's Beth Israel Hospital, said it would be at least six weeks, or until the end of the regular season on April 24, before Starks could begin running and perhaps another couple of weeks before he was in shape to play for any extended periods.
He said the timetable depended on Starks's progress during recuperation.


No Headline
"I believe that my continued service will not be as effective as it has been; that the distractions on me at this time will interfere with my service to the country and the president's agenda; and that my family, although totally supportive, is being harmed." -- WEBSTER L. HUBBELL, in resigning from the Justice Department.  [ B7:2. ]


Canadian Natural Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Victim of Crime Battles the Criminal Justice System
On a winter afternoon two years ago, Vasso Tarnaras, a high-school cheerleader who dreamed of being an artist, was found unconscious in a bedroom closet in her house in North Massapequa.
The next day, her former boyfriend, Raymond Purvis, was charged with trying to choke her to death, a crime that left the 17-year-old student in a coma for months.
Over the ensuing months and years, Ms.
Tarnaras slowly emerged from her coma and gradually regained the ability to speak and read.
But she remained in a wheelchair, unable to perform many daily activities, like eating or dressing, on her own.
She can walk, but only with the aid of a walker or the assistance of a nurse.
And even worse as far as she was concerned, she could no longer paint or draw.


Iba Out at T.C.U.
MOE IBA, Texas Christian men's basketball coach, was dismissed yesterday after seven years with the Horned Frogs and a 96-108 record.
He will be paid for the remaining two years on his contract. (AP)


Remember, No Looking Ahead! Well, O.K.
So if Temple plays Indiana, and John Chaney interrupts Bob Knight's post-game news conference to issue his second death threat in as many months, will witnesses stand up to get in his way, or applaud?
If Syracuse meets California, and Lawrence Moten outplays Jason Kidd, will children from coast to coast suddenly adopt Moten's style of pulling his socks all the way up to just below his knees?


Slender Thread Visible Amid Stars
MANY of the 4,500 or so rocket payloads hurled from Earth in the course of the space age have been visible to observers on the ground.
At certain times on a clear night, spacecraft lit by the sun can be seen with the naked eye as they slowly work their way across the sky.
Invariably, they appear as bright dots drifting from horizon to horizon like wandering stars.
Now, apparently for the first time, people around the globe are watching a man-made object in the cosmos that has a shape -- a thin, bright line across the sky.
Remarkably, the luminous tendril is made up of a plastic fiber only one thirty-second of an inch thick but more than 12 miles long.
Some scientists had predicted it would be invisible.


Flight Service Back to Normal at London Airports
Flight operations returned to normal today at London's two main airports, which were paralyzed briefly on Sunday night after the Irish Republican Army fired dud mortar shells at Heathrow and threatened the airport at Gatwick.
The attacks led the British and Irish Governments today to rebuff a new appeal by the I.R.A. to reopen stalled peace talks on Northern Ireland.


Protests at City Hall Over Proposed Cuts in AIDS Financing


Classical Music in Review
The Ysaye Quartet  Metropolitan Museum of Art
The Ysaye Quartet returned to New York on Friday, offering competent, respectful performances of Haydn, Debussy and Pascal Dusapin.
This youngish French group seemed to be playing as well as it could, which is not badly at all.
One remembered with some pleasure the finale of Haydn's G-minor Quartet from Opus 74 and the last moments of the Andantino movement from Debussy's Quartet in the same key.
Here was loveliness born of discretion.
Elsewhere the muted personality of this group seemed altogether too discreet for its own good.
All these performances were well prepared and reasonably secure, yet Debussy's last movement stretched the players's ensemble techniques to the point of discomfort.


Budget Seen Cutting Services Or Increasing Property Taxes
The levels of state aid in Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's budget brought expressions of disappointment and dismay today from representatives of school boards and municipalities, who predicted that Mrs.
Whitman's failure to increase aid will lead to higher property taxes or sharp service cuts.
At the same time, the union that represents 50,000 state and local workers said that Mrs.
Whitman has unilaterally reneged on a deal to prefinance pension and cost-of-living increases that was worked out two years ago with the current Republican leaders of the Legislature, former Gov.
Jim Florio and state and union actuaries.


Federal Express Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


U.S. PLANE CRASHES OFF KENYA COAST
Four days before the last United States troops are to leave Somalia, an Air Force AC-130 gunship supporting the operation crashed today off the Kenya coast.
One crew member was killed and 10 others are missing, the Defense Department said.
The Pentagon has sent investigators to determine the cause of the crash, but early indications suggested engine failure.
There was no sign of hostile fire, military officials said.


Blazers' Robinson Fined
CLIFF ROBINSON of the Portland Trail Blazers was fined $7,500 yesterday for verbally abusing officials and failing to leave the court quickly after receiving two technical fouls in a game last week against Golden State.
The ejection carries an automatic fine of $7,500. (AP)


Dana Plans To Buy Stake In Company
Capitalizing on problems at Metallgesellschaft A.G., the Dana Corporation said yesterday that it had signed a letter of intent to buy the German company's 47 percent controlling stake in Kolbenschmidt A.G., a leading manufacturer of engine parts.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed, but securities analysts said that based on Kolbenschmidt's closing price of $143 a share on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, it could be worth $180 million.


GE Capital Makes $2.1 Billion Bid for Kemper
GE Capital, the highly profitable financial arm of the General Electric Company, announced yesterday that it was offering $2.1 billion in cash for the Kemper Corporation, a mutual fund and securities company, whose management is not eager to sell.
Kemper's chairman, David B. Mathis, had rejected GE Capital's merger overtures following a Jan. 26 meeting between executives of the two companies, but GE Capital is pressing forward with its offer.
In announcing publicly yesterday that GE Capital would pay $55 a share or possibly more for Kemper, its chairman, Gary C. Wendt, said he hoped Kemper's board would reconsider.
Mr.
Wendt described the attitude of Kemper's management as saying the company, based in Long Grove, Ill., "was not for sale at any price."


U.S. Shouldn't Sell Airwaves, but Lease Them
To the Editor:
In "Airwaves for Sale" (Op-Ed, March 4), Henry Morgenthau makes a good case for subsidizing public broadcasting by using funds realized from the auction of the publicly owned broadcast spectrum formerly used by the armed forces.


Settlement By Deloitte On S.&amp; L.'s
Deloitte &amp; Touche, a major accounting firm, agreed to pay $312 million to settle Federal charges that it failed to properly audit a number of failed and troubled banks and savings institutions.
The agreement, which is the second largest won by Government agencies pursuing professional firms in the wake of the savings and loan scandal, resolves all pending and future Federal litigation against Deloitte &amp; Touche in the matter.
In 1982, Ernst &amp; Young agreed to pay $400 million to settle Federal allegations of improper auditing.


Ross Stores Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Never Tiring of Talking About Work
Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich stepped into an elevator with half a dozen fidgety aides and fiddled with the pin on his lapel.
'Hideous!" he concluded as a thousand unseen gears whisked him to the top of the city's towering Renaissance Center. "Lavender and yellow?
It must be the flag of some obscure Slavic country."


Israel Gets Tough With Its Own
Israel's Government, predictably, ran into a minefield of domestic criticism yesterday for outlawing two Jewish radical groups linked to terrorism.
Not only settler groups but some members of the main opposition party, Likud, find it intolerable for an Israeli government to subject Jewish extremists to the same kind of restrictions that have long been employed against radical Palestinians.
Generally, it is hard to justify restrictions on peaceful, if provocative, political advocacy.
But in this case, Prime Minister Rabin acted appropriately.
Last month's mosque massacre in Hebron and subsequent revelations that Israeli troops had standing orders to avoid deadly force against settler violence made it urgent for Israel to demonstrate greater evenhandedness in security matters.


Of the Perils of Memory Inflation and Child's Play
IMAGINE if each auto were designed as if it would be the only car on the road.
Make that rear seat sofa size, extend the floor to hold a hassock, add a pinball machine for entertainment.
So what if the 55-foot result needed a lot of room to change lanes and had a turning radius similar to that of the QE2?
It's the only car on the road!
Some software seems to be designed in the same dream world, what Robin Raskin, an editor of PC Magazine, describes "as some sort of a digital ivory tower, where misguided programmers never stopped to think that you'd want to have more than one program installed on your machine at once."


Travel Groups' Joint Venture
The Carlson Travel Group announced its intention yesterday to form a joint venture with Wagons-Lits Travel, a chain of travel agencies based in Paris.
The new company, to be called Carlson Wagons-Lits Travel, will be based in London and will be aimed at the global business traveler.
The partners are investing $40 million in the venture, which they expect eventually to include more than 4,000 locations in 125 countries.
The merger of their business travel operations does not include the leisure travel business of either company.


Chess
Iceland's slippery crags were nothing compared with the pitfalls of the Reykjavik International Tournament, held Feb. 5-13.
The highest ranked players were the most strongly affected as they fell, one after another, to their inferiors.
When the topsy-turvy event ended, an international master, 17-year-old Vadim Svjaginsev of Russia, had topped a 62-player field that included 26 grandmasters.


Hills Stores Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


COMPANY BRIEFS
BISCAYNE HOLDINGS INC., Clifton, N.J., bought a 20 percent interest in Hartwell Sports Inc., Hartwell, Ga., a maker of casual shirts and jackets.
Terms were not disclosed.


Amarillo Promises a Profit For American Air's Service
After Amarillo, Tex., learned last month that it would be losing jet service from a major airline, it decided to fight the same fate that had befallen dozens of other small cities.
So late last week, city officials put up $1 million to guarantee American Airlines a profit on flights between Amarillo and Dallas.
The arrangement is not unique, but is part of an emerging trend among cities to go on the offensive to retain or expand jet service, which can be crucial in attracting new business and maintaining a strong local economy.
With several of the largest carriers shrinking capacity and shedding unprofitable routes, many airlines have told city officials in places like like Sioux City, Iowa, and Bismarck, N.D., that they would replace jets with smaller, propeller planes.


Penn Traffic Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Gamma Ray Bursts Traced to Young Stars
NEW observations by spacecraft and radiotelescopes have given astronomers their first compelling evidence identifying the source of one form of gamma ray bursts, those mystifying blasts of powerful gamma radiation that flash suddenly and briefly in the heavens.
The source appears to be young, rapidly spinning dead stars.
About 1,000 of these transient flashes have been detected, nearly all of them in the last three years by the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory that is orbiting Earth.
These intense emissions occur seemingly at random across the sky and vanish in seconds.
The most common of these bursts do not appear to be coming from any known objects.


Worthington Industries(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Whitewater case misstated the source of a report that David Kendall, Bill and Hillary Clinton's lawyer, believed the Clintons might owe some back taxes on their real estate investment in the Ozarks of Arkansas.
The report, published this week in U.S.
News &amp; World Report, was attributed by the magazine to unidentified "insiders," not to Mr.
Kendall.


Review/Music; Operatic Goings-On Before the Opera
Do audiences appreciate the thorny logistical problems involved in giving unknown operas professional performances?
The question came to mind on Sunday evening at Carnegie Hall, when Eve Queler led her Opera Orchestra of New York, the Prince Pro Musica chorus and a valiant but inconsistent cast in a concert version of Donizetti's "Caterina Cornaro."
It cannot be easy to persuade famous or almost-famous singers to learn roles they are unlikely ever to sing again.
Miss Queler's track record for doing exactly that has been impressive, but assembling "Caterina Cornaro" seems to have been unusually nerve-racking.


Editors' Note
An article on Sunday reported the filing of a sexual-harassment lawsuit in Los Angeles by two female F.B.I. agents against their superiors.
The article described the women's accusations as "a catalogue of petty abuses that ranged from neck massages to a kiss on the back of the neck to placing hands on buttocks or into skirt pockets to pulling at the front of a blouse."


Morris Will Not Hit the Court While the Nets Hit the Road
When Chris Morris broke his thumb Feb. 27, the Nets put him on the injured list, meaning he would miss a minimum of five games.
And it was feared he would miss three weeks.
Today Morris was confident that he could join the team on Saturday in Phoenix for the finale of the Nets' three-game Western swing.
But that was before his condition was re-evaluated.


Business Digest
Companies
Federal prosecutors said they were uncovering fraud by American executives of Honda Motor, who they said took big bribes and kickbacks from car dealers for new dealerships and popular models.
Five people have reportedly been indicted.  [ Page A1. ]  Disclosure of the fraud resulted partly from problems between two New Hampshire Acura dealers.  [ D19. ]


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Nuggets Smother Spurs Mahmoud Abdul Rauf scored a season-high 33 points to pace the Denver Nuggets to a 116-88 blowout of San Antonio last night, limiting the Spurs' All-Star center, David Robinson, to eight points, his lowest total of the season.


Black &amp; Decker May Merge Account
The Black &amp; Decker Corporation said yesterday that it was considering consolidating the media portion of its estimated $30 million to $34 million account at one agency.
The account is currently divided between the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago and McCann-Erickson in New York.
"We are looking for smarter buying options," said Beck Bunnell, a Black &amp; Decker spokeswoman in Shelton, Conn., confirming a report of the possible consolidation this week in Adweek.


Patterns
An Intriguing Proposal
Fashion editors have spent years sorting out the riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma of Martin Margiela's fashion.
Just when they thought they had figured it out, this season they were summoned to the periphery of Paris to see no collection at all.


Classical Music in Review
Marie-Claire Alain  Organist Church of the Holy Trinity
With a catalogue of more than 200 recordings, Marie-Claire Alain is probably the most thoroughly documented organist playing today.
Her recordings capture something of the clarity with which she conceives her interpretations, and they suggest her ear for color.
But many are on the prim side.


Review/Television: Milton Berle -- Mr. Television; A Zillion Gags (Not Counting Repeats)
Milton Berle, named Milton Berlinger when he was born in 1908, was in silent movies five years later, pushed by an adoring mother who foisted all of her own frustrated stage ambitions on her smart-aleck kid.
Later, in vaudeville, young Berle would pattern himself after the comic Ted Healy, who firmly believed that there is no such thing as an old joke: "If they haven't heard it before, it's new." That bit of advice helped Mr.
Berle stitch together a successful career that, in 1948, would burst into superstardom in the fledgling medium of television.
His story is told tonight, sketchily but entertainingly, on A&amp;E in a segment of "Biography" called "Milton Berle: Mr. Television."
As a master of ceremonies in vaudeville in the 1930's (heralded as the youngest M.C. ever to work B. F. Keith's Palace in New York), Mr.
Berle developed his habit of getting into everyone's act.
He become a headliner in Broadway shows, including a 97-week run in the Ziegfeld Follies.
He made movies ("Tall, Dark and Handsome," "Sun Valley Serenade").
And he did a lot of radio, everything from the Fred Allen show to "Can You Top This?" But as he acknowledges during an interview in this documentary, his humor was too visual for a big success in radio.
And then along came television and "Texaco Star Theater."


Echlin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


STEEP DROP SHOWN IN NEW CASES OF TB FOR NEW YORK CITY
Saying concerted efforts to control the spread of tuberculosis seem to be paying off, New York City's Health Commissioner announced yesterday that the city last year experienced its most significant drop in new cases in 15 years.
Nationwide, the number of new cases dropped 5 percent last year, Federal health officials said.
But the decline was particularly steep in New York, where health officials have spent more than $70 million in the last three years to combat a resurgence of the disease.


Labontes Unhurt in Crash
The Nascar driver BOBBY LABONTE and his wife, DONNA, were forced to crash-land in an airplane Sunday night at an airport in Winston-Salem, N.C.
No one was hurt.
The Labontes and the pilot were returning to their Thomasville, N.C., home from the Atlanta Motor Speedway, where Bobby Labonte participated in a Nascar race Sunday. (AP)


Giuliani Wants Welfare Recipients to Work
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that his administration is considering requiring at least 10,000 people receiving welfare payments to perform jobs like cleaning streets, filling potholes or scrubbing graffiti in exchange for their payments.
Speaking at a news conference in City Hall, the Mayor said the plan is "in the idea stage," adding that it is one of a number of methods being considered to compel able-bodied welfare recipients to go to work.


Classical Music in Review
Orchestre National de France  Charles Dutoit, conductor Avery Fisher Hall
Contradicting France's usual reputation for discretion and tact is a very different national love of shiny surfaces, spectacle and the uninhibited joyful noise.
Uproarious Frenchness, indeed, took up most of the Orchestre Nationale de France's program under Charles Dutoit on Sunday afternoon.
"Le Corsaire," Berlioz's early overture, was splendidly done: playing of great elegance that was virtually lifted in the air by a corporate energy and grace.
French orchestras, with some justification, have not enjoyed the best of reputations in recent years.
Given music close to its heart, this one sounded very good indeed.


Deadly Virus Killing Ducks in Upstate New York


Tuberculosis Found to Be Old Disease In New World
ONE THOUSAND years ago, a woman in southern Peru died at the age of 40 to 45 and was buried in a stone tomb in a river valley near what is now the coastal community of Ilo.
As sometimes happened in the desiccated climate of the Atacama Desert, her body dried out and was spontaneously mummified.
Now, modern scientists have come along and conducted a revealing post-mortem examination of the well-preserved body.
Their research offers new evidence that pre-Columbian Americans may already have been infected with some of the devastating diseases that were thought to have been brought to the New World by Columbus and other early explorers.


Victim in Serial Killing Is Buried


Stocks Advance Slightly in Light Trading
Stocks drifted up yesterday in light trading.
Market professionals held back, awaiting inflation news today and tomorrow as the bond market again approached but then pulled back from long-term interest rates of 7 percent.
Companies related to the computer industry, whose share prices have generally risen recently, benefited from the small rally.
Computer makers like I.B.M. and the Digital Equipment Corporation, semiconductor companies like Motorola and Intel, as well as software companies like Novell and Oracle, all saw their share prices rise.


Biomet Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Large Pension Funds to Back Housing for Those With Low Incomes
WASHINGTON, March 14 --
Two of the nation's largest pension funds announced today that they would use some of their assets to help finance housing for low-income families.
The announcement is significant because it involves the California Public Employees' Retirement System, which has long been the trend-setter in the pension industry, and because the pension money will actually be spent on bulldozers and cement.
In the past, state pension funds have mostly confined their low-income housing investments to the purchase of mortgages on existing buildings.


On My Mind; The Way She Died
She died on the street, near her house in Queens, stabbed to death in the early morning of March 13, 1964.
It wasn't much of a story; an editor in the New York Times newsroom held up a thumb and forefinger, meaning keep it short.
Four paragraphs appeared, written by a young police reporter.
Even in the newsroom they were barely noticed.
But two weeks later Catherine Genovese's name became known around the world.


Room at Top, Nice View of Field, Tenant Needed
With Vince Coleman now in Kansas City, the Mets are pondering a question this spring to which they may have no satisfactory answer: Just who will lead off?
Dallas Green has a typical managerial shopping list for the position: Someone who combines speed with an ability to get on base, someone "who can make some things happen in the early part" of the batting order.


Admiral Is Named NATO Commander In Southern Europe
The White House today named Vice Adm.
Leighton W. (Snuffy) Smith Jr. as NATO's military commander in southern Europe, a post with responsibility for dealing with the conflict in the former Yugoslavia.
He replaces Adm.
Jeremy M. Boorda, who, as expected, was named to be the Chief of Naval Operations, the Navy's top admiral.
Admiral Smith, a 54-year-old graduate of the United States Naval Academy, is the Navy's director of plans, policy and operations at the Pentagon.
He was the director of operations for United States forces in Europe from 1989 to 1991.


Boggs Is Beyond Compare, And He's the First to Say So
Wade Boggs grimaced when the statistical comparison flashed across the television screen last weekend.
Boggs was being lumped with Michael Jordan and it was not for his jump shooting prowess, his golf swing or his baggy shorts.
Neither player had managed any hits in spring training games.
Jordan, one of the greatest basketball players, was 0 for 12 as he tried to become a baseball player.
Boggs, one of the greatest active hitters, was 0 for 13.
Their names were side by side, their averages were standing still at .000 and Boggs was disgusted by the inference.
Although it was a harmless graphic on ESPN, the future Hall of Famer resented being aligned with the future minor leaguer.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  CRACKDOWN IN ISRAEL  Israel searched houses for weapons and detained a settler after outlawing two militant Jewish groups.
It said it will continue to move against the radicals.
A1  'NON' TO ENGLISH  In its continuing battle against the English language, France is considering a law that would create a barrier against any further foreign-language incursions.
A1  A GESTURE TO RUSSIA  Secretary of State Christopher stopped in Russia for talks with the Foreign Minister, in a gesture to assure him that Washington does not take Moscow for granted.
A7  U.S.
ARMS PROGRAM DEFENDED  Defense Secretary William J. Perry said that he supports military cooperation with Russia but that the United States should continue its nuclear weapons programs as a hedge against instability there.
A6  GERMAN LEADER'S WOES  The Chancellor of Germany, Helmut Kohl, a leader in Europe for 11 years, appears to be in trouble leading up to national elections in October, largely because of the country's economy; but he says he is not worried.
A14  CAUTION ON BOSNIA FORCE  Despite calls for expanded military involvement in Bosnia, United States officials are raising the specter of Vietnam, saying certain conditions should be met before expanding NATO threats of air strikes.
A6  NO PROGRESS IN CHINA  The talks between the United States and China ended with the two sides still far apart on human rights, and China blamed the United States for the lack of progress.
A3  TOUGH WORDS FOR THE I.R.A.
After three I.R.A. attacks on Heathrow Airport, Britain and Ireland rebuffed a request from the Irish Republican Army for concessions in terms for peace negotiations over Northern Ireland.
A9  Euro Disney took its first step away from the brink of bankruptcy.
D1  A U.S. plane helping troops leave Somalia crashed off Kenya.
A10  Small countries accused the United States of a power play.
A12  El Escorial Journal: In Spain, believers and doubters.
A4  National A16-21, B6-8  JUSTICE OFFICIAL RESIGNS  Webster L. Hubbell, a member of the inner circle that the Clintons brought from Arkansas, resigned from a top Justice Department job, saying he wanted to spare the White House further embarrassment over accusations that he overbilled his former law firm.
A1  HAUNTED BY TIMES PAST  News Analysis: The essential quality of those in the Clintons' inner circle was the shared intimacy of times past.
But now, that very intimacy is claiming them, one by one, leaving the survivors in the White House feeling besieged.
A1  STILL WARY ON HEALTH  A New York Times poll shows that the Clinton Administration has made almost no progress in persuading Americans that its approach will solve the nation's health care problems.
A1  A health care plan will have its first test in this Congress.
B8  FRAUD CHARGED AT HONDA  Federal prosecutors said they are uncovering a scheme in which U.S. executives for Honda Motor took more than $10 million in bribes and kickbacks from car dealers for new dealerships and popular cars.
A1  LITTLE ENTHUSIASM  In Representative Dan Rostenkowski's Chicago district, there were few campaign buttons and lots of indecision on the eve of a tough primary for an influential Democrat scarred by ethics troubles.
A16  KEEPING A PROMISE  The Administration is stepping in to help an Ohio representative who voted for the North American Free Trade Agreement and who is now being punished by labor.
A18  PACKWOOD RELENTS  Senator Bob Packwood gave up his battle and said he would turn over his diaries to a Senate ethics panel, a move that could set the stage for public hearings into his sexual and official conduct.
A21  PENSION MONEY FOR HOUSING  Two of the nation's largest pension funds announced that they would help finance housing for low-income families.
Administration officials hailed the move.
A21  AIR TRAFFIC REVAMPING  The Administration is proposing to move control of the air traffic-control system from the Federal Aviation Administration to a Government-subsidized corporation.
B6  Shelbyville Journal: A town builds a house for 28 Haitian children.
A16  Metro Digest B1  GAINS AGAINST TB SEEN  Saying that concerted efforts to control the spread of tuberculosis seem to be paying off, Federal health officials announced that New York City experienced its most significant drop in new cases in 15 years.
A1  Science Times C1-16  FLAWED CANCER STUDY BACKED  A re-analysis of a study comparing mastectomy and lumpectomy, excluding falsified data, is said to support its conclusions that the treatments have the same survival rates for most women.
A1  A curious sea creature shed light on kidney stones in people.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C17-22  The future of the New-York Historical Society.
C17  Music: Critic's Notebook C17  Television: Berle looks back.
C17  Business Digest D1  Obituaries B10  Fashion Page B9  Sports B11-17  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  Israel gets tough with its own.
Parading the wrong message.
Haiti: the plan no one wants.
Neglect of the CUNY board.
Letters  Russell Baker: Mired in stardom.
A.
M.
Rosenthal: The way she died.
Milton Viorst: Pay the settlers to leave.
Walter Cronkite: caveat spectator.
Chronicle B6 Chess C16 Crossword C22


N.R.A. Heeds Olympic Call To End Team Affiliation
The National Rifle Association, suffering a severe public relations blow, decided last night to remove itself as the governing body for the Olympic sport of shooting.
The move came three days after a panel representing the United States Olympic Committee recommended that the N.R.A.'s authority be revoked.
For the N.R.A., the withdrawal represents a rare defeat after several years of skirmishing with athletes and officials of the United States Shooting Team.
They have accused the N.R.A. of using its Olympic affiliation to further its own political agenda, while using bullying tactics and ignoring its administrative responsibilities to the sport.


Ban English? French Bicker on Barricades
The French official, elegant as always, walked into the Foreign Ministry salon, bowed slightly and began, "Le briefing est off the record."
Soon, official use of such a phrase will be against the law if the Culture Ministry has its way.
So will Fun Radio's un-French name and its babble about "le listing" on "le hit parade." Not to mention Ford Motor Company's advertisement for a new car equipped with "le air bag."


Ship Collision Kills at Least 15 and Closes the Bosporus


Rockin' the Concord: Electric Borscht Land
SPRING break '94, the Concord Resort Hotel.
They Might Be Giants is playing the Imperial Ballroom.
Audience members are bopping like pogo sticks.
And Billy Vine, walking, talking Borscht Belt history, is patiently explaining the distinction between stage diving and moshing.
"See, what that guy just did is stage diving," he said, watching a skinny teen-ager who had jumped onto the platform and back off, into a sea of bodies.


Accounts
*
McDonald's Restaurants of Switzerland, Zurich, to Matter/Galbucci &amp; Leo Burnett, Zurich, to handle its account, previously handled by McCann-Erickson, Zurich.
Burnett already handles McDonald's' account in 11 countries including the United States.
Billings were estimated at $7 million.


Who's That In Agassi's Hip Pocket? It's Becker
Andre Agassi and Boris Becker, once a mutual admiration society unto their anti-establishment selves, have lately suffered a fraternal conflict of interest because of coach Nick Bollettieri's decision to align with Becker after dropping Agassi.
Don't mix your mentors appears to be the message.


Crackdown by Israel Is Off to a Slow Start, But More Is Promised
A day after it outlawed two virulently anti-Arab groups, Israel pursued its tougher policy toward militant Jewish settlers today, with the police searching houses in Hebron for weapons and detaining the firebrand leader there, Rabbi Moshe Levinger.
The results of the dragnet were slender: two guns, a couple of arrests and the quick release of Rabbi Levinger after questioning about his reportedly disruptive behavior a few months ago at the Cave of the Patriarchs, the Hebron shrine where a Brooklyn-born settler killed at least 29 Muslim worshipers on Feb. 25, abruptly halting Israeli-Arab peace talks.


Chicago Tribune Review Is Narrowed
The Chicago Tribune Company said yesterday that it had narrowed the review of the creative portion of its account to seven agencies.
The account, with billings estimated at $7 million to $8 million, was handled by Griffin &amp; Boyle in Chicago for the last five years.


Devils Honed for Long Spring Skate
The team-comes-first concept that Jacques Lemaire was taught and absorbed so successfully in Montreal is beginning to take deep roots in New Jersey.
Lemaire and his assistant, Larry Robinson, are tuning the Devils as if they were experienced mechanics and they appear to have all cylinders firing, from the goaltending down to the last forward on the last line.


Classical Music in Review
Academy of Ancient Music  Christopher Hogwood, conductor Avery Fisher Hall
Telemann with a sense of humor was the centerpiece of Sunday evening's program by the Academy of Ancient Music under Christopher Hogwood.
That prolific and generally upright contemporary of Bach was heard in his "Burlesque de Quixote," in which scenes from Cervantes get a thorough going-over in sound.
The Don attacks to repeated notes played agitato.
He sighs to accented two-note slurs.
Steeds gallop in triple time.
Devoid of its literary allusions, this particular Telemann suite (1 of 600) might sound a little bare.
As a package for ear and the imagining eye, it is considerable fun.


'Horse With Wings,' A Benefit Performance
The sopranos Harolyn Blackwell and Angelina Reaux, the baritone Michael Sokol and the ensemble Musica Sacra under the direction of Richard Westenburg are to take part in "A Horse With Wings: The Music of Ricky Ian Gordon" tonight at 8 o'clock at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine (Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street, Morningside Heights).
Proceeds from the event are to benefit Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS, Classical Action and Crises Outreach Ministries.
Ms.
Blackwell is to sing "Genius Child," a cycle of 10 songs set to poems by Langston Hughes.
Musica Sacra will offer "Water Music," a two-part Requiem, and Ms.
Reaux and Mr.
Sokol will sing excerpts from "Autumn Valentine (Dorothy Parker's General Review of the Sex Situation)," accompanied by Mr.
Gordon.


G.M. Executive Says He Will Stay Put
Phil Guarascio, general manager of marketing and advertising at General Motors' North American operations in Detroit, put an end yesterday to speculation that he was leaving his post at G.M. after nine years to join Turner Broadcasting Sales.


Old Friend Turns Aside Rangers' Best Shots
After the Rangers arrived here Saturday night, Coach Mike Keenan decreed that there would be no practice on Sunday -- a reward to his team for having played 13 games in 21 days, including 6 games in the previous 8 days.
"From Halifax to Florida," he said, dryly.
The veterans Joe Kocur and Mike Gartner elected to play 36 holes of golf on Sunday, and had the sunburned faces to show for it.
"We underestimated the sun," said Kocur, reaching for some skin lotion.


INSIDE
Plan to Cut Trenton Budget
Governor Whitman plans to close a $2 billion budget deficit by laying off some workers and postponing hundreds of millions of dollars in pension and health-care obligations.
Page B1.
Endangered Tigers
In India, where it serves as the national symbol, the tiger is almost extinct, and some blame an illegal trade with China, where the tiger is used in medicine.
Science Times, page C1.
U.S.
Limiting Bosnia Role
The United States is resisting pressure to expand its Bosnia role, indicating that it will meet its obligations, but that it does not want to be drawn into an open-ended mission.
Page A6.


Review/Fashion; From Apprentices to Sorcerers
Jean-Paul Gaultier started his career at Pierre Cardin, and Herve Leger as an assistant to Karl Lagerfeld.
Now, the assistants to those former assistants are creating their own collections.
Which made Friday spore day here.
Mr.
Leger's former assistant, Ocimar Versolato, and Mr.
Gaultier's former assistant, Gilles Rosier, finished out the European round of fall '94 showings with hints of where this third generation of ready-to-wear designers will take fashion.


Salute to the Chief


Wausau Paper Mills Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Corrections
An article on March 9 about a high school job-training program in Portland, Ore., misstated the surname of the Education Department's assistant secretary for vocational and adult education, who described benefits of the program.
She is Augusta Kappner, not Kappan.


Books of The Times; How Stalin's Victims Remember His Rule
The Unquiet Ghost  Russians Remember Stalin  By Adam Hochschild. 304 pages.
Viking. $22.95.
No one in history, the scholar Richard Pipes has written, "possessed such power over so many human beings; no one ever inflicted such havoc on his own country."


Of Course They Manipulate Cigarette Nicotine
To the Editor:
"Addiction by Design?" (editorial, March 6) adds to the frenzy over the apparently sudden discovery by Dr.
David Kessler, Food and Drug Administration commissioner, that tobacco companies may be addicting smokers by spiking the nicotine content of cigarettes.
If this is so, you suggest, "it will come as a shock to the great majority of Americans who no doubt assumed" that the nicotine in their cigarettes got there naturally.


Defense Chief Calls Caution Toward Russia Vital
Defense Secretary William J. Perry, arguing that the instability in Russia could lead to a renewal of the cold war, said today that the Pentagon needed to continue nuclear weapons programs to "hedge" against that possibility.
In a speech at George Washington University two days before he is to leave for a trip to Russia and several Soviet republics, Mr.
Perry made a forceful argument for continuing military cooperation with Moscow and providing aid to the former Soviet states to dismantle their weapons of mass destruction.


Roadmaster Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Element Is Named In Honor Of Chemist
AN artificial element known as Element 106 has been named seaborgium in honor of the American chemist and Nobel laureate Dr.
Glenn T. Seaborg, one of the discoverers of plutonium and nine other elements.
The announcement was made on Sunday at a meeting of the American Chemical Society in San Diego.
Dr.
Seaborg, 81, said: "This is an extraordinary honor for me. Future students of chemistry, in learning about the periodic table, may have reason to ask why the element was named after me, and thereby learn more about my work."


Boom and Bust May Be the Norm in Nature, Study Suggests
FROM sudden plagues of locusts to mysterious declines in sought-after creatures like the Dungeness crab, the booms and busts of nature have puzzled researchers.
A new study suggests that scientists may sometimes have difficulty finding an environmental cause for these fluctuations simply because there is not one.
In the study published last month in the journal Science, researchers at the University of California at Davis found evidence that many animals, even when they are unperturbed by unusual weather or any other alterations in their environment, can undergo wildly unpredictable changes in their numbers.


Inquiry Into Contamination Starts at Brooklyn Navy Yard
The recent discovery of elevated levels of toxic chemicals in soil and groundwater taken from the Brooklyn Navy yard has prompted a formal investigation by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
The investigation could result in the site's being assigned to the state's toxic waste Superfund list and thus further threaten the already troubled efforts to build a $450 million garbage incinerator at the Navy Yard.
"It's premature to jump to the conclusion that this is the end of the incinerator," Anne Canty, a spokeswoman for the New York City Department of Sanitation, said yesterday.
"The samples were not taken from the part of the Navy Yard where the incinerator is to be constructed. But the investigation is the prudent thing to do. We will cooperate fully."


Chicago Undecided on Eve Of Rostenkowski's Primary
The North Side commuters waiting blankly for the el train this morning in their trench coats and earmuffs did not look as though the country's future was resting on their shoulders, even though some Democrats say it is.
There were few campaign buttons and little spontaneous talk of politics.
There was a lot of indecision just 24 hours before perhaps the most important primary of the year, the one that will determine whether Dan Rostenkowski, the larger-than-life chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, will be renominated and whether, some say, the President's health care plan can be passed or welfare reform can take shape.


General Mills Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


School Fight Injures Five In Brooklyn
A fistfight among students at Erasmus Hall High School in Brooklyn escalated into a bloody brawl that ranged through hallways and into a gymnasium yesterday after at least one student, brandishing a box cutter, slashed five of his classmates in the face and neck, the police and students said.
Three of the injured students were treated at Kings County Hospital Center, the police said.
School authorities closed the school about an hour early because of the fight, students interviewed outside the school said.


Parading the Wrong Message
For the first time in several years, New York City awaits its St.
Patrick's Day parade with the law clear from the outset.
Thursday's parade is a private event, albeit on public space, and its sponsors have the right to decide who may march and who may not.
Neither the law nor the Constitution requires the inclusion of gay Irish-Americans who identify themselves as such.
Thus free to make a private decision, the Ancient Order of Hibernians has once again excluded the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization.
Likewise at liberty to march or not, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani says he will.
Both the sponsors and the Mayor are sending a divisive, needlessly cruel message.


Clinton Offers Job Prescriptions
President Clinton called on Japan to stimulate its economy more and on Europe to lower its interest rates, as he opened the jobs conference of the world's leading industrial nations today.
But he also used the occasion to call for putting a lid on American interest rates.
"I think that since there's no inflation in the economy, interest rates should not continue to go up," he said.


Let's Learn How to Negotiate With Japan
To the Editor:
In the Clinton Administration's trade skirmishes with Japan, the United States has displayed a cultural insensitivity that could have unintended economic and political consequences as its result.


Shelbyville Journal; Real Home at Last for a Family of 30
Since 1990, Dan and Kathy Blackburn and the 28 adopted children they saved from the chaos of post-Duvalier Haiti had made their home in an abandoned grammar school in North Vernon, Ind.
But the lease was going to be up on March 1, and the building had deteriorated to the point where all 30 Blackburns had to use the single working shower.


Sea Containers Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reluctantly, Couple Seek Refuge
As they edge toward late middle age, Henry and Geraldine Fox Grass are planning to leave the suburbs they watched spring up over the farmlands and resort beaches of Long Island.
But they will be reluctant exiles, forced out by property taxes and prices that make growing old here unthinkable.
The couple, whose Long Beach condominium overlooks the Atlantic Ocean, have been considering moving to Wilmington, N.C.
"It's like Long Island in the 50's," Mrs.
Grass said recently.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Released Scott Taylor, pitcher.


COMPANY BRIEFS
IMCERA GROUP INC., St.
Louis, a medical products and chemicals company, said its shareholders had approved a change in the company's name to Mallinckrodt Group Inc.
STAPLES INC., Framingham, Mass., the retailer of office supplies, said it would acquire seven former Office America stores in Virginia and Kentucky.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


IP Timberlands Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


International Paper Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 11
Mar. 4
Mar. 12
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
6.8
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.0
2.8
Gasoline stocks
225.7
225.8
237.4
Distillate stocks
103.0
102.7
103.9
Crude imports, daily
5.7
6.4
7.6
Product imports, daily
2.5
1.9
1.6
Crude stocks
328.9
334.2
343.0
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
87.3
85.9
84.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


This Invitation Was Totally Unexpected
John Kresse sits in his office, trying to do an interview. It isn't working.
Every two minutes, the telephone rings.
A congratulatory call from a former player in Germany.
A call from a student wondering if Kresse has the authority to cancel classes for the rest of the week.
A fan wondering how to get tickets.


Protect the Child, but Also Protect the Innocent
To the Editor:
"A Federal appeals court in Manhattan has ruled that the standard of evidence used by New York State to place a suspect's name on its central child-abuse register poses an 'unacceptably high risk of error,' and that many people are placed on the list who do not belong there" (front page, March 6).
I read with pleasure of this step to correct an unchecked system of abuse or potential abuse.


High School, Cell Division; Erasmus Prepares to Become Four Schools
When New York City officials wanted to show off the city's lofty educational traditions in 1987, they staged a reception in the glittering stained-glass chapel of the city's oldest high school, Erasmus Hall in Brooklyn.
The school had months earlier celebrated its 200th birthday with a candlelight ceremony on its Gothic campus, attended by hundreds of its illustrious alumni, who include Barbra Streisand, the chess champion Bobby Fischer, and hundreds of physicians and jurists, actors and writers.


New Battery By Bellcore Uses Lithium
A new type of lightweight rechargeable battery that is thin and flexible as a credit card and cannot leak was announced yesterday by Bell Communications Research, the research arm of the regional Bell telephone companies.
Officials of Bellcore, as the company is known, said they envisioned that the batteries would be used in portable telephones and electronic equipment like laptop computers.
But they said there appeared to be no theoretical reason that the batteries could not be made in bigger versions for uses requiring much more power, like electric cars.


Mixed Doubles: Players as Business
A few years ago, a 10-year-old Russian prodigy named Anna Kournikova was spirited out of Moscow and then, in a scene part fairy tale, part venture capitalism, granted a brand-new life at the Nick Bollettieri Tennis Academy in this gulf-side resort town.
She was immediately supplied with a famous coach, Bollettieri, and she and her mother signed a contract with the International Management Group, the agency poised to make her a superstar and, not coincidentally, a millionaire before her 13th birthday this year.


Kenneth Neill Cameron, 85, Dies; Scholar of Shelley and His Circle
Dr.
Kenneth Neill Cameron, one of the country's foremost scholars of Shelley and English Romantic poetry in general, died on Monday at New York University Hospital.
He was 85 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Flawed Cancer Study Haunts Many Women
Geri Barish lost her mother to breast cancer.
So when she found a lump in her breast in June 1986, the decision about what she should do weighed heavily on her.
In the end, Mrs.
Barish, of Baldwin, L.I., said she based her choice on a study that said removing the tumor would be as effective as removing the entire breast.
She had a lumpectomy.


Crestar Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Counsel Goes to Capitol Hill, and Whom Does He See?


Giuliani Cuts Cash Awards To Landlords for Homeless
The Giuliani administration has ordered drastic cuts in a program that has awarded landlords thousands of dollars in incentives for providing apartments to homeless families living in shelters.
Administration officials said the bonus program paid some landlords too much money.
They said the reduction would not hurt the program in part because of recent increases in Federal rent subsidies.


When Kipling Found a Home in Vermont
To the Editor:
"Cavendish Journal: Shielding Solzhenitsyn Respectfully" (news article, March 3), on Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's Vermont neighbors, reports how New England honors privacy.
You also describe the continuation of a century-old tradition of Vermonters caring for visiting Nobel laureates in literature.


Chipcom Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Thousands in Hungary Denounce Dismissal of Broadcast Journalists
Tens of thousands of people have demonstrated in the streets here in the last two days over the Government's dismissal of journalists at its radio and television stations.
As Hungary's right-of-center Government gears up for elections in May, prominent journalists were dismissed from state radio and television amid charges that the Government is trying to muzzle the airwaves.


The Whitewater Fallacy
Reliable sources tell me that the word "incestuous" is coded into the computers of all news media people writing about Arkansas and Whitewater.
Press the F1 key and a reflexive sentence will describe the illicit political and financial culture from which the President of the United States sprang.
So long have Arkansans endured the hillbilly caricature that defensiveness is part of their genetic code.
They know why the incest metaphor seems so natural to Washington reporters, whose picture of Arkansas is of an ethical Dogpatch where savings-and-loan schemers bed their sisters and then get their idiot spawn appointed to the state regulatory agencies.


The Pop Life
Few Guns, No Concert
Offering tickets to a top-flight rap concert in exchange for turning in a gun sounds like a sure-fire way to help rid the urban landscape of weapons.
Or at least it did.
At last count, only 25 guns had been turned in.
The concert, scheduled for Friday night at the Beacon Theater?
Forget about it.


Redskins Land Gesek From the Cowboys
The Washington Redskins have agreed to terms with Dallas Cowboys offensive lineman JOHN GESEK.
Team officials confirmed late yesterday they expect to sign the 31-year-old free agent lineman in the next day or so.
The 285-pound Gesek was a guard at Dallas, but the Redskins are signing him as a center, the position he prefers.
Washington's current center, RALEIGH McKENZIE is expected to move to right guard.
The Washington Post reported in today's editions that the deal with Gesek is for three years and is worth $3.6 million. (AP)


Review/Music; Bang on a Can and Lincoln Center Survive First Concert Unmarked
Professional worriers of different stripes are no doubt poring over the schedule of the eighth Bang on a Can series, searching for portents.
For some, Lincoln Center's adoption of the post-Minimalist downtown festival, with its informal atmosphere and its occasional nods to rock-and-roll, is a sign of Western civilization's imminent collapse; or at least, of Lincoln Center's shameless abandonment of the artistic high ground in pursuit of trendiness.
The alternative fear is that Bang on a Can, having allowed itself to be absorbed by Lincoln Center, will surrender its quirkily omnivorous character and be sucked into the bland mainstream.
Maybe both sides have a point.
But after their first dance, on Monday evening at the Walter Reade Theater, neither Lincoln Center nor Bang on a Can seemed any worse for the encounter.
The performers were the Bang on a Can All Stars, a flexible and expert sextet with Maya Beiser, cellist, Lisa Moore, pianist, Mark Stewart, guitarist, Evan Ziporyn, clarinetist and saxophonist, Robert Black, bassist and Steven Schick, percussionist.
The group, which has lately done some international touring, offered nearly three hours of new music, much of it fully involving.


Whitman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Facing Big-City Problems, L.I. Suburbs Try to Adapt
The Long Island suburbs, which pioneered a new and better way to live in postwar America, are struggling with problems they never expected to reach their door.
They have become a bellwether for the nation's older suburbs, trying to adapt to an uncertain and threatening future.
The Island's fiercely local brand of self-government grew up to serve bedroom communities of a like-minded middle class, almost entirely white, pursuing the good life.


EXPERTS TO REVIEW STUDY CONCLUSIONS
Federal health officials have commissioned three statisticians to analyze independently data from a flawed breast cancer study, in the hope that the re-analysis will assure the public that the original conclusions remain valid.
The statisticians are to finish their analysis in two weeks, said Dr.
Michael A. Friedman, an official of the National Cancer Institute, a Federal agency in Bethesda, Md.
The institute, which commissioned the review, paid tens of millions of dollars for the initial study, which helped change the way breast cancer is treated.
It concluded that lumpectomies followed by radiation are as effective as full mastectomies in preventing spread of the disease in many women with early breast cancer.


Charles Kuralt Announces His Retirement
Charles Kuralt, the widely respected anchor of the CBS News program "Sunday Morning," announced his retirement from CBS yesterday after almost four decades on the air.
Long regarded as one of the best writers in television journalism, Mr.
Kuralt, who will be 60 in September, cited a desire to travel and write as the reason he has chosen to step down now.
He is planning to write a book on his 12 favorite locations in America, he said.


CHRONICLE
How do you get to the top of Mount Everest?
You start by flying to Tibet, loading 75 yaks with one and a half tons of gear and trekking through deep snow for two weeks to a base camp at 17,500 feet above sea level.
SANDY HILL PITTMAN is scheduled to embark on that route this morning.
She has already stood on the tallest mountain peaks on six continents, and if she reaches the summit of Mount Everest, she will become the first woman to climb the highest peaks on all seven continents.


Whitman Seeks 2d Tax Cut, Aimed at Middle Class
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman produced her first state budget tonight with the promise of an additional tax cut aimed at the middle class.
She proposed to wipe out several state agencies to help pay for it and appealed over the heads of the State Legislature for New Jerseyans to keep up the pressure for smaller government and lower taxes at all levels.
Her $15.4 billion budget, which is for the fiscal year beginning on July 1, was only precariously in balance with the help of an $800 million one-time source of savings.
Governor Whitman said she would pay for $589 million in income tax cuts over 18 months by eliminating the Department of Higher Education and turning state campuses free to govern themselves.
She called for closing the Office of Public Advocate and folding its public-defender functions into the Department of State, and for ending state ownership, and funds for, New Jersey's public television network.


White House Memo; A Traveling President Trailed by Whitewater
As Bill Clinton floated into Boston Harbor aboard a ferry named Beacon, fireboats sent plumes of water into the air and supporters cheered on the dock.
But Mr.
Clinton was out of sight for much of the short ride on Monday, hunkered below deck on a secure mobile telephone where he could talk to his Associate Attorney General, Webster L. Hubbell, who had just resigned.
Despite his efforts to get away from the distraction of the Whitewater investigation, Mr.
Clinton has found that escaping from bad news in Washington is not so simple.
As he traveled through Michigan, Massachusetts and New Hampshire this week, he was forced to cope with the fallout at every turn.


PolyGram reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Indiscretion in Software
Microsoft Word for Windows, a leading word-processing program, has a flaw that can allow the readers of documents to retrieve material that the writer had deleted.
Fred Langa, the editorial director of Windows magazine, reports in the May issue that under some circumstances, recipients of a file sent by E-mail or disk or shared on a network "still may be able to read at least some of your original, raw remarks." The May issue of Windows magazine goes on sale in mid- to late April.
The magazine, which has a circulation of about 450,000, is published by C.M.P.
Publications of Manhasset, L.I.


Suntrust Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Gretzky Is a Step Closer  Although his team outscored the Ottawa Senators by 7-0 last night in Inglewood, Calif., Wayne Gretzky had only one of those goals, leaving him at 799, two away from tying Gordie Howe's National Hockey League record of 801 career goals.
At 3:15 of the second period, Gretzky converted a pass from rookie Robert Lang at the right of the net against goalie Craig Billington.
After the Kings chased goalie Mark LaForest from the net with their fourth straight goal at 12:44 of the first period, Gretzky put the puck behind Billington on a breakaway with 1:03 left before intermission.
But the goal was disallowed by Referee Dennis LaRue, who had already whistled the Kings' Tony Granato for hooking. (AP) Capitals 5, Penguins 4: Randy Burridge scored his third goal of the game 40 seconds into overtime as the Washington Capitals ended a six-game streak with a victory by defeating the Penguins, 5-4, last night in Pittsburgh.
Burridge scored his 23d goal of the season just as a Washington power play ended.
He deflected Michal Pivonka's pass from the right wing boards through Tom Barrasso's legs for the third hat trick of his career. (AP)


Janney Refuses to Report to Vancouver
Center CRAIG JANNEY said yesterday that he would not report to the Vancouver Canucks, at least not immediately.
On Monday, an arbitrator awarded Janney and a No. 2 draft pick to the Canucks as compensation after the St.
Louis Blues signed the free agent PETR NEDVED on March 3.
"As of right now, I'm not going to report," Janney said at a news conference with his agent, BOB MURRAY.
"We're checking out things we can do. It's such a shock. We want to take some time. Hopefully, I'll get 100 percent before any decisions are made."


METRO DIGEST
L.I. SUBURBS TRY TO ADAPT TO THE FUTURE
The Long Island suburbs, which pioneered a new and better way to live in postwar America, are struggling with problems they never expected to reach their door.
They have become a bellwether for the nation's older suburbs, trying to adapt to an uncertain and threatening future.
A1.
INTERSTATE TRADE OF POLLUTION RIGHTS
In the first deal of its kind across state lines, a New Jersey utility will clean up its generating stations so boilers in Connecticut can emit more smog-producing chemicals.
A1.


Data on Risks Create Debate About Drug to Prevent Breast Cancer
New questions about the treatment and prevention of breast cancer have been raised by researchers who have access to data from a large trial on the use of the drug tamoxifen.
The questions specifically concern the use of the drug among healthy women who are at high risk of the disease and who are taking the drug to prevent its onset.
The new data suggest that the drug may be riskier than had been thought, with the potential to cause fatal uterine cancers.
A few experts are advising that the data are so persuasive that the study should be scrapped, just two years after it began.


United Foods reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Rangers' Canseco Contemplated Suicide
JOSE CANSECO was so upset over the crumbling of his personal and professional lives that he considered committing suicide, although the Texas Rangers slugger says he never tried killing himself.
"The last two years were a total nightmare," Canseco told The Fort Worth Star-Telegram columnist JIM REEVES in a column published yesterday.
"When the bottom really fell out was that period from about four or five months after I was traded until about six or eight months ago."


Macy (R.H.) &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Graphic Industries(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Fire Disrupts Los Angeles Phone Service
An early morning fire at a telephone switching station in downtown Los Angeles disrupted phone service for more than three million Southern Californians today and knocked out the area's emergency 911 system for several hours.
Forty percent of the calls routed through Los Angeles were affected, said a spokeswoman for the Pacific Bell Telephone Company.
Most telephone service was restored by midday, but for several hours many downtown offices had to go without their phones, fax machines and computers.


Macy Earnings Jumped in 2d Quarter
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company reported markedly stronger second-quarter earnings yesterday, building up its ammunition as it prepares to bargain with creditors over a plan to emerge from bankruptcy.
Citing better profit margins and strict cost controls, the company said profits soared to $60.4 million in the quarter that ended Jan. 29, compared with $8.9 million in the corresponding period a year ago.


Rebecca P. Logan, 90, Art Patron and Hostess
Rebecca Pollard Van Lennep Guggenheim Logan, a philanthropist and patron of the arts who was for a generation one of the best-known social hostesses in Washington, died on Friday at her home in Washington.
She was 90.
The cause was heart failure, said Leonard L. Silverstein, her lawyer.


Wine Talk
GETTING a reasonably priced bottle of wine in a New York restaurant is a struggle.
Too many restaurant owners still think a bottle is a bottle, whether it holds wine or vodka, and should bring whatever the traffic will bear.
For some wines, that means three or four times cost.
What seems like a long time ago, Windows on the World, the now shuttered restaurant in the World Trade Center, showed that low wine prices encouraged more wine sales, and that two low-priced wines often meant more profit than one expensive bottle.


Fruit Juice May Hinder Child Growth
SOME young children who fail to grow properly may be suffering from overconsumption of fruit juice, which takes the place of more nourishing foods, a study of eight very young Brooklyn children suggests.
The children from 14 to 27 months old, were examined because they had not gained weight or increased in height as expected for children their age.
All were consuming large amounts of fruit juice, most often apple juice.
Juice intake ranged from 12 to 30 ounces a day and contributed from 25 to 60 percent of their daily calories.


REP. ROSTENKOWSKI WINS TOUGH BATTLE IN CHICAGO PRIMARY
Locked in the political battle of his life, Representative Dan Rostenkowski, President Clinton's chief arm twister and cajoler in Congress, won renomination tonight in one of the most important primary elections anywhere in the nation this year.
The fate of Mr.
Clinton's ambitious agenda of health care and welfare reform is largely tied to the fate of Mr.
Rostenkowski, who has had to contend with a Federal investigation of his financial dealings with the House Post Office.


Lopez Wins An Award
Felipe Lopez of Rice High School, one of the most highly regarded scholastic players in the nation, was named yesterday as the 1994 Gatorade Circle of Champions national high school basketball player of the year by Scholastic Coach Magazine.
Lopez, a 6-foot-6-inch senior forward, received the award based on his athletic and academic achievements.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.30
2.72
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.55
3.57
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.81
3.85
3.09
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.44
6.51
6.00
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.89
6.95
6.86
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.78
7.78
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.04
6.05
5.98
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


New Work for Flute
Renee Kremsier, a flutist, is to play the world premiere of "Turnabout," by Barbara Kolb, in a recital tonight at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
Also on the program are Poulenc's Sonata for Flute and Piano, Bach's Partita in A minor for Solo Flute, Georges Hue's Fantaisie, and Carl Reinecke's "Undine" Sonata in E minor.
Deborah DeWolf Emery is the pianist.
Tickets are $12; $8 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 362-8719.


Executive Changes
RESOUND CORP., Redwood City, Calif., named Peter Riepenhausen president and chief executive.
SALOMON BROTHERS, New York, named Carole Berger managing director and co-head of domestic bank coverage in equity research.


U.S. Urges Israel to Consider Role For the P.L.O. in Policing Hebron
In a new effort to restart Middle East peace talks, the United States urged Israel today to consider P.L.O. proposals that would put a Palestinian police force in control of Hebron, United States officials said.
According to United States and Palestinian officials, the Palestine Liberation Organization is also insisting that international observers be sent to the West Bank town and perhaps to other parts of the Israeli-occupied territories to help protect Palestinians.


Standing Up to China
When dealing with China, it sometimes helps to see matters through Chinese eyes.
As Beijing views it, a great power must always insist on being treated with due respect.
To behave otherwise is to acknowledge inferiority and therefore to forfeit influence.
During Secretary of State Christopher's weekend visit to Beijing, Chinese leaders aggressively asserted what they see as the prerogatives of China.
They deliberately humiliated America's highest-ranking diplomat by temporarily rounding up some of the country's most prominent dissidents, and by detaining several Western correspondents trying to report on the crackdown.


Review/Film; After 50 Years on the Defensive, Still a Cinema Master
"The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl" was shown as part of the 1993 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 14.
The film opens today at Film Forum 2, 209 West Houston Street, South Village.
Ray Muller's "Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl" is a big, long (over three hours), sometimes clunky but consistently fascinating documentary portrait of the woman most easily identified as Hitler's favorite film maker, with good reason.
Ms.
Riefenstahl's two outstanding films, "Triumph of the Will" (1935) and "Olympia" (1938), for all of their esthetic glories, served the propaganda machine of National Socialism in ways that probably neither Hitler nor Ms.
Riefenstahl could have foreseen.


Weyerhaeuser Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


North Korea Said to Block Taking Of Radioactive Samples From Site
North Korea blocked inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency last week from taking critical samples of radioactive material inside their most important nuclear site, making it impossible to determine if North Korea is still working to develop an atomic weapon, officials in several countries who have been tracking the vital inspection say.
It is unclear if the agency, an arm of the United Nations, will declare the inspection a failure when its seven-member team reports on its findings at the agency's headquarters in Vienna on Wednesday.


Principal Causes Furor On Mixed-Race Couples
A high school principal in this east Alabama town was suspended with pay on Monday after students said he tried to ban interracial couples from the prom and called a mixed-race student a "mistake" he wanted to prevent others from making.
The Randolph County School Board took the action against the 55-year-old principal, Hulond Humphries, who is white, at a tense meeting attended by more than 500 parents and students.
The vote was 4 to 2, with the sole black member voting with three whites to suspend Mr.
Humphries until the board completed an investigation into accusations that he made racially discriminatory remarks in trying to cancel the April 23 prom.


City National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Silicon Valley Schools Set Technical Standard
This is how the children of Silicon Valley use computers in the classroom:
At every grade level, the curriculum integrates technology with math, science, English and the arts.
In biology class, for example, students might view the life of a cell on their monitor, stopping to identify mitochondria or the nucleus.


Public &amp; Private; Victim and Valkyrie
When the elevator door was finally opened it looked as though a bottle of cranberry juice had broken, on the walls, the floor, a scream of red.
But it was blood.
Blood where he slit her throat, blood where he broke her jaw, blood where he knocked out her front teeth.
It was only after he had done all that that he told her to take off her clothes.


Theater in Review
Titus Andronicus  St.
Clement's Church 423 West 46th Street Clinton Through March 26 By William Shakespeare; directed by Julie Taymor; music by Elliot Goldenthal; set by Derek McLane; costumes by Constance Hoffman; lighting by Donald Holder; sound by Eric Liljestrand; music director, Richard Martinez; fight director, David Leong; voice and text consultant, Robert Neff Williams; dramaturg, James Leverett; production stage manager, Carol Dawes.
Presented by Theater for a New Audience, Jeffrey Horowitz, artistic and producting director; Peter M. Kindlon, general manager.


Crompton &amp; Knowles reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Officer Is Shot and Killed, Apparently Interrupting a Robbery
A police officer was shot to death in the Bronx last night, apparently after interrupting the armed robbery of a store, setting off a intense search for his killers in the High Bridge and Morris Heights neighborhoods.
Sean McDonald, 26, a father of two, became the first on-duty New York City police officer to be killed since Rudolph W. Giuliani became Mayor.
He was shot at least five times, including at least once in the head, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said, and was rushed to Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, where he was pronounced dead.


Employer-Paid Health Care Backed by House Panel, 6-5
President Clinton won a victory today as a Congressional subcommittee voted 6 to 5 to support his proposal to require all employers to help buy health insurance for their employees.
In the year's first vote on health care, Democrats on the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health defeated a Republican proposal to eliminate the mandate on employers from any comprehensive bill intended to guarantee health insurance for all Americans.


Angelica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


In America; The Prom And the Principal
When you're 16 the high school prom is a very big thing, and so it was with Revonda Bowen, a child of mixed-race parentage, who is the president of the junior class at Randolph County High School in Wedowee, a very small town (population 800) in east-central Alabama.
The school has a 55-year-old principal named Hulond Humphries, who seems to have maintained an unhealthy longing for the grand old days of the 1950's when most black people in the United States, and especially those in the South, could be counted upon to know their place, and to stay there.
On


From Slain Youth's Mother, Words of Pride and Anger
It took the police three days to track down Aaron Halberstam's tefillin, the small leather cases containing slips of paper with passages from Scriptures.
The prayer articles had been lost in the chaos of the crime scene on the Brooklyn Bridge on March 1 when a gunman opened fire on a van of Hasidic students and Aaron was fatally wounded.
Devorah Halberstam wept when she received the tefillin at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
Hours later, her son, her first-born child, was dead.


Adobe and Aldus Plan a $500 Million Merger
Adobe Systems Inc. and the Aldus Corporation -- two personal computer software companies that played crucial roles in the rise of the $2 billion desktop publishing industry -- announced their intention to merge yesterday in a stock swap valued at more than $500 million.
If approved by stockholders and regulators, the combined company would have annual revenues of more than $500 million and would be a significant force in the emerging field of electronic document creation and delivery.
The deal is expected to be completed in July, officials of the companies said.


Mexico Slips Quietly Into Recession
The battered Mexican economy has slipped from slow growth into a formal recession with hardly a word of acknowledgment from Government officials.
Figures just revised on Mexico's gross domestic product show that the national economy declined in both the third and fourth quarters of 1993.
This is the first time there have been two quarters of overall economic shrinkage -- which is how United States economists define a recession -- since President Carlos Salinas de Gortari took office in 1988.


Regeneron Stock Plunges on Drug Report
Shares in Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. lost a third of their value in the stock market yesterday after the company disclosed that unforeseen side effects of its drug for the treatment of Lou Gherig's Disease would force the modifications and extension of human clinical trials.
Regeneron, based in Tarrytown, N.Y., has been testing ciliary neurotrophic factor, or C.N.T.F., a naturally occurring human protein for the treatment of Lou Gherig's Disease.
The disorder, formally called amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, causes those afflicted to lose control of their muscles, leading to paralysis and death.
There is no effective treatment.


Sports of The Times; On Being Mickey Mantle
LIKE so many others, you probably once thought that it must be great being Mickey Mantle.
All those home runs.
All those World Series rings.
All those $100,000 contracts when $100,000 was big money.
All those laughs with Billy Martin and Whitey Ford.
All those parties.
All those drinks.
All those muscles.
All those women handing him their telephone numbers.


Hi-Lo Automotive Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Richard Tierney; Blood Center Executive, 58
Richard Tierney, a nursing administrator at the New York Blood Center who helped develop a process for monitoring donations of blood, died on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
Mr.
Tierney, who lived in Manhattan, was 58.
The cause was a heart attack, said Jenni Lee Robins, a spokeswoman for the center.


Ferguson-Mercer Trial Set Amid Sparring Over Jury
The trial of Ray Mercer, who is charged with attempting to bribe Jesse Ferguson to throw their heavyweight bout at Madison Square Garden last year, finally gets under way today in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
But not before some preliminary sparring yesterday in which the judge repeatedly chided the prosecution for allegedly trying to exclude jurors because of their race.
Justice Jeffrey M. Atlas turned down virtually all of Assistant District Attorney Roslynn Mauskopf's challenges to black jurors.
At one point, his voice rising, the judge told her, "I'm sure they were not racially motivated, but they were racial." Both Mercer and Ferguson are black.


Black Summit Can't Exclude Nation of Islam
To the Editor:
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People remains committed to our historic mandate to challenge racial exploitation, discrimination and bigotry.
We will not be diverted by attempts to mischaracterize our efforts to convene African-American leadership to confront collectively the profound issues affecting African-American communities of the United States.


Market Place; Kemper Spurns the G.E. Bid, But Shareholders May Not
The men running the Kemper Corporation think they deserve time to prove that they have turned around a lumbering giant.
But they may not get the opportunity because while the bid from the General Electric Company on Monday was declared unpalatable by Kemper executives, it may look quite inviting to Kemper shareholders, making a hostile move by G.E. a lot easier.
Until the offer by G.E. was disclosed, Kemper stock was trading well below where it was in late 1989 and there had been an erosion of shareholder loyalty.
At the same time, Kemper was watching its market share decline in some of its most important businesses.


Jordan's Role Looks More and More Minor
Michael Jordan teased some teammates as they slapped a Ping-Pong ball back and forth in the White Sox clubhouse, he perused the college basketball tournament brackets and attacked the spread of food like any other hungry major leaguer.
He looked like a player, acted like one and even looked snazzy in a black uniform.
But Jordan is not prepared to play in the major leagues yet and may never be.
He conceded he was not ready, the White Sox have shared that feeling for weeks and the great experiment will continue soon in a minor league city.
Jordan may not be demoted for another week, but it will happen.


Black Summit Can't Exclude Nation of Islam; Not N.A.A.C.P. of Old
To the Editor:
"The N.A.A.C.P.'s Mistake" (editorial, March 7) is correct to criticize the courting of Louis Farrakhan, the Nation of Islam's head, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
But you are inaccurate on the N.A.A.C.P.'s history and attitude regarding black extremists in the civil rights movement.


Manitowoc Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Books of The Times; Voyaging in a Realm Next Door to Rational
The Oxford Book of Fantasy Stories  Selected by Tom Shippey  499 pages.
Oxford University Press. $25.
" 'So you won't sell me your soul?' said the Devil.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; How un-British! How unlike an airline! Virgin enters the San Francisco market, yodeling.
MOST airline advertising trumpets prices, destinations or amenities.
And that is unfortunate, because it often lends an unreal feel to the world of airlines, a world where one-way prices are based on round-trip purchases and comfy seats are part of that something special in the air, where everyone loves to fly the friendly skies and it shows.
Or something like that.
How refreshing, then, to see some advertising that smacks of the real driving force of the airline business: unrelenting competition to get just one more passenger on my plane instead of yours.


Officer Fatally Shot On Patrol in Bronx
A 26-year-old police officer who apparently was trying to thwart an armed robbery was shot and killed in the Bronx last night.
Officer Sean McDonald, a father of two from Putnam County, was shot at least five times after he confronted two men who had tied up the owners of a clothing store in High Bridge, officials said.


That Day in Hebron -- A special report.; Soldier Fired at Crowd, Survivors of Massacre Say
Interviews with dozens of Palestinian witnesses support assertions that at least one Israeli Army soldier opened fire on the crowd trying to escape the massacre in a Hebron mosque last month, and that the army fire killed at least one Palestinian.
The witnesses' accounts of those chaotic minutes in the early morning of Feb. 25, when a Jewish settler entered the mosque in the Cave of the Patriarchs and began spraying the worshipers with bullets from his assault rifle, vary widely in many details.


Gripping TV Suspense Is Hit With Pirates
On a Sunday evening each March, Seton Hall Coach P. J. Carlesimo and his players have gathered in a locker room at Walsh Gymnasium to watch a television program.
This season, though, the National Collegiate Athletic Association men's tournament draw had a great deal of suspense for the 17-12 Pirates.


Low-Income Mortgage Plan
The Federal National Mortgage Association, better known as Fannie Mae, announced today that it planned to increase its purchases of mortgages issued by banks to low-income families and recent immigrants and planned to start a national educational program aimed at helping renters find ways to buy homes.
Fannie Mae said it would increase its purchases of such mortgages to $1 trillion for the seven-year period ending in 2000.
It had previously planned to buy about $850 billion worth of the mortgages in this period.


Peter G. S. Mero, 84, Electronics Executive
Peter G. S. Mero, a retired entrepreneur in the telecommunications industry, died on Sunday at Evanston Hospital in Evanston, Ill.
He was 84 and lived in Wilmette, Ill., a suburb of Chicago.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Off the Menu
Like Good Old Days
In March 1974, when Sirio Maccioni opened Le Cirque, a three-course lunch was $12.75.
Now, Mr.
Maccioni is ready to observe the restaurant's 20th anniversary by offering a similar menu at the original price.


Personal Health
PAIN, not death, is widely acknowledged to be the most feared aspect of cancer.
To escape from or avoid intolerable pain, cancer patients sometimes go so far as to attempt suicide.
Few seem to know that they suffer in vain, and that the pain of cancer, even when far advanced, can be adequately controlled in at least 90 percent of cases.
Even fewer realize that in trying to ignore their pain and maintain a stiff upper lip, they may actually be compromising their chances for recovery as well as wrecking their quality of life.


Jack Sears; AIDS Panelist, 40
Jack Sears, who served on President Clinton's transition team dealing with AIDS issues, died on March 1 at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Santa Fe, N.M.
A resident of Santa Fe since 1988, he was 40.
The cause was complications of AIDS, said his companion, Rich Cress.


Hughes Supply reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Inquiry Into Double Agent to Examine Several Top C.I.A. Officials
Some senior officials of the Central Intelligence Agency are under scrutiny in a sweeping internal investigation to determine how an accused Soviet mole flourished at the agency for at least nine years, the head of the C.I.A. and other Government officials said today.
The investigation, by the agency's Inspector General, will focus in part on "a relatively limited number of people" whose "behavior needs to be scrutinized carefully," the Director of Central Intelligence, R. James Woolsey, said in his first public comments since the arrest last month of Aldrich H. Ames, the career C.I.A. official accused of spying for Moscow.


Singapore Journal; A Flogging Sentence Brings a Cry of Pain in U.S.
The future of relations between the United States and one of its closest allies in Southeast Asia may rest on whether this futuristic, order-loving city-state carries out a punishment that dates back to its colonial past.
An American teen-ager, who has pleaded guilty to spray-painting cars and other mischief here, has been sentenced to a flogging, a punishment that has drawn a harsh personal protest from President Clinton.


Zale Names Chief After Long Stretch
The Zale Corporation, the nation's largest jewelry retailer, named Robert J. DiNicola, a department store veteran, its chief executive today, handing him a company that has been leaderless and stumbling since emerging from bankruptcy last July.
Mr.
DiNicola built his career at Macy's and has most recently been chief executive of the Bon Marche division of Federated Department Stores.
He succeeds Dean Groussman, who departed, after less than a year, under pressure from the board last August.


Synovus Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cincinnati Signs Oliver, a Free Agent
The Cincinnati Bengals signed safety LOUIS OLIVER yesterday to a two-year, $3.5 million contract after a team doctor concluded that Oliver has healed from the foot injury that caused him to miss the last five games of 1993 with the Miami Dolphins.
The Bengals declined to reveal terms of the contract with Oliver, who had been a protected transition player until the Dolphins lifted that designation when they signed MICHAEL STEWART this week.


Intertrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Rights Group Says Israel Failed to Enforce Law Against Violent Settlers
An Israeli human rights group asserted today that the Israeli authorities had failed for years to enforce the law against violent Jewish settlers in the occupied territories, thereby setting the stage for the massacre of Muslim worshipers last month in Hebron.
The group's findings reinforced testimony last week before a state commission of inquiry into the massacre indicating that the army reacts differently to violence by Jews and by Arabs.


Star Banc Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
Paper plates have never had it so good.
Bass wrapped in phyllo dough and tiramisu were served on disposables at lunch yesterday at the Four Seasons.
The occasion for the nontraditional presentation was a luncheon sponsored by Dixie to introduce a new line of decorative mix-and-match paper tableware.
KAKI HOCKERSMITH, the interior decorator whom Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton hired to work on the White House, endorsed the line.


Kruk to Begin Radiation Treatments
The Philadelphia Phillies' first baseman, JOHN KRUK, who had a cancerous testicle removed last week, will start radiation therapy next week to try to keep the cancer from spreading.
Kruk will leave the Phillies spring training camp in Clearwater, Fla., today and is expected to be in Philadelphia tomorrow for routine tests that are necessary before the treatment can begin, a team spokesman, LARRY SHENK, said.


Collecting Secrets From Lespinasse
WHEN Gray Kunz was an inquisitive 8-year-old growing up in Singapore, he relished visiting the city's outdoor food markets, those deliciously exotic bazaars perfumed with cumin, cardamom, mustard seed, chutneys and tropical fruits.
"Those memories haunted me for years," said the 38-year-old Mr.
Kunz, the chef of Lespinasse in the St.
Regis Hotel in Manhattan, as he prepared one of his beguiling meals recently in the kitchen of Pierre Franey's house in East Hampton, L.I.
Lespinasse received a four-star rating in a restaurant review in The New York Times last Friday.


Evans Signs to Play for Jets
For the Jets to sign Donald Evans, their new nose tackle and Pittsburgh Steelers unrestricted free agent, the team waived its old nose tackle, Scott Mersereau, a seven-year veteran who has started at the position since 1988.
The Jets also waived cornerback Clifford Hicks, who signed last year as an unrestricted free agent from Buffalo.
Mersereau was due to earn $675,000 for the 1994 season and Hicks was scheduled to make $450,000.
Evans signed his contract, which was for $3.45 million over three years, at Hofstra yesterday.


Producer Prices Rose Last Month
Inflation remained subdued in February despite a surge in energy costs that drove the Producer Price Index up by five-tenths of 1 percent, the most since last spring, Government figures showed today.
Not counting energy, which has since declined, prices received by producers of finished goods were unchanged for the month and up less than 1 percent over the last year.


Departing Aide Expected to Face Ethics Complaint From Law Firm
One day after the abrupt resignation of Webster L. Hubbell, the third-ranking official at the Justice Department, his former law partners in Little Rock, Ark., have tentatively decided to file an ethics complaint against him, lawyers involved in the inquiry said today.
Mr.
Hubbell announced on Monday that he was resigning as Associate Attorney General, saying he was stepping aside to avoid embarrassing his longtime friends, President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton, as he faces an inquiry into whether he improperly billed his former law firm.


Stewart &amp; Stevenson (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Citing Cancer, Fish Declares He Will Retire From Congress
Representative Hamilton Fish Jr., the New York State Republican who followed his father, grandfather and great-grandfather into the United States Congress, announced today that he would retire when his 13th term ends next January because he is battling a recurrence of cancer.
Mr.
Fish's unexpected announcement leaves wide open the race for the House seat in his district, which covers all of Putnam County and parts of Westchester, Dutchess and Orange Counties.
His withdrawal also raises the possibility that for the first time since 1843 a Hamilton Fish will not be representing the state in Congress.


Office Depot reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Time Warner
Shares of Time Warner Inc. rose for the second consecutive session yesterday after an analyst was quoted on the CNBC cable television channel on Monday as saying that the Seagram Company, Time Warner's largest shareholder, may try to acquire the giant media company.
Seagram, the Canadian distiller, denied the report.


Food Notes
Cookbooks for Passover
A number of new Passover cookbooks have been published in time for the weeklong holiday, which begins March 26.


Chief Named At Glamour
Charles H. Townsend, president and chief executive of The New York Times Company Women's Magazines Group, was named publisher of Glamour magazine yesterday.
Mr.
Townsend succeeds Jack Kliger, who was promoted last week to senior vice president for corporate services at Conde Nast Publications, the parent company of Glamour.
Michael Golden, executive vice president and general manager of the Times Company Women's Magazines Group, will assume Mr.
Townsend's responsibilities until a successor is named.


Review/Recital; Russian Soprano's Debut
Keeping track of the countless gifted singers coming out of Russia has become increasingly difficult.
The latest is Lyuba Kazarnovskaya, a lyric-dramatic soprano who rose through the ranks of the Bolshoi and Kirov companies before receiving an invitation from Herbert von Karajan to sing at the Salzburg Festival in 1989.
After a spate of European appearances, she made an acclaimed debut at the Metropolitan Opera last season as Tatyana in "Eugene Onegin" and also distinguished herself in a recent Deutsche Grammophon recording of Shostakovich's 14th Symphony.
Making her American recital debut on Monday night at the Kaye Playhouse, Ms.
Kazarnovskaya displayed a powerful, dark-hued, smoothly controlled soprano voice, secure across the whole range.
Her dependence on vibrato sometimes resulted in a lack of focus at higher volumes, but the brilliance of the sound made up for any tonal imprecision.
Most impressive were the range and vividness of her vocal characterizations.


Jobs Conference Closes, With Emphasis on Education1


No Headline
"Suburbs increasingly represent the problems of society as a whole. They're not really refuges anymore." KENNETH T. JACKSON, professor of history at Columbia University.  [ B4:2. ]


2d Water Main Break Prompts Gridlock Alert in Midtown


Chevrolet Is Seeking To Reclaim Old Glory
With its strong products and canny marketing, the Chevrolet Motor division for decades meant affordable style, power and patriotism for its customers.
It also meant big profits for the company it dominated and defined, the General Motors Corporation.
So, it was no coincidence that G.M.'s earnings suffered as Chevrolet's image rusted after the late 1970's.
Chevrolet sells as many cars and trucks as all of G.M's other divisions combined.
But customers just would not buy dull or ugly cars like the instantly forgettable Corsica and that regrettably unforgettable whale, the Caprice.


Stocks Slip as Market Ignores Inflation Report
In a departure from recent trading sessions, the stock market closed mixed when the bond market went up yesterday.
It is a parting of the ways that may be repeated today, when the Consumer Price Index, the best known gauge of inflation, is released.
The markets were perhaps of two minds about inflation.
Before the stock market opened, the Producer Price Index for February was released, and its favorable news on inflation should have cheered both the stock and bond markets.


Doctors Urged to Revamp Approaches to Angina
A federally sponsored panel of experts urged doctors today to be more thorough in diagnosing and more flexible in treating unstable angina, the severe chest pain caused by circulation problems of the heart.
In the first detailed guidelines for treating the condition, the panel said that many cases of unstable angina could be diagnosed and managed by regular doctors and community hospitals and that they did not require the immediate use of heart specialists and specially equipped cardiac care units.
But, they said, arrangements should be made to provide specialized care immediately if patients do not respond to the initial treatment.


Natural Wonders reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 27


Islanders Intercept Streaking Devils
In a game between two teams desperate for points, the Islanders played with more gusto and desire than the Devils tonight and skated away with a 3-2 triumph at Nassau Coliseum.
The loss was the first in 10 games for the Devils, who were looking to move within 2 points of the first-place Rangers in the Atlantic Division of the National Hockey League.
Instead, they remained 4 points back, with 14 games to play.


Comcast Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Reporter's Notebook; A Meeting Fit for Detroit's Contrasts
Detroit has never been known as the Paris of the Midwest.
Even at the best of times it was more of a monument to the oily, smoke-belching, spark-flying spirit of American competition than a natural home to the cultural subtleties of opera, architecture and fine art or a natural host to the worldly and elite.
Hard hit now by streamlining in the automobile industry, by high crime and unemployment, it struggled to put its best face forward this week as host to the two-day jobs conference of the Group of Seven industrial nations.


The Pub: A Center Of Ireland in Exile
WHEN Giles Cooper was growing up in County Kerry, Ireland, he was so poor he slept with his only pair of shoes stuck under the bedposts, so that no one could steal them without lifting the bed and waking him up.
Now, Mr.
Cooper is a contractor and no longer poor.
Last Christmas, when he and two friends spent $200,000 to open Tom &amp; Jerry's Bar and Restaurant on Elizabeth Street, on the edge of SoHo, Mr.
Cooper was a happy man.
From the exterior he may resemble Willie Nelson, down to the ponytail and the bandanna around his head, but in his heart, he will always be an Irishman.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the crash of a United States Air Force plane off Kenya referred incorrectly to the departure date planned for the last American troops in Somalia.
It is March 25, not March 18.


Clintons' Investment Loss Is Disputed
When questions first arose in early 1992 about Bill and Hillary Clinton's Ozark real estate venture, the Clinton Presidential campaign hired a Denver accounting firm that concluded that the couple had lost $68,000 on their investment.
The firm's report put questions about the Whitewater Development Company to rest during the campaign.
And it has been the cornerstone of the Clintons' defense against allegations stemming from the investment.
How could they be criticized, they argue, for a deal in which they had heavy losses?


Vicorp Restaurants Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for 16wks to Feb 20


S.&amp; L. IN ARKANSAS FACED 2d INQUIRY
Clinton Administration officials last year rejected a recommendation by a senior regulator to open a Treasury Department investigation into the failed savings and loan association owned by President Clinton's former partner in the Whitewater venture, Government and Congressional officials said today.
The request to open a broad investigation of the savings institution was made by Brian McCormally, the top enforcement official for the Midwestern division of the Office of Thrift Supervision, which is part of the Treasury Department.


Spacelabs Medical Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Review/Theater; White Knights and Villains In the Quiz-Show Scandals
Not only is there material for a riveting play in "Night and Her Stars," the new work by Richard Greenberg currently having its world premiere here at the South Coast Repertory, but there is probably material enough for two.
Taking as his subject the television quiz show scandals of the 1950's, the playwright, known for his small-cast explorations of contemporary neuroses ("Eastern Standard," "The Extra Man"), has produced his largest canvas yet.
Indeed, you could hardly address the topic without considering such issues as what constitutes real knowledge or how television irrevocably changed our perceptions of the world.
A writer of wit and intelligence, Mr.
Greenberg has all sorts of fascinating and ironic insights to offer, even as the play itself seems to be slipping inexorably out of his control.
What first presents itself as an embarrassment of dramatic riches winds up as a sprawl of unfocused possibilities.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Monday about a Federal investigation of a study of breast cancer treatments referred incorrectly in some copies to the extent of wrongdoing found.
Data were falsified, but there was no finding of fraud.
The article also misstated the year of the study's publication in The New England Journal of Medicine.
It was 1985, not 1989.


Novo Nordisk reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Argonaut Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sometimes a Company Must Become a School To Be a Good Business
Delta Wire hardly looks like much.
A windowless factory building in a small town in the lost back stretches of the mud-rich Delta, the company is an oasis of industry in a land of cotton crops and scrubby fields.
With only 120 employees, it is small by city standards -- minuscule next to its top competitors -- a humble place, where the offices are uncarpeted and the attitude is unpretentious.


Catherines Stores Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Let's Not Forget Sarajevo's Cultural Casualties
To the Editor:
In response to "Sarajevo Haggadah" (letter, March 8) by Prof.
Francis B. Randall, inquiring about the fate of a Hebrew illuminated manuscript, a 14th-century copy of the text recited at the Passover seder:


Even Without Starks, Knicks Roll to No. 7 in Row
Winning without John Starks may not be easy, but the Knicks intend to keep winning.
Continuing their remarkable defensive run, and keeping their poise during a fourth-quarter cold spell, the Knicks squeezed out an 88-82 victory over the Indiana Pacers last night at Madison Square Garden.
It was the Knicks' seventh consecutive victory, matching their longest streak of the season, when they started the season 7-0.
And in each of these victories, New York has held its opponent to fewer than 90 points, extending a franchise record.


Mr. Hubbell's Necessary Departure
Webster Hubbell's decision to leave Washington to deal with a nest of angry hornets at his old Little Rock law firm is good for the Justice Department, good for the public and probably good for his very dear friends and principal patrons, President and Mrs.
Clinton.
The immediate beneficiary is Attorney General Janet Reno, who now has a chance to show that her department is truly independent of White House influence.
Mr.
Hubbell had undertaken major responsibilities and, by Ms.
Reno's account, was acquitting himself well.
Still, the presence of the President's old golfing partner in the number three post has long created the impression that the interests of Justice were subservient to the political requirements of the White House.


Schourek Spinning Out Of Rotation
In wrapping up his generally nightmarish 1993 season, left-hander Pete Schourek, a fixture in Manager Dallas Green's doghouse, produced a surprise ending: two victories in a row.
Even more teasing was the 1.69 earned run average he achieved in 16 innings over those two games.


Alcan Aluminium Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
Breast Cancer Study Debate
Researchers see possible risks to women in a study of whether the drug tamoxifen can prevent breast cancer, but the National Cancer Institute says it should continue.
Page B7.
Health Plan Passes a Test
A House panel narrowly voted to endorse a Clinton proposal requiring employers to help pay for their workers' health insurance.
Page A16.


Review/Television; A Documentary Glimpse Of the Actual Schindler
Between the Thomas Keneally novel that won the Booker Prize in 1982 and the Steven Spielberg movie that is likely to win several Academy Awards next week came a 1983 Thames Television documentary about Oskar Schindler, the enigmatic black marketeer and Nazi Party member who is credited with saving 1,000 Jews from German death camps.
You can see the absorbing, moving, even inspiring work tonight on Channel 11.
"Schindler," a 78-minute compilation of pictures from German archives and the testimony of people who knew the man, lays out the facts with less art but also less artifice than Mr.
Spielberg's "Schindler's List." Among the witnesses are men and women who say they owe their lives to the flamboyant factory owner; his wife, Emilie, who tells cheerfully how she reconciled herself to his taste for other women, and Ruth Kalder, the mistress of Amon Goeth, a camp commander who was executed as a war criminal.


Pentagon Turning Plowshares Into Swords
The press to develop an electric car has become a holy quest for environmentalists, who seek an antidote for smog, traffic noise and the nation's reliance on oil.
But lately, this peacenik technology has found an unlikely patron: the Pentagon, which sees battlefield uses for electric-vehicle systems.
Although some environmentalists express misgivings about the Pentagon's patronage, in the last few months the military has been dispensing money to various civilian electric-car ventures, including a Georgia company at work on a computer-controlled battery charger; a Connecticut maker of fuel cells, and a Massachusetts company that has been converting gasoline cars to battery power and now wants to design an electric vehicle.


In Italian Election, Brash Words Help
Umberto Bossi seemed to be warmed less by the loden topcoat that protected him from the Alpine cold than by the fervor of his accustomed conviction.
"We will be the linchpin of any government that is formed in this country," the slight, tousled leader of the separatist-minded Northern League told a crowd in the mountain town of Aosta early this month.


Bradlees Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


When a Life of Music Went Sour at the Bank
VALERIE CAPERS has a throaty laugh, an ironic kind of Pearl Bailey laugh that implies that while getting from here to there is seldom easy, taking short cuts would be out of the question.
Ms.
Capers has known this since she became blind when she was 6 years old.
Since then she has mastered the piano.
She graduated from Juilliard.
She composed classical pieces that have been played around the world.
Twenty years ago she began teaching at Bronx Community College and now she heads the department of Music and Art there.


Miscellany
*
Coca-Cola Nestle Refreshments Co. said yesterday that it planned to increase marketing efforts for its ready-to-drink Nestea iced tea products by spending $30 million advertising with new packaging, a new promotion and new flavors.
A new campaign, created by McCann-Erickson New York, features Karch Kiraly, a professional beach volleyball player, along with the theme "Plunge In," replacing "Take the Nestea Plunge."


Noranda Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Administration Faulted on Rikers Melee
A day after a melee on Rikers Island, the New York City Council Speaker questioned whether a recent transfer of inmates to the prison might have contributed to the disturbance, and leaders of the guards' union seized the occasion to warn that budget cuts could lead to more trouble.
The Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, criticized the Giuliani administration for closing a jail in Brooklyn on March 1, which led to the transfer of about 900 inmates to Rikers Island.
And leaders of the correction officers' union attacked plans to trim nearly 1,000 correction officers over the next two years.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW: The following streets will be closed from 9:30 A.M. until 5:30 P.M. for the St.
Patrick's Day Parade:
Fifth Avenue from 42nd to 90th Streets


Theater in Review
As You Like It  Judith Anderson Theater 422 West 42d Street Clinton Through March 27 By William Shakespeare; directed by Edward Berkeley; set by Anne C. Patterson; costumes by Richard Shawn Dudley; lighting by Steven Rust; music by Wade Russo; choreography by Nora Kasarda.
Presented by Willow Cabin Theater Company, Mr.
Berkeley, artistic director; Adam Oliensis and Maria Radman, producing directors.


Problem Looms: Gant Put on Unconditional Waivers by Braves
If any major league team wants a 29-year-old left fielder who last season hit 36 home runs and drove in 117 runs, he is available, until Friday at 2 P.M., for the waiver price of $1.
But caveat emptor.
Any club claiming Ron Gant would take on two heavy burdens: a $5.5 million salary and a broken leg.
The Atlanta Braves, in a move that could produce a test case under major league baseball's grievance system, decided today to let Gant go, placing him on unconditional-release waivers.
Club officials expressed regret at having to take that step, but they concluded that they didn't want to pay Gant his hefty 1994 salary without knowing if, when or how well he could play.


Marshall &amp; Ilsley (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Gannett Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Interest Rates DeclineOn New Inflation Data
Interest rates fell sharply yesterday, as traders and investors greeted this week's first inflation report warmly.
But the rebound in the market was only enough to offset Monday's sharp losses.
The positive tone in the market was established early in the session, following the Labor Department's release of February's Producer Price Index.
The index showed an increase of five-tenths of 1 percent over all and one-tenth of 1 percent when food and energy were excluded.
While slightly higher than analysts had expected, the index painted a fairly benign inflation picture.


David B. Simpson, 85, Hospital Surgery Chief
Dr.
David B. Simpson, who practiced as a physician and surgeon in Bayonne for more than 50 years, died yesterday at his home there.
He was 85.
The cause was cancer, said his son James Simpson.


No Vindication of North
To the Editor:
Statements in news accounts about Oliver L. North, who is now hoping to run for the Senate from Virginia, that his convictions were overturned and the charges dismissed are true, but misleading.
They help perpetuate the myth, cultivated by him, that he was vindicated by the appeals court.


U.S. Pro League Moves Along By Signing a Television Deal
Major League Soccer, the legacy of the World Cup's being awarded to the United States, yesterday announced three-year television deals with ESPN and ABC.
When the 12-team league starts play in April 1995, ESPN will televise 10 games, ESPN2 will air 25 games and ABC will broadcast the championship game.


Serbs Block U.N. Relief Convoy to Besieged Town in Bosnia
Bosnian Serb nationalists defied fresh United Nations Security Council demands today and refused permission for an aid convoy to enter Maglaj, a besieged Muslim pocket north of here where an estimated 103,000 people have been trapped for 10 months.
Late Monday, the Security Council demanded that the Serbs lift their siege of Maglaj and stop pilfering supplies from Maglaj-bound aid convoys.


Southtrust Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Injury Pattern Linked to Air Bags
AIR bags and automatic seat-belt systems, while undoubtedly saving lives, are also transforming the kinds of injuries that people get in serious traffic accidents, emergency room physicians and Federal researchers say.
Crash victims in cars equipped with such devices tend to suffer crushed ankles, shattered legs and other trauma to their lower extremities, said Dr.
Jeffrey Augenstein, a trauma surgeon who is the director of the Department of Transportation's crash study at the Ryder Trauma Center of Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami, Fla.
They may also suffer internal injuries that would probably not be noticed at the scene of an accident, Dr.
Augenstein added.


Corrections
A brief report in the Music Notes column yesterday about the appointment of two conductors by the Philadelphia Orchestra misstated one title.
At the beginning of the 1994-95 season, Luis Biava is to become a conductor in residence, not an acting assistant conductor.


Nike Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Book Notes
Saul Bellow's Words
Saul Bellow, the 78-year-old author of such novels as "Humboldt's Gift" and "Herzog," has found himself unexpectedly on the defensive lately.
First, an excerpt from Brent Staples's new memoir, "Parallel Time: Growing Up Black and White" (Pantheon), in The New York Times Magazine of Feb. 6 described how Mr.
Staples, a young graduate student, felt horribly conflicted about Mr.
Bellow's work.
On the one hand, Mr.
Staples wrote, he considered the novelist a hero, a dazzlingly gifted writer.
On the other hand, as a young black man, Mr.
Staples was frustrated and aggrieved by Mr.
Bellow's characters' ugly descriptions of blacks.
In a particularly vivid passage, Mr.
Staples, now an editorial writer for The Times, related how he once followed Mr.
Bellow with a wild fantasy about confronting him, although he abandoned the idea.


CHRONICLE
DONNA HANOVER GIULIANI is off and running.
She has been named the chairwoman of the fourth annual Race for the Cure, a fund-raiser for breast cancer research.
The race, a five-kilometer event for women in Central Park, drew 7,000 runners (plus some determined walkers) last year and raised more than $300,000.
This year's race will be on Sept. 11.


EASTERN UTILITIES IN UNUSUAL PACT: A SMOG TRADEOFF
In the first deal of its kind across state lines, a New Jersey utility will clean up its generating stations so boilers in Connecticut can emit more smog-producing chemicals.
The deal will bring a small reduction in pollution regionwide and probably will cut smog in New York and New Jersey, but that is not the main goal.


Seagate Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Lake Placid
The same four teams that competed a year ago in Lake Placid, N.Y., will skate in the Olympic Arena on Friday and Saturday nights at the Eastern College Athletic Conference's 33d annual championship tournament.
In the semifinal matches, Brown, again seeded fourth, will take on No. 1 Harvard and Clarkson will play Rensselaer.
A year ago, the Bears upset the Crimson and then lost the championship game to Clarkson by 3-1.


Elsag Bailey Process Automation NV reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accent Is on Education as Global Jobs Talks End
Government officials from the United States and other leading industrial nations agreed today that the only way to create more good jobs in the face of rapid technological change was to upgrade education, particularly for those who are least skilled.
The final statement, read by Lloyd Bentsen, Secretary of the Treasury, at the close of the two-day international jobs seminar stressed this, along with more familiar themes, such as the importance of not adopting protectionist policies to guard shrinking job markets and of stimulating economies to insure growth.


Lawyers Draft Agreement in Silicone-Implant Suit
Negotiators for recipients of silicone breast implants and for most of the companies that made the devices are preparing to submit to a Federal judge their agreement in the $4.75 billion settlement of the nation's largest product-liability dispute.
Ralph I. Knowles, representing the plaintiffs, said that both teams of negotiators would meet on Wednesday in Tuscaloosa, Ala., and hoped to present a signed draft of the agreement that night to Judge Sam C. Pointer Jr. of Federal District Court in Birmingham, who supervises all Federal breast-implant litigation.


Mercer Int'l(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


6 Teen-Age Friends Are Arrested In Conspiracy to Buy Illegal Guns
Six teen-age friends have been arrested on charges that they conspired to buy illegal weapons from a black market gun dealer in New York City, the Bergen County Prosecutor said today.
The Prosecutor, John J. Fahy, described five of the six as model students at Northern Valley Regional High School in Demarest, N.J., and said he believed that the six considered possession of their own gun as a status symbol.


Viacom Names Team for Merger Transition
In its first big move since it formally acquired Paramount Communications Inc., Viacom Inc. yesterday promoted two top executives and formed a transition team to lead the consolidation of Paramount and Blockbuster Entertainment into their new parent.
Philippe P. Dauman, 40, and Thomas E. Dooley, 37, were named to the new posts of executive vice president.


With Spring Beckoning, a School Breaks Out
It was 7:25 A.M. when Shirley Moore, a veteran history teacher, sliced a banana muffin, she scanned the dining hall at her beloved Emma Willard -- one of the oldest girls' boarding schools in America (founded 1814) -- and said: "You wouldn't be able to tell, but I can see it. I see a little more makeup out there this morning, a little more dress up."
She felt there was a chance of keeping some order among the girls this final day before spring break.
"They have a lot of tests, a lot of papers due today," Ms.
Moore said, "so it might not break out until noon."


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location will be shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., or Freddie Mac, is selling $250 million of notes due in 2004 priced at 100 to yield 7.05 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The issue is callable in three years.
*
GTE California Inc., Thousand Oaks, a unit of GTE Corp., is selling $250 million of 6 3/4 percent debentures due in 2004 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The issue was reoffered with a coupon of 6 3/4 percent at 98.808 to yield 6.917 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A-1 by Moody's, A+ by S.&amp; P. and AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-14  NEW PROPOSAL FOR ISRAEL  In an effort to get talks with the P.L.O. under way again, the U.S. urged Israel to consider a proposal by the organization for a Palestinian police force in Hebron.
A1  ISRAELI SOLDIERS ACCUSED  Interviews with many Palestinians who were at the mosque in Hebron where a Jewish settler opened fire on Muslims praying lend credence to reports that at least one Israeli soldier fired on the crowd.
A1


Heeding Advice of Cost-Minded Voters
When Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman asked the public for ideas on how to cut state spending, one radio caller suggested that the state feed prison inmates with road-killed deer.
Well, thanks anyway.
But the Governor did find solid proposals from the thousands of other New Jersey "budget busters" who at her urging offered tax-saving ideas.
Governor Whitman has decided to sell two state-owned marinas, eliminate a basic skills test for first-year college students and check the state's voluminous telephone bill.


Roadway Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Accounts
*
Sprint/United Telephone-Florida, Apopka, Fla., to Greenstone Roberts Advertising/Florida, Orlando, Fla., to handle its business services account, and its Sprint/Centel unit, previously handled by Gouchenour Advertising, Orlando.
Billings were estimated at $2.5 million.


N.C.A.A. Women Are Tipping Off In Untapped Areas
From Storrs, Conn., to Knoxville, Tenn., to Palo Alto, Calif., the best teams in the country will play in the first round of the women's National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament today.
The women are one step ahead of the men, with their 32 first-round games tonight preceding the start of the men's tournament tomorrow.
For the first time in tournament history there will be 64 women's basketball teams on the trek to Richmond, site of the 1994 Final Four, to crown a national champion.


Reader's Digest Chief
James P. Schadt, president of Reader's Digest Association Inc., has been named president and chief executive of the company, effective Aug. 1.
He will succeed George V. Grune, who will retire as chief executive but retain the title of chairman of the board.
Mr.
Schadt, 55, has been president, chief operating officer and a member of the board since he joined the company in 1991.
Before that he was president and chief operating officer of Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C.


Federal National Mortgage Assn. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Posts Profit for 1993
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. yesterday reported a profit for 1993, its first in five years.
But the good news was accompanied with a cautious outlook for this year.
The London-based company, which owns advertising and marketing agencies like Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Worldwide, Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide and Campbell Mithun Esty, reported net income of $:7.3 million, or $11 million, compared with a loss of $:613.7 million, or $1.08 billion, for 1992.


Charles G. Stachelberg; Commodities Importer, 67
Charles G. Stachelberg, a retired commodities importer who was active in community affairs and as an advocate of children's rights, died on Monday in Beth Israel North Hospital.
A lifetime resident of Manhattan, he was 67.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


All Pain Deserves To Be Treated
To the Editor:
Re "Making the Pain Go Away" (editorial, March 4), on undertreated cancer pain: Your characterization of "pain-racked patients" who "cry out for medication" misses the point.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
While I was eating lunch at a midtown cafeteria today, it suddenly occurred to me that I hadn't paid for my food; I had ambled past the cashier in a state of oblivion and was now enjoying a free lunch.
At first, admittedly, I was pleased with my prandial windfall.
But as luck would have it, my conscience spoke up.
I was forced to put down my pickle.


Michael Callen Memorial
A memorial service for Michael Callen, a singer, writer and AIDS advocate, is scheduled to take place at 8 P.M. on Tuesday at the New York Society for Ethical Culture, Central Park West and 64th Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Callen died on Dec. 27.


Theater in Review
Cole Porter's 'Jubilee'  Medicine Show 552 West 53d Street Clinton Through April 2 Book by Moss Hart; music and lyrics by Cole Porter; directed by Barbara Vann; music director and pianist, Mihoko Suzuki; decor by Knox Martin; choreography by Tim Harling and Lisa Giobbi; lighting by Stacey-Jo Marine; set construction by Dominique La Porte; costume construction by Aimee Grubel and Kaori Terao.
Presented by Medicine Show.


Risotto That Sticks To the Ribs, Not the Pan
WITH new nonstick pans that have advanced linings like Excalibur, it is possible to make risotto with very little stirring and almost no sticking.
Risotto was never as troublesome as some think, but cooks have always had to be very careful not to let it stick to the pot and burn.
That is no longer a concern, as I discovered in this rather elaborate version of risotto, with smoked mussels, pepper and tomato paste.


Metro-Richelieu reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 12


Theater in Review
Exchange  Blue Heron Theater At the SoHo Rep Theater 46 Walker Street Through March 27 By Yuri Trifonov, translated and adapted by Michael Frayn; directed by Peter Westerhoff; original music by Brant Adams; set by John Douglas; lighting by Sybil Killian; costumes by Lesley Neilson-Bowman.
Presented by Blue Heron Theater Inc., Ardelle Striker, artistic director.


Graf's Few Challengers Oblige Her at Lipton
There is stagnancy, in the unyielding form of Steffi Graf, at the pinnacle of women's tennis.
But if today's double dose of upsets to the players seeded just behind Graf at the Lipton Championships are any indication, a significant shifting of the guard is going on among her understudies.
This particular shift not only cost the Lipton its second- and third-seeded players in the quarterfinals, but it also spoiled the bid of the two-time defending champion, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, to become the first three-time winner here and extended the astonishing title-less streak of Gabriela Sabatini to 31 tournaments.


Hynes to Run for Attorney General's Office


Irish Parade Becomes a Political Hurdle
For years, the coming of the St.
Patrick's Day Parade was most visibly marked by the appearance of a green line painted down Fifth Avenue.
Now the painting of the green line is a harbinger not just of spring but of the annual argument over whether gay and lesbian marchers join in, and the tallying that follows of which politicians decided to make points by being in the line of march and which decided to make points by staying away.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Inflation remained subdued in February despite a surge in energy costs that drove the Producer Price Index up five-tenths of 1 percent, the most since last spring.
Separately, the Federal Reserve said severe weather had inflicted less of a setback to industrial production than had been assumed.  [ Page D1. ]  A Congressional subcommittee narrowly voted to support President Clinton's proposal to require all employers to help buy health insurance for their employees.  [ A16. ] Business Technology
The search for an electric car has become a quest among environmentalists, who seek an antidote for smog, traffic noise and reliance on oil.
But lately, this technology has found an unlikely patron: the Pentagon, which sees battlefield applications for electric-vehicle systems.  [ D1. ]  Bell Communications Research announced a new lightweight rechargable battery as thin and flexible as a credit card.  [ D5. ]  Companies
For decades, Chevrolet meant big profits for General Motors.
Restoring Chevrolet's sales power is vital to G.M., which is why the division is in the middle of the fastest product overhaul in its history.  [ D1. ]  G.M. resumed talks with union workers to settle a strike at two plants that could cost it $20 million a day.  [ D4. ]
Government officials from the United States and other leading industrial nations agreed that the only way to create good jobs in the face of technological change was to improve education, particularly for the least skilled.  [ D2. ]  Although Detroit has been a fitting enough host for the conference, even its public relations material could not avoid hinting at the city's problems.  [ D2. ]  The battered Mexican economy has slipped from slow growth into a formal recession.
Figures just revised show that the nation'sgross domestic product declined in both the third and fourth quarters of 1993.  [ D1. ]  Markets
After early rallying, the leading stock indexes traded downward.
The Dow dropped 13.39 points, to 3,849.59.  [ D6. ]  Interest rates fell sharply, as traders and investors greeted this week's first inflation report warmly.  [ D18. ]  Rising speculation that Germany will cut interest rates this week pushed the dollar higher against the German mark.  [ D15. ]  Gasoline futures rallied as traders correctly bet that petroleum industry data would show a reduction in supplies.  [ D15. ] Today's Columns
While GE Capital's bid has been declared unpalatable by Kemper executives, it might look quite inviting to Kemper shareholders.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D1. ]  Virgin Atlantic Airways' latest regional campaign revives its sometimes hostile rivalry with British Airways.
Advertising.  [ D20. ]


Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


A Hot Stove Keeps the Pot Boiling
The modern hockey business is like a big stove with a lot of burners fired up under many hot pots and pans.
One big dish will get stirred a bit today in New York when the National Hockey League commissioner, Gary Bettman, meets with Bob Goodenow, the executive director for the N.H.L.
Players Association, for their first negotiating session in several weeks.
The players have worked without a collective bargaining agreement all season.
Two years ago, under similar circumstances, the players went on strike right before the Stanley Cup playoffs.
With the tournament a month away and their leverage almost identical, is it time for deja vu all over again?


Philip Morris Tops List of Lobbying Spenders in New York
Philip Morris, fighting off a number of stringent anti-smoking measures, was last year's biggest spender on efforts to lobby members of the New York State Legislature, followed by a state teachers' group and New York City, according to a report released today.
In all, 1,142 organizations, from private corporations to public authorities, paid a record $38.5 million last year for lobbying efforts to influence state legislation, an 11 percent increase over 1992, the annual report from the New York Temporary State Commission on Lobbying said.


Echoes of Jacob Riis
In a room not 13 feet either way slept 10 men and women, two or three in bunks set in a sort of alcove, the rest on the floor.
A kerosene lamp burned timidly in the fearful atmosphere, probably to guide other and later arrivals to their "beds" for it was only just past midnight. . . .
The "apartment" was one of three in two adjoining buildings . . . similarly crowded.
Only the kerosene lamp stamps the above as having been written more than 100 years ago.
In all other particulars it might have appeared last Sunday, in a Times article on the thousands of New Yorkers, most of them illegal immigrants, who live in basement cubicles.
They may have come from different countries from the people the photojournalist Jacob Riis described in 1890, in his powerful "How the Other Half Lives." But like them they come with the "purpose and ambition to better  [ themselves ]  and, given half a chance, might be reasonably expected to make the most of it." The trick, of course, is getting that half a chance.


Canandaigua Wine (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


France Confronts Vichy Past in War Crimes Trial
Almost half a century after the liberation of France from German occupation, an ailing 78-year-old man, accused of ordering the execution of seven Jews in 1944, on Thursday will become the first French citizen to be tried for crimes against humanity committed during World War II.
Many thought this day would never come.
In the 1980's, three other aging Frenchmen were also charged with crimes against humanity for deporting Jews to Nazi death camps, but endless delays in all four cases suggested strong official resistance to reopening the debate about France's wartime past.


Willamette Industries(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Viewers in Britain Catch a Bouquet Of America's Weirdest TV Shows
Pity the poor British.
At a time when Americans routinely receive 50, 75, even 100 channels, most people in England have to make do with four.
This makes channel surfing here a lot like trying to ride the waves in the Central Park Reservoir.
Now, though, the British have a show that does the zapping for them.
Naturally, it is made in America.
And the vision it presents of the multi-channel world is such that many viewers here may be tempted to trade in their remote controls.


Apartheid Goes 'Bop'
In South Africa, "Bop" is short for Bophuthatswana, a black homeland known for its cumbersome name, its platinum mines and for Sun City, a Las Vegas-style resort.
Created in 1977 and scattered in six unconnected pockets of land, Bop was one of 10 "independent" nations meant to confer legitimacy on Pretoria's denial of a vote to a huge black majority.
The specious argument was that all blacks enjoyed citizenship rights in "nations" recognized only by South Africa.
But Bop will now be remembered instead as the site of the first real clash over the country's new democratic order.
Its ruler, Lucas Mangope, fearing loss of power and profits, chose to boycott South Africa's first all-races election next month and tried to prevent campaigning in his homeland.
Rushing to his support were his white separatist allies, who within 48 hours sent 400 trucks and cars filled with armed commandos to Mmabatho, Bop's capital.


Michigan Votes School Finance Plan
Michigan voters today approved a constitutional amendment to raise the state sales tax and cigarette tax to replace property taxes as the means of supporting the state's schools.
With 88 percent of the statewide vote counted, the amendment had 70 percent of the vote.


Cato Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Knicks: A Train That Could (or Couldn't)
They make you change your mind every half hour, these Knicks do, from quarter to quarter.
They can win it all.
No they can't.
Yes they can, but you didn't read it here.
Last night's variation on Knick revelation was that they can get the job done without John Starks.
Then they blew a 13-point lead to the Indiana Pacers.
What fools we were to think that.
Hold on.
Hubert Davis just nailed a 3-pointer to put the Knicks ahead, then a neat lefty drive to sew up an 88-82 victory.


A People Magazine Offshoot From Time Inc.
Does the world really want another magazine about celebrities?
Absolutely, says Time Inc., which gave the green light yesterday to In Style, a People magazine offshoot about celebrity life styles that has tested three issues on the newsstand since September.


Publisher Pulls a Textbook In Furror on Sexual Content
A publisher has decided not to sell a health textbook in Texas rather than make hundreds of revisions demanded by state officials after the book was criticized by anti-abortion groups and others for its discussion of condom use, homosexuality and other sexual issues.
The publisher, Holt, Rinehart and Winston Inc., of Austin, Tex., said it was pulling its 700-page high school health text out of the huge Texas textbook market not only because making scores of requested revisions was economically unfeasible but also because ethical issues were at stake.


Rich Nations Plan $2 Billion for Environment
The United States and other aid-giving countries pledged today to provide $2 billion over the next three years to help poor countries keep the environmental promises they made in Rio de Janeiro two years ago, when they undertook to fight global warming and preserve animal and plant life.
The money will replenish a new Global Environment Facility, which was set up in 1991 and administered by the United Nations Development Program, the United Nations Environment Program and the World Bank.
The fund aims at helping the third world pay the additional cost of keeping development environmentally sound.


Market Place; Nursing homes' shift to subacute care offers hope to investors.
NURSING homes are rapidly expanding into lucrative services for seriously ill patients after they have been hospitalized for heart surgery, strokes and traffic injuries.
Thousands of nursing home beds are being shifted from lower-profit traditional patients to providing for people who no longer need the expensive services of acute-care hospitals but who are still too sick to go home.
But while most nursing homes are following this trend to what the industry calls subacute care, the shift has been especially profitable for a handful of relatively small companies.


Mercer Bribery Trial Is Under Way
RAY MERCER "pleaded" repeatedly with JESSE FERGUSON to throw their fight 13 months ago, the prosecution charged as Mercer's trial on a bribery charge opened yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
The prosecution charges that during the bout Mercer offered Ferguson $100,000 to throw the fight.


Masur Brings Students a Glimpse of What Can Be


Plus Ca Change . . .
The eminences grises of the French cultural elite are in a lather once again, resurrecting the venerable bete noir of the linguistic mesalliance of foreign patois with their precious mother tongue.
Sans doute it's a case of deja vu.
These cris du coeur seem to occur every few years; successive generations of intellectuals and demagogic politicians throw a grand mal fit at the inevitable incursions of Americanized English into their daily lives.
The term Franglais was coined back in the 60's, when the jeunesse doree fell in love with hamburgers and Nancy Sinatra.
It has now been at least 30 years since terms like le camping and le parking first embedded themselves in the vocabulary; it's hardly our fault if they have served so well that they are now to be found in every French dictionary.


Heartstrings, not heartbeats, drive Chevy's new campaign.
BY Chevrolet's accounting, four times in recent history the flagship division of General Motors has "redefined" what Chevrolet means to life in the United States through its advertising campaigns.
The first came in the 1950's when Dinah Shore told Americans in song to "See the U.S.A. in your Chevrolet." Twenty years later, an oil crisis reminded Americans of the perils of economic dependence, and Chevrolet responded with nationalist pride, advertising itself as an All-American icon, along with baseball, hot dogs and apple pie.
Then came the invasion of Japanese cars in the 1980's and more nationalism -- Chevrolets as the heartbeat of America.


TOUGH NEW LIMITS ON SMOKING SOUGHT FOR NEW YORK CITY
The leadership of the City Council announced yesterday that it was seeking sweeping new restrictions on smoking in New York City, banning it in virtually all public places, from outdoor arenas and playgrounds to most restaurants and offices, except in enclosed, specially ventilated rooms.
The city already has smoking restrictions, passed in 1988, that require designated nonsmoking areas in restaurants and other public places and that limit smoking in the workplace.
But the new legislation, introduced by Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone of Queens and for that reason very likely to be passed by the Council, would make New York one of the most smoking-restrictive cities in the nation.


House Enters Alien Terrain: Debating
Members of the House of Representatives have made their political points in countless ways through history -- beating opponents with fire tongs, sleeping through the 1812 resolution declaring war on Britain and, in one early instance, undressing on the House floor -- but in recent decades, stirring political debate has not been one of them.
No, this is the place where one representative confused the French idioms "du jour" and "a la mode" in a speech last fall and wound up implying that the North American Free Trade Agreement was topped with a scoop of ice cream.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.25
3.58
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.51
3.55
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.77
3.81
3.07
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.36
6.44
6.00
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.80
6.89
6.86
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.65
7.75
7.78
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.98
6.04
5.98
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Two L.I. Agencies Merge Operations
Two agencies based on Long Island, Donaudy &amp; Munch in Ronkonkoma, and Summit Advertising and Marketing in Melville, have merged to form Donaudy Munch Muro.
The terms were not disclosed.
The new shop, which will be in Summit's offices, will have combined billings estimated at $11 million and 13 employees.
Donaudy brings to the deal an estimated $7 million from clients like Magnavox.
Summit brings an estimated $4 million from clients like C.M.P.
Publications.
No client conflicts are expected.


For Family in Blue, Bullets Take A Brother in a Shop in the Bronx
When Police Officer Andrew McDonald heard the call for help that came over the radio about 8 o'clock Tuesday night, his reaction was quick and simple.
"I hope that's not my brother," he told his partner as they rushed to the scene.
All their lives, Andrew and Sean McDonald did the important things together.
They attended Catholic elementary school in Astoria, Queens.
They grieved over the loss of their mother while they were still boys.
They dreamed of one day becoming police officers and shared the jubilation of joining the police academy in June 1992, ultimately graduating in the same class.
They even served in the same borough, the Bronx.


Police Report Progress in Search for an Officer's Killers
Grasping for clues from tips, sniffing bloodhounds and a mysterious parked sports car, the police said yesterday that they had made significant progress in the citywide hunt for two men in the Tuesday night murder of a rookie police officer killed while he tried to break up a store robbery.
Early today, three men were being questioned in connection with the killing, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina S. Mohrmann.


Sports of The Times; Harding's Guilty Plea Anticlimactic
NOW we will never know.
It's not going to be one of those neat Perry Mason deals in which someone stands up in the 59th minute of the show and shouts at the jury, "I did it and I'm glad." It's not going to be one of those made-for-TV schlock-o-dramas in which they exonerate the defendant and lead a witness off in shackles.
We're never going to know if Tonya Harding really sat in with those four cretins and planned the most famous knee-whacking in American history.


2 Top Art Shows Select French Directors
French curators will be in charge of the next incarnations of Europe's two most important surveys of international contemporary art.
Catherine David, curator of the Galerie Nationale de Jeu de Paume in Paris, is to be the commissioner of Documenta 10, the prestigious survey of contemporary art in Kassel, Germany, in 1997.
Jean Clair, an art historian who is director of the Musee Picasso in Paris, has been chosen commissioner of visual arts, the biggest part of the Venice Biennale, for 1995.
The French dominance of these powerful if temporary curatorial positions was unexpected.
Both choices overturn established traditions, including selection processes that often seem mired in art world politics.


Judge Accepts Harding Plea In Conspiracy
A 10-week whodunit that captured world attention for the unlikely backdrop of figure skating came to an inconclusive halt yesterday when Tonya Harding pleaded guilty to a single charge in the Jan. 6 assault on her rival, Nancy Kerrigan.
In a plea agreement in a Portland, Ore., District Court, Miss Harding admitted to conspiring to hinder prosecution of the case, a felony offense.
But what the agreement did not include -- and now might never be known for certain -- is the full extent of her knowledge of the attack in Detroit, where Miss Kerrigan was struck on the knee with a collapsible metal baton.


States Moving to Ease Tax Burden
From Maine to California, nearly a score of states are moving to cut taxes, while several others are taking steps to shift levies sharply away from a reliance on local property taxes.
As a consequence, 1994 is shaping up as the first year since 1985 in which the total weight of taxes imposed by state governments is expected to ease, a report being published today says.


House Panel Backs Plan to Free Inmates
In a move that might confound a public outraged about crime, the House Judiciary Committee today approved a proposal to let up to 16,000 inmates out of prison.
The idea is to clear the Federal prisons of minor offenders and make room for violent ones.
The committee also debated a "three strikes and you're out" proposal, approving a complex array of qualifications.
The bill would put away for life anyone convicted of three violent crimes.
The first two crimes could be violent state crimes, and one of the first two "strikes" could be a drug offense involving large quantities.
The third strike must be a violent Federal crime and could not be a drug offense.
After protracted debate, the committee rejected an amendment that would have allowed "three strikes" inmates to get out of prison after serving 25 years if they had reached the age of 60.
But the panel did approve amendments to exempt Indian reservations from the law and to increase the amount of drugs necessary to count as a "strike."


Life Sentence In the Killing Of Journalist
Saying the crime struck at the heart of a free society, a judge imposed a sentence of life in prison without parole yesterday on a teen-ager convicted of killing Manuel de Dios Unanue, a journalist whose slaying prosecutors linked to a Colombian drug cartel angered by his writings.
Moments after the defendant, Wilson Alejandro Mejia Velez, said, "I beg your honor to have mercy because I am innocent," Judge Edward R. Korman rejected the protestation and declared that the 19-year-old illegal immigrant from Colombia had "not only snuffed out in cold blood the life of another human being, he endangered the very rights that underlie a free society."


N.F.L. Is Close to Adopting the 2-Point Conversion
Tired of those 18-15 or 9-6 National Football League games in which one team kicks a ton of field goals, the other kicks one fewer and no one scores a touchdown?
Tired of watching kickoffs booming through the end zone?
Tired of watching a kick returner kneel down in the end zone?
So are the league owners, whose approach to the game has traditionally been stodgy rather than creative.
But when the owners meet next week in Orlando, Fla., the competition committee will recommend that when a team scores a touchdown, it can try a 2-point conversion with a run or pass.


Slaying Suspect's Grim Youth Recalled by His Brother
Ricardo S. Caputo, who surrendered last week and confessed to slaying four women in the 1970's, lived a tortured childhood, struggling in vain to get the help and support he needed, his brother said today.
"He was abandoned as a small boy," the brother, Alberto M. Caputo, said at a news conference.
"He was raped. He was beaten. He was ignored when he begged for help.


Calendar: Antiques And Quilts
Antiques on Park Avenue  Seventh Regiment Armory, 643 Park Avenue (66th Street); (212) 472-1180.
More than 100 dealers will sell antique furniture, jewelry, toys, textiles, porcelains and prints, starting Wednesday from 4 to 9 P.M.
Also open on March 24, noon to 5 P..M.; on March 25 and 26, noon to 9 P.M., and on March 27, noon to 6 P.M.
Admission is $10.


Hampton Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Study Shifts Birds' Place In Dinosaur Family Tree
A report to be published today discloses surprising evidence that some ancient birds, unlike modern ones, may have been cold-blooded.
This conclusion challenges a widely held view that modern birds descended from warm-blooded, active dinosaurs.
The finding, if confirmed, could force scientists to redraw the entire family tree that birds share with dinosaurs.
The evidence, based on an examination of the microscopic structure of leg bones of two long-extinct species of birds, is presented in the British journal Nature by Dr.
Anusuya Chinsamy and Dr.
Peter Dodson of the University of Pennsylvania, and Dr.
Luis M. Chiappe of the American Museum of Natural History in Manhattan.


Measurex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Review/Television; Advocacy Journalism: A Medium's Strength
As signaled by its title, "While America Watched: The Bosnia Tragedy," this strong hourlong program charges two Administrations with failing to act to prevent what it calls genocide in Bosnia.
Standing at the Holocaust Museum in Washington, Peter Jennings sets out his theme: "For genocide to happen, you don't need Nazis or ovens. You need only killers and victims. And a third element as well: those who stand by and let it happen."
The two years of war in which some 200,000 civilians were killed and more than 1,000,000 were sent into exile is presented with all of television's graphic power.
As the terrible pictures take up the screen, journalists tell of random murder, rape and torture, and former State Department officials tell of their unavailing efforts to get the United States to intervene with something more forceful than statements of distress.


Despite Foe, Burmese Junta Finds a Silver Lining
The generals who run Myanmar in many ways hold a tighter grip on the country than at any time since their 1988 crackdown on the democracy movement, even as they ponder whether to open negotiations with the woman who has threatened to end the military's decades in power.
Their foe is Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the opposition leader and Nobel Peace Prize winner who is now in her fifth year under house arrest in the capital, Yangon.


Salant Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Trade Pact Is Spurring Mexican Deals in U.S.
During the heated debate last year over approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement, critics in the United States warned that the accord would encourage American employers to shift their resources south to Mexico.
Yet in the four months since Congress voted in favor of the agreement, the boldest acquisitions so far have been made by Mexican companies in the United States.


REX Stores Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


NBC and Kent Settle Suit
Arthur Kent and NBC News have patched up their differences.
Mr.
Kent, who gained attention as an NBC correspondent during the Persian Gulf war, was dismissed by the network in August 1992 after he refused an assignment in the Balkans.
At the time, Mr.
Kent accused the network's management of "incivility," "brute stupidity" and "unworthiness of command." He subsequently sued NBC for breach of contract.


Panama Likes Ruben Blades But Not, It Seems, as Leader
A sense of wonderment descends on Ruben Blades as he sets out late in the afternoon from his sparely furnished apartment in the Casco Viejo district, a stone's throw from the neighborhood where he grew up.
Girls in high-school uniforms muster the courage to approach, hoping to catch his eye.
Elderly men leave their shops, crossing the street to exchange a word.
Mothers lean from their finely wrought balconies for a peek at him.
Shirtless young boys drop their street games to cry out his name.


Elliott Gladly Leaves Pain Behind
It is not something he likes to talk about, but there was a time late last season when the pain in Jumbo Elliott's back was so bad that he wondered if he would ever play football again.
Like a knife in the back, the pain would sometimes force the Giants' 300-pound offensive lineman to kneel just to brush his teeth because it hurt too much to stand.
His wife would have to push him into the car and deliver him to Giants Stadium because the pain kept him from driving.


Siena (Who?) Pulls Stunner On Georgia Tech (What?)
Siena 76, Georgia Tech 68
Spurned by the National Collegiate Athletic Association on Sunday, Georgia Tech was shocked in the first round of the National Invitation Tournament yesterday in Albany.
Tech (16-13), which this season beat North Carolina twice, was overwhelmed down the stretch by Siena (22-7), losing, 76-68.


Mattingly And Fans Are Having A Blast
It was the bottom of the fourth inning and a feeling of nirvana had already been realized by Yankee fans.
Forget that the weather was sunny or that the home team was winning by three runs or that Jimmy Key was being Jimmy Key.
Don Mattingly had slugged home runs in his first two times up, so all was splendid in Yankeeland.
The fans still holler for Mattingly as if it were 1985.
They still plead for his autograph until their voices are scratchy.
They still wait for him to make baseballs vanish over the outfield fence, something Mattingly managed to do just once last spring.
But Mattingly made the wait worth it today as he continued his spring rampage.


Books of The Times; How Jack Nicholson Got That Way
Jack's Life  A Biography of Jack Nicholson  By Patrick McGilligan  Illustrated. 478 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $25.
What comes as a small surprise in Patrick McGilligan's intermittently engrossing "Jack's Life: A Biography of Jack Nicholson" is that the screen actor's career did not begin with his performance as George Hanson, the alcoholic Southern small-town lawyer, in "Easy Rider" (1969).
That part, incidentally, was modeled by the screenwriter Terry Southern after William Faulkner's fictional lawyer Gavin Stevens and was originally meant to be played by Rip Torn.


RABIN SHORING UP CABINET COALITION
While in Washington trying to salvage the Middle East peace talks, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin is shoring up his political base at home with legislative maneuvers that should bring back into the fold an errant religious party that had left his governing coalition.
A key vote today means that Mr.
Rabin will soon have what he has lacked for months, an assured parliamentary majority, which he says is essential for crucial decisions on peace.
It was "unthinkable," he said recently, for the minority Government he now leads to take steps on such important issues.


F. Strickler-Greenspan; Textile Executive, 57
Francine Strickler-Greenspan, a former president of the Saxon Textile Corporation in Manhattan's TriBeCa area, died yesterday at Memorial-Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.
She was 57 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was a brain tumor, her family said.


What Do the Irish Look Like? Like All of Us. Americans.
To the Editor:
"Last Wednesday Rose Avery died at the hospital. Her mother was at her side. A memorial Mass was held at the small Russian chapel on the Lower East Side where Rose, as Irish-looking as her mother, had worshiped because she loved the music and the liturgy" (About New York column, March 5).
What do the Irish look like?


Stocks Mixed as Dow Falls on Late Selling
At last, stock traders believed good news about inflation yesterday.
After some hesitation, most leading stock indicators followed the trend in the resurgent bond market and closed higher in active trading.
The exception was the Dow Jones industrial average, the most closely watched stock barometer, which had climbed steadily into positive territory by 2:30 P.M.
But in the session's final seconds, the Dow dropped more than 13 points, probably because of high-speed computer trading.


Publisher Pulls a Textbook In Furror on Sexual Content
A publisher has decided not to sell a health textbook in Texas rather than make hundreds of revisions demanded by state officials after the book was criticized by anti-abortion groups and others for its discussion of condom use, homosexuality and other sexual issues.
The publisher, Holt, Rinehart and Winston Inc., of Austin, Tex., said it was pulling its 700-page high school health text out of the huge Texas textbook market not only because making scores of requested revisions was economically unfeasible but also because ethical issues were at stake.


Why Take the Half-Step of Clinton Health Plan?; Flaw in Alliances
To the Editor:
A primary argument in support of health purchasing alliances, which are a basic element in the Clinton Administration's proposed health plan, has been that these large groups will have greater purchasing power when negotiating with the likes of insurance carriers and health maintenance organizations than small employers would have on their own.
I would like to offer the opposing view.


If You Expand It, More People Will Come


Shabdai S. Koder, 86, Jewish Leader in India
Shabdai Samuel Koder, a Jewish leader in southern India, died March 10 in Cochin, Kerala, India.
He was 86.
The cause was a heart attack, said Johanna Spector, a friend.


A Big Dog Among Ankle Biters
Some college basketball fans look at the junior forward Glenn Robinson and Purdue as the 1994 version of Danny Manning and Kansas, the team that won the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball championship in 1988.
Because Manning was a superb player surrounded by lesser talent, that Jayhawks team was nicknamed Danny and the Miracles.
With Robinson, a phenomenal player whose nickname is Big Dog, leading a lackluster pack, Purdue could be called Hoop Doggy's Dogs.


Weymouth Journal; It Was Hershey Bars and Yanks, and Then D-Day
The memories of those days 50 years ago when three and a half million troops turned southern England into one vast army camp have faded a bit, like the snapshots that bleach into a pale brown over time.
But once they get going and pull out the pictures as stepping stones to the past, those who are old enough to remember revel in talking about D-day and the arrival nine months before of thousands upon thousands of G.I.'s.


Review/Television; The Sounds That Crossed the Water and Took Root
"Irish Music and America," a documentary on the Disney Channel tonight, conveys the distinct and misleading impression that just about every American tune ever composed has its roots in Ireland.
It's a harmless bit of blarney, much like insisting that on St.
Patrick's Day everybody is Irish.
But "A Musical Migration," as the show is subtitled, does make an impressive case for the widespread influence of Irish music and musicians.
Brought to the United States by waves of immigrants, it can be found clearly in Civil War songs ("The Lakes of Pontchartrain"), in cowboy songs and, most obviously, in bluegrass and country music.
Bono of the rock group U2 says: "I didn't know I was Irish until I went to America. It was amazing to go to Graceland, the birthplace of rock-and-roll, and find that the Irish had already been there in their songs and in their tunes."


U.S. and Israel Hope to Persuade Syria to Return to the Peace Talks
With the P.L.O. still balking at returning to the Mideast peace talks, the United States and Israel sought today to regain momentum by enticing Syria into resuming negotiations.
At a White House news conference, President Clinton held out the prospect of improved relations with Syria if President Hafez al-Assad reopened the talks and reached an agreement with Israel.


U.S. Cancels Talks With North Korea Over Atom Inspections
The United States today canceled high-level talks with North Korea scheduled for next week and stepped up planning for military exercises with South Korea because of the North's refusal to permit international monitors to complete their inspection of a key nuclear installation.
The action brought Washington full-circle in its long negotiations over efforts to stop North Korea's suspected program to develop nuclear weapons.


Aurelia Schober Plath, Educator, Dies at 87
Aurelia Schober Plath, an educator and the editor of the correspondence of her daughter, the poet Sylvia Plath, died on Friday at the North Hill Health Center in Needham, Mass.
She was 87, and lived in North Hill, Mass.
The cause was complications from Alzheimer's disease, said her son, Warren J. Plath of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.


Kendall To Settle Lawsuits
The Kendall Square Research Corporation, with the help of William I. Koch, its flamboyant benefactor and acting chief executive, sought to insure its survival yesterday by agreeing to settle a dozen shareholder lawsuits provoked by an accounting scandal last fall.
Kendall Square, a Waltham, Mass., manufacturer of supercomputers, also said that Mr.
Koch, its largest investor, would invest an additional $25 million into the company's depleted coffers.


House Proud
THERE'S a lot of talk in home design about the mix of old and new.
But it's not often that a single feature embodies the two, like a new 19th-century wooden floor.
Peter Downs, a Manhattan wood-flooring professional, likes old things.
"Old motorcycles, old cars: The way things were made is so superior in many ways," he said.
Last June, he bought an old house, a genuine 18th-century colonial in Alford, Mass., in the Berkshires.


Competing Research Teams Find New Colon Cancer Clue
Keeping up the relentless pace that has distinguished colon cancer research over the last few months, scientists have identified a new genetic defect that destroys a cell's quality-control system, giving birth to colon cancers.
The newly discovered gene accounts for a large percentage of cases of hereditary colon cancer, as well as many cancers that do not appear to have a familial connection.


Executive Changes
CHARLES SCHWAB CORP., San Francisco, named David S. Pottruck, its president, to the additional post of chief operating officer.
Mr.
Pottruck is also chief operating officer of the brokerage firm unit.
RUBBERMAID INC.
Wooster, Ohio, named David L. Robertson senior vice president of human resources, succeeding Thomas W. Ward, who will retire in April.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- ADDENDA
*
Allied Signal Automotive Aftermarket, Rumford, R.I., to McCann-Erickson Detroit, Troy, Mich., to handle advertising for its replacement automotive products like Autolite spark plugs, previously handled by Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot, Boston.
The new assignment, with billings estimated at $8 million to $10 million, consolidates all Allied Signal's advertising at McCann Detroit. *
Canstar Sports Inc., Swanton, Vt., to Kelly &amp; Company, Boston, to handle advertising for its Bauer in-line skate brand account, previously at Jager Di Paola Kemp Design, Burlington, Vt.
Billings were not disclosed.


AT HOME WITH: Shirley MacLaine; A Free Spirit Of a Certain Age
EXCEPT for the sound of the sea outside, it is perfectly still in Shirley MacLaine's beachfront apartment.
She has shifted from talking about movies to the mystical, pondering the cause of the underlying chaos on the planet.
"To me, it's like we're coming to the end of this millennium," Ms.
MacLaine says in her reasonable, woman-next-door manner.
The 59-year-old actress pops a tiny marshmallow from her fruit salad into her mouth.


Another Biased Death Penalty
The numbers are amazing, even for those familiar with the racial discrimination that plagues the death penalty.
Nine out of ten times the Justice Department has sought the death penalty under the 1988 Federal "drug kingpin" law, the defendant was black or Hispanic.
Don Edwards, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, whose staff collected the statistics, understandably asks why.
It is a timely question as the committee considers how many of the Senate's proposed new capital crimes -- there are more than 50 altogether -- to recommend for House approval.
So far neither the Justice Department nor Congressional fans of the death penalty have any answer, reason enough to slow down the execution express now barreling through Congress.


Economic Scene; Cleaning the California air and speeding traffic with a road tax.
WITH Southern Californians battered by earthquake, fire and recession, it seems cruel to remind them of yet another reason to emigrate to Boise.
But that's not stopping the Environmental Defense Fund, which has published a new study on road congestion and air pollution in the land of gridlock.
Happily, this spinach may not prove hard to swallow.
For while the report, "Efficiency and Fairness on the Road," by the economist Michael Cameron, documents the mess that is Southern California's car-dependent transportation system, its conclusion are, at heart, optimistic.


Persistent Racial Segregation Mars Suburbs' Green Dream
When Marshella Atkinson's parents decided to leave Brooklyn for Long Island, the enthusiasm of friends and teachers made her smile with anticipation.
Perhaps they pictured the swimming pools of nearby Levittown, or the shopping centers of Garden City, or the well-stocked library and spotless corridors of Plainview-Old Bethpage High School.
Ms.
Atkinson is not sure.


Retailer Names Executive
Merry-Go-Round Enterprises said yesterday that it had hired Hank J. Belsky as executive vice president, another step in the bankrupt specialty store retailer's efforts to turn around its business.
Mr.
Belsky, who was executive vice president of the Americo Group, an apparel manufacturer that caters primarily to mass merchandisers, will be responsible for changing merchandising at the company's DeJaiz and Chess King chains.
A key part of Merry-Go-Round's new strategy is to give each of its various specialty store chains, which over time became differentiated in name only, distinct identities through merchandising.


Shoulder Injury Sidelines Fernandez
SID FERNANDEZ has again been sidelined by an ailing left shoulder.
With less than three weeks until the regular season, Fernandez, who is expected to be Baltimore's No. 3 starter, has pitched only two and two-thirds innings for the Orioles. (AP)


Fairchild Appointment
Susan Hasson, vice president and publisher of Women's Wear Daily, a Fairchild publication, has been named vice president of corporate sales at Fairchild.
In the newly created position, Ms.
Hasson will be responsible for the development and coordination of corporate sales programs for the company's trade publications.
People at the company, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Ralph Erardy, senior vice president of advertising at The Wine Spectator and a former group associate publisher of Fairchild Publications, was expected to succeed Ms.
Hasson.


Benefits of AIDS Drug Questioned
The slight benefits of taking AZT, the commonly used AIDS medicine, are often canceled by the drug's side effects, a study concludes.
The report casts even more doubt on the routine use of this medicine, which is often given to people who are infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, but are not yet sick.


Foes of Aristide Reported to Kill 70 in Haiti
In an effort to stamp out any continuing support for the country's exiled President, the Haitian military and its civilian allies have unleashed a killing spree that has resulted in the death of more than 70 people during the last six weeks, diplomats and United Nations officials said today.
In March alone 21 bodies have appeared, a vast majority of them in Cite Soleil, a slum known for its high concentration of people loyal to the President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, United Nations officials said.


Why Take the Half-Step of Clinton Health Plan?; Call a Tax a Tax
To the Editor:
The Congressional Budget Office has suggested that any expenses incurred in bringing universal health care to the American public should be counted in the Federal budget up front -- as opposed to hiding these costs "off budget" in the form of employer-paid insurance premiums.


Council Votes to Protect Entry to Abortion Clinics
The New York City Council overwhelmingly passed a bill yesterday that would make it illegal to restrict or to block access to an abortion clinic, joining several states that have passed laws to keep anti-abortion protesters from harassing women outside clinics.
The Council voted 40 to 6 in favor of the bill after several impassioned speeches on both sides.
The opposition came from Republicans from Queens and Staten Island and a Brooklyn Democrat.


People
*
Laurie Carver, executive vice president and executive creative director of Hamilton Carver &amp; Lee Healthcare Advertising Worldwide, Chicago, was promoted to the additional position of president, succeeding Jim Lee, who was promoted to the new position of chief strategic officer for the parent company. *
Anthony Aveni was named to the long vacant position of president at Metro Seliger Industries, a direct-mail company in Woodside, Queens.
He was previously president and chief executive of National Print and Mail, Norwich, Conn.


Rifkin Confession Cleared as Evidence
Joel Rifkin's detailed confession to the murders of 17 women was declared admissible as evidence today by Judge Ira H. Wexner of Nassau County Court.
The judge found that statements made by Mr.
Rifkin to investigators were "taken under proper constitutional procedures" and that there were no indications of misconduct by the state police or the Nassau police in the way they conducted their arrest of Mr.
Rifkin and investigation of the homicide charges against him.


Davis Shows Rare Flash of Old Form
Glenn Davis had been waiting for this moment.
He arrived at the Mets' camp as a reclamation project, once a great player but now little more than a question mark.
And, until today, he had done little to convince Mets management that he was going to make a comeback.
Today, though, he felt a spark of hope.
Davis launched two mammoth home runs over the left field wall at Municipal Stadium, each time driving in two runs.
And so, on the first day after the Mets' first major cuts of the spring -- on a day when Manager Dallas Green asked the remaining players to shine -- Davis finally did something to earn praise, albeit faint, from his manager.


Ukrainians Imbue Cloth With Life
AMONG the vivid scraps of history in Lubow Wolynetz's life is a memory of herself as a 6-year-old girl.
She was living in a small town in Germany after World War II, having fled western Ukraine with her family when the Russians invaded in 1945.
Upon their arrival, her mother sorted through the family's few remaining possessions and realized that her young daughter was without her embroidered shirt.


Russia and Latvians Agree On Troop Pullout Deadline
Ending more than two years of often bitter negotiations, Russian and Latvian diplomats agreed Tuesday on an August deadline for the pullout of Russian troops, and an extended four-year lease on a Russian early-warning radar station on the coast at Skrunda.
The agreement is expected to be signed in early April by President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and President Guntis Ulmanis of Latvia, spokesmen said today.


Bridge
The two top-ranked squads went down to defeat in the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals here Tuesday night.
One match was a cliffhanger that was not decided until long after play at the table was completed.
Jim Cayne of Manhattan, seeded first with Chuck Burger of West Bloomfield, Mich., Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash., Bob Goldman and Mike Passell of Dallas, and Mark Lair of Canyon, Tex., appeared to have lost by five imps, but Soloway claimed that he had been misinformed about the bidding on one deal.
The committee awarded him 1.5 imps, and a 3.5 imp victory, an unusual fractional margin, went to Steve Zolotow, Marc Jacobus, Harold Lilie, all of Las Vegas; Ron Smith of Chicago, and Chris Compton of Oklahoma City.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Critics of the North American Free Trade Agreement had warned it would push U.S. companies to move to Mexico.
Yet in the four months since Congress approved the pact, the boldest acquisitions have been made by Mexican companies in the U.S.  [ Page D1. ]
China has sought out international markets for its growing industries.
It was just such a search that led to a deal with Johnston Tombigbee Furniture Manufacturing of Columbus, Miss.  [ D1. ]


Time for Calhoun to Keep His Head
The guard wouldn't let him in.
Here was Jim Calhoun, moments after one of the highlights of his coaching career to that point, his team's second victory in a N.C.A.A. tournament game.
His Huskies -- the 11th-seeded Northeastern Huskies -- had beaten St.
Joseph's, and here he was in the bowels of Nassau Coliseum, headed for the interview room, and here was a guard, insisting that Calhoun needed a pass.
It was not until the guard was informed that Calhoun was the reason there was an audience in the interview room that the coach was allowed inside.


Trying On Clothes And a Confident Air As Oscar Night Nears
Stockard Channing is nervous about the 66th annual Academy Awards on Monday night.
And who can blame her?
"Wherever I go, the one question people ask me is, what am I going to wear?" said Ms.
Channing, who has been nominated for best actress for "Six Degrees of Separation." "They don't ask a guy."
So what is she going to wear?
Like every other actress and, yes, actor in contention, she has been asked by the most formidable European and American designers to wear their outfits.
After all, a billion television viewers ogle, and some even hoot at, the clothes on television.
"I've picked something quite snazzy by Richard Tyler," she said.
"He's Australian. Very attractive clothes. No disparagement to the other designers."


Kemper Board Discusses Hostile G.E. Bid
The board of the Kemper Corporation met last night -- a day earlier than planned -- to begin discussions over the merits of a hostile takeover bid by the General Electric Company.
Kemper, the asset management and life insurance company based in Long Grove, Ill., has so far rebuffed a $55-a-share, or $2.2 billion, bid by GE Capital, General Electric's financial arm, saying it wishes to remain independent.


National Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Review/Music; A Master Of Guitar, Circling The Globe
The Australian guitarist John Williams has a great deal to say about his instrument's repertory, and during his current visit, he is offering his insights in a kind of guitaristic triptych at the 92d Street Y. The first concert, last Thursday, was devoted to Baroque music, and the finale, on Saturday, will be a bouquet of favorites by Albeniz, Falla and Barrios.
But although Mr.
Williams's mastery of those styles is evident from his many recordings, in some ways the most inviting of the three was the 20th-century program he played on Tuesday evening.
Actually, Mr.
Williams's taste in new music is on the conservative side, and although the program brought together composers from an unusually broad geographic range -- Australia, Japan, Russia, the Czech Republic, Spain, Cuba and Italy were represented -- stylistic variety was less pronounced.
Tonality reigned, and most of the works, including the latest additions to Mr.
Williams's repertory, were built on harmonies, arpeggiation styles and juxtapositions of timbre that fell naturally on the fretboard.


Mercer Int'l(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rangers Soothe Jittery Nerves, for Now, With a Victory
Had the Rangers been beaten last night, their losing streak would have reached three, and the injury to Mark Messier, the suspensions to two other centers and the walkout by their third-string goalie might have earned the best team in the National Hockey League some panic-button attention on the local sports-babble radio station.
Instead, the Rangers rolled over the woeful Hartford Whalers by 4-0, soothing the jittery nerves of everyone around Madison Square Garden, at least for a couple of days.
The victory raised to 6 points the Ranger lead over the Devils in the race for first place in the Atlantic Division, the Eastern Conference and the 26-team N.H.L.


Astronauts Float Idea for Longer Flight


Scholastic Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


LSB Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
LEADERS SUPPORT A BROAD SMOKING BAN The leadership of the New York City Council announced that it was seeking sweeping new restrictions on smoking in New York, banning it in virtually all public places, from outdoor arenas and playgrounds to most restaurants and offices, except in enclosed, specially ventilated rooms.
A1.
New York's antismoking proposal would join many new smoking curbs across the nation.
B3.
NEW YORK CITY  LINE-OF-DUTY DEATH TAKES A ROOKIE COP  In the 44th Precinct, which was in shock, in a small village in Putnam County, where he lived, in Astoria, Queens, his boyhood home, there was mourning for Sean McDonald, a Dublin native who was the first on-duty New York City police officer to be killed this year.
A1.
Tips from Bronx residents and a gun found in a parked car helped the police as they searched for two suspects in the murder of Officer McDonald.
B4.
NEW BAN ON ANTI-ABORTION HARASSMENT The New York City Council overwhelmingly passed a bill yesterday that would make it illegal to restrict or to block a woman's access to an abortion clinic, joining several states that have passed laws to keep anti-abortion protesters from harassing women outside clinics.
B3.
MUSICIANS REALLY TAKE IT FROM THE TOP It was inspiring torture for 33 young string players in an orchestra at the Third Street Music School Settlement, which opened its 100th anniversary celebration by inviting Kurt Masur, the conductor of the New York Philharmanic, to lead a rehearsal.
B3.
REGION  RACIAL ISOLATION TARNISHES L.I.
More and more middle-class black families are moving to suburbs like Roosevelt, L.I.
But instead of finding the good life, many are finding that segregation has moved with them, in the form of minority enclaves in the least desirable neighborhoods.
A1.
Racism is no longer official and rarely overt, but it persists, and strongly, says a black former principal.
B6.
SO FAR, WHITMAN BUDGET KEEPS PROMISE While it may be weeks before the full impact of her spending plan becomes apparent, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman appears to have framed a budget that incorporates her signature tax cuts without drastically affecting aid to public schools and other state priorities.
B7.
NASSAU WINS TAX-ASSESSMENT FIGHT Ruling unanimously that tax assessments for residential properties in Nassau County are no less fair than in other parts of the state, a panel of Appellate Division judges has overruled an order for Nassau to reassess 363,000 homes.
B7.
HARTFORD BIDDING DISPUTE CALMS DOWN The losing bidder for Connecticut's emissions-testing contract withdrew its request for an independent review, apparently ending the controversy that has dogged the Weicker administration for months.
B7.
Traffic Alert B3  Chronicle B4


As the Boss Goes, So Goes the Secretary: Is It Bias?
Women in professional jobs have workplace issues like the glass ceiling and the mommy track.
But now there is one for secretaries: rug-ranking.


A Service To Help the Learning Disabled
People with questions about learning disabilities and parents searching for after-school tutors for their learning-disabled children now have a place to start.
The Learning Disabilities Association of New York City, a nonprofit organization, operates a telephone referral and information service to point people in the right direction.
"Our mission is to facilitate access to services for people with learning disabilities and provide support for their families," said Dr.
Hannah Flegenheimer, the executive director of the association.
Counselors are trained to explain the symptoms and signs of learning disabilities, inform parents of their rights in the New York City school system, refer interested families to private and nonprofit tutoring and counseling organizations, and direct people to clinics and hospitals for evaluations of learning disabilities.
Information is offered in English and Spanish.


CHRONICLE
The year: 1966.
The place: A Marine encampment in the northern part of South Vietnam, near Phu Bai.


Review/Music; Mahler's Final Word, With Someone Else's Coda
We are sometimes obsessed with unfinished works by dying artists, as if they contain in their unresolved tensions some prophetic vision of what was about to come, some summing up of the life that was about to end.
How much more so with Mahler, who knew he was dying, who superstitiously felt he would never complete more than nine symphonies, and whose sketches for the unfinished 10th Symphony are inscribed with phrases like "Destroy me that I may forget that I exist!" and "Farewell, my lyre! Farewell. Farewell. Farewell."
The history of his unfinished 10th is, in fact, an epic itself, the latest episode of which unfolded in Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night when Leonard Slatkin and the St.
Louis Symphony offered a new performing version of the symphony by the young American musciologist Remo Mazzetti Jr.


Why Take the Half-Step of Clinton Health Plan?
To the Editor:
In "Alliances for Progress" (Op-Ed, March 6), Prof.
Paul Starr is on the money in pointing out that "with the rise of managed care, employers now choose which doctors and hospitals their workers and families use," calling this "an extraordinary usurpation: no one would tolerate an employer's dictating its employees' choice of schools or housing."


Traffic Alert
TODAY: The following streets will be closed from 9:30 A.M. until 5:30 P.M. for the St.
Patrick's Day Parade: Fifth Avenue from 42d to 90th Streets


F.B.I. and C.I.A. Cooperated on Spy Case
To the Editor:
"Spy Suspect Replied Deceptively on Lie Test in 1991, F.B.I. Says" (front page, March 8), on the investigation preceding last month's arrest of Aldrich H. Ames by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, unfortunate- ly confuses fact and opinion.
You purport to explain why the Central Intelligence Agency allegedly failed to use polygraph examinations of Mr.
Ames properly.
The basis you cite for your report is an article by Ronald Kessler on that day's Op-Ed page.
Your reporter and Mr.
Kessler, using anonymous sources, suggest the C.I.A. is unwilling to cooperate with law enforcement because of its "nature."


Some Free Speech On Mayor's Words
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani discussed his philosophy of what freedom means in a democracy yesterday at a forum on urban crime, and his remarks left a civil libertarian puzzled and worried.
The Mayor, a former United States Attorney in Manhattan, said New Yorkers were inclined to "see only the oppressive side of authority."


Russian Troops in Tajikistan on Alert


Bears Release Harbaugh, Former Top Pick
The Chicago Bears, who last month signed quarterback ERIK KRAMER from Detroit, yesterday released quarterback JIM HARBAUGH, who had started for the team for three years.
The move, which was expected, makes Harbaugh an unrestricted free agent, allowing him to negotiate with any team without compensation to the Bears. (AP)


Sampras Puts On Display Of Power
Pete Sampras, the Lipton's defending champion, reached the semifinals with a 6-2, 3-6, 6-3 display of controlled aggression that left 13th-ranked Petr Korda blinking in disbelief as yet another untraceable ace blazed past his motionless racquet.
But in the evening quarterfinal between Jim Courier, whose machine-like efficiency has been out of kilter in recent months, and sixth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic, the hardest-serving man in Croatia, it was Courier's steady returns that took precedence.
The fifth-ranked Courier, who was No. 1 in the world at this time last year but has yet to win an event in 1994, used a 6-3 7-5 victory to advance to the semifinals against a peer who had displaced him at the head of the tennis class.
Sampras leads that rivalry by 9-2.


Nicolas Flagello, 66, American Composer
Nicolas Flagello, an American composer and conductor who played a busy role in this country's postwar musical life, died yesterday in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He was 66.
The cause was pneumonia, said Walter Simmons, a friend.


Corrections
A dance review on Tuesday about the Denishawn Repertory Dancers at St.
Mark's Church on Saturday misidentified the soloist in "A Javanese Court Dancer." She was Jacqulyn Buglisi, not June Balish.


Seton Hall Hangs On With Brooks to Rescue
Near the end, when Seton Hall was simply trying to hang on and the strategy became oh-so simple: Give the ball to Jodi Brooks and get out of the way.
Or as her coach, Phyllis Mangina, said, "It was 'Jodi, you make it happen.' "


R.I.P., Louise, a Victim of the Health-Plan Advertising War
Louise, we hardly knew ye.
A creation of the health insurance industry, Louise was invented, along with her husband, Harry, to illustrate the perils of President Clinton's health care plan.
Over the last several months, the couple have appeared in a series of television commercials sponsored by the Health Insurance Association of America.


Review/Cabaret; Steve Ross Emulates Noel Coward
More than any other contemporary cabaret performer, the singer and pianist Steve Ross is the embodiment of a type that is seldom seen nowadays: the debonair, Anglicized man-about-town who is never at a loss for a bon mot.
Noel Coward originated the type in the 1920's as an artsy version of an English dandy.
And near the beginning of Mr.
Ross's delightful new show, "Noel Coward and His Ladies," in the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel, he describes how Coward "burst upon the scene in London" and made long ivory cigarette holders an essential social prop for fashionable young men.
The show, in which Mr.
Ross is joined by Jeanne Lehman, a redheaded singer whose pealing soprano contrasts bracingly with Mr.
Ross's wry, clipped delivery, is a seamlessly written and performed party piece.
Beginning with the comic song "Mrs. Worthington," whose narrator wittily lists all the reasons why the title character should discourage her daughter from a stage career, the show mixes biographical anecdotes with songs that either evoke women of the era or were popularized by female stars.


Price Data Show Mild Inflation
Higher charges for energy helped push consumer prices up three-tenths of 1 percent in February, the Government said today.
But most economists say they still believe that inflation remains at bay.
"There is little, if any, evidence that inflation is heating up," said Laurence H. Meyer, a consultant in St.
Louis.
But he added that the trend of progressively less inflation that marked most of the last decade had probably come to an end.


Skyline Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Long-Term Rates Fall As Inflation Data Ease
Long-term interest rates on Treasury securities dropped sharply yesterday after back-to-back reports showed inflation rising at a restrained pace.
Late in the day the price of the Government's 30-year bond was up 11/16 , to 933/32 , for a yield of 6.80 percent, down from 6.89 percent on Tuesday.
Short-term bills and intermediate notes also rallied, with three-month bill rates down to 3.51 percent, and six-month bill rates falling to 3.77 percent, both dropping by four basis points.


National Computer Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Setback in United Air Deal As Machinists' Union Balks
The long-running effort by United Airlines' pilots' and machinists' unions to create the nation's largest employee-owned company suffered another setback yesterday when the machinists balked at signing the final paperwork for the $5 billion deal.
The unions' bid to gain majority control of United is by no means over.
But leaders of the International Association of Machinists apparently have concerns that resulted in the parties missing a self-imposed deadline to complete the final contract, which in turn was to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


No Vote at Historical Society
The board of the New-York Historical Society decided on Tuesday to postpone any action on a proposed contract with New York University that would give the university effective control over the society's library and parts of its collections.
Wilbur L. Ross Jr., a co-chairman of the society, said a decision on the contract has been deferred until after the board has discussed the terms of the university affiliation with neighborhood representatives and elected city and state officials.
Public officials and representatives of the Upper West Side community have raised objections to the arrangement with the university, saying it would effectively end the society's independent existence.
Under an agreement reached with the city and the state last year, public money was to be made available to assist the financially troubled society on the condition that it remain independent.


Nassau County Reassessment Is Blocked by Appeals Panel
Ruling unanimously that tax assessments for residential properties in Nassau County are no less fair than in other parts of the state, a panel of four Appellate Division judges has overruled an order for Nassau to reassess 363,000 homes.
Last March, Justice Leo F. McGinity of State Supreme Court ordered a reassessment, which would have cost up to $40 million, to correct a county system he ruled was illegal, irrational and unconstitutional.


E-Z Serve Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Eagle-Picher Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Whitman Goal: Cut Taxes Without Wounding Voters
While it may be weeks until the full impact of her spending plan becomes apparent, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman appears to have written a budget incorporating her promised tax cuts without drastically affecting aid to public schools and other state priorities.
The only aspect that will touch every New Jersey resident is a graduated reduction in the state income-tax rate, and she has proposed nothing that would stir mass opposition to her plan.


3Com Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


German's Race-Hatred Conviction Is Reversed
Germany's highest appeals court has reversed the conviction of a far-right leader on a charge of inciting racial hatred, saying that publicly repeating another person's denial of the Holocaust was not in itself enough to prove the charge.
The ruling was welcomed today by neo-Nazis and condemned by Jewish groups, which called it a boon to the forces of intolerance.


Black in the Suburbs: Lonely, Puzzled and Unsure of Oneself
Recalling the incident now, Frederick A. Coverdale seemed unsure whether the issue had been race.
A teacher at Suffolk County Community College, he had gone to get a parking sticker for his car.
The clerk on duty, who was white, demanded several forms of proof.
Anger flickered in the 57-year-old history professor, who doubted so much would have been required from white colleagues.
The clerk turned away.
"I don't have time to deal with you," Mr.
Coverdale recalled his saying.


Michigan Votes for Revolution In Financing Its Public Schools
In the nation's most dramatic shift in a century in the way public schools are financed, Michigan will begin using sales and other taxes, not property taxes, to pay for its 3,286 schools.
The experiment also includes provisions to begin equalizing spending by rich and poor districts throughout the state by giving each district a minimum of $4,200 a student, $1,000 more than the poorer districts now spend.
The plan is being examined by several states; 28 are now mired in lawsuits about the inequities of financing from property taxes.


Los Angeles Is Taking Rapid Road to Recovery
Two months after it was jolted by one of the most powerful and costliest earthquakes to hit the United States, Los Angeles is making a fast recovery.
Southern California's economy, already showing signs of pulling out of recession, is getting a jump start from the $15 billion in reconstruction aid that has started flowing in: $11.5 billion in Federal and state money and $3.5 billion in insurance payments.
In June, Californians will vote on a $2 billion bond issue for quake repairs.


Washington at Work; Wall St. to Beltway: A Smooth Ride
When Arthur Levitt Jr. took over as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission last year, skeptics questioned whether someone who had made his fortune on Wall Street and vigorously represented the interests of medium-sized businesses as chairman of the American Stock Exchange could effectively regulate the securities industry.
In recent months, however, Mr.
Levitt has moved aggressively on several fronts to improve investor protection and has begun to dispel the image he sometimes projects as a wealthy dilettante.
What has begun to impress securities executives is not so much the originality of the initiatives -- most had been proposed before Mr.
Levitt arrived -- but his ability to make things happen because of his extensive network of industry and government contacts.


A New Slovak Government Pledges Moderation
The second government in Slovakia's 15 months of turbulent independence was sworn in today and immediately set about trying to establish a more moderate tone than the confrontational policies of ousted nationalist leader, Vladimir Meciar.
The new Prime Minister, Jozef Moravcik, 48, a former Foreign Minister who led last week's revolt against Mr.
Meciar, hastily patched his Cabinet together after Mr.
Meciar was defeated in a confidence vote last Friday.


U.S. Leather Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Upper Brandon Journal; An Old Farm Is Sprouting New Ideas
Tell most farmers to flood low-lying farm land for the benefit of wild ducks and geese and they will reckon that they are coming out behind on the deal.
But at Upper Brandon Plantation, a working Colonial-era farm on the south bank of the James River, about 30 miles southeast of Richmond, game birds outrank corn, soybeans, wheat and other cash crops, and anything that encourages waterfowl is considered a sound investment.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
MANY couples view retirement with trepidation that has little to do with health or finances.
The concern, sometimes shared by their children, is over how well they will get along once one or both of them is no longer working outside the home.
It is a worry reflected in a phrase that is usually said only half-jokingly: "I married him for better or for worse, but not for lunch!"
Underlying that quip is the common belief that retirement -- especially a husband's retirement -- will cause a married couple to get on each other's nerves.
"One woman told me that she'd just gotten to the point where she could live her own life, and now she has her husband underfoot," said Dr.
Helen Q. Kivnick, an associate professor of social work at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis.


Review/Theater; Racial Perceptions As Multiple Metaphor
Joyce Carol Oates has written some fine short stories, but she is not by nature a miniaturist.
She tends to be most at home with big topics -- particularly patterns of violence in everyday life that reflect broader sociological issues -- couched in expansive, surging narratives.
A short play like "Black," which is being presented by Women's Projects and Productions at the Intar Theater, can't comfortably accommodate all the weighty issues she stocks it with.
Unable to employ her compelling novelistic voice, she burdens her characters with thematic dialogue that sometimes suggests a blueprint for an essay in The New York Review of Books.
Set in a middle-class living room in a New Jersey town, "Black" traces the deterioration of a dinner party given by a white woman and her black lover for the woman's ex-husband.
It is a sort of topical variation on the Walpurgisnacht of "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf," in which the pretense at civility soon slips into nasty, soul-baring explosiveness.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a New York City program that awards cash incentives to landlords who provide apartments for homeless families misstated the minimum payment in some editions.
It is $1,000 for housing a two-member family, not $1,000 per person.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Citicorp is selling $200 million of 7.125 percent subordinated notes due in 2004 priced at 99.195 to yield 7.24 percent through Salomon Brothers Inc.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-2 by Moody's, A- by S.&amp; P. and BBB+ by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., or Freddie Mac, is selling $200 million of notes due in 1999 priced at 100 to yield 6.19 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The notes are callable in one year.


And This Once Was Paradise
THE Loew's Paradise Theater, that 1929 movie palace in the Bronx where millions of Saturday-night dates took place under a starlit ceiling, may have put on its last picture show.
The Paradise, at 187th Street and the Grand Concourse and designed by the architect John Eberson, has been closed since January.
On the marquee below the majestic Italian Baroque-style facade, a notice reads:
CLOSED FOR RENOVATIONS AVAILBLE.


A Dangerous Homeless Policy
After well-deserved criticism for its plan to cut New York City funds from a successful program for the homeless, the Giuliani administration has been scrambling to come up with Federal money to keep the program alive.
Give the Mayor and his advisers credit for admitting their error.
But unless the Federal money is real and substantial, the administration needs to back down from an ill-considered plan that will cheat both the city and its homeless population.
The program in question, the S.R.O.
Loan Program, finances the development of single-room-occupancy apartments and provides their tenants with support services.
Such "supported S.R.O.'s" are one of the few techniques for helping the homeless that have proved effective, and one of the few policies of the Dinkins administration that Rudolph Giuliani said he supported as a candidate.


Lighter Tax Burden
As states move to cut taxes, a report says 1994 may be the first year since 1985 that the burden of state levies is expected to ease.
Page A21.


Panel Endorses Price Controls on Drugs
A Congressional subcommittee voted today to impose a kind of price control on prescription drugs, as part of a bill to provide all Americans with insurance covering the cost of such medications.
Under the proposal approved by the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, the Government would review drug prices and could deny Medicare coverage for drugs whose prices were deemed excessive.


Aldus
Shares of the Aldus Corporation, a computer software company based in Seattle, surged in Nasdaq trading yesterday following the announcement after the close of trading on Tuesday that Adobe Systems Inc. planned to acquire Aldus.
The 52-week average price for shares of Aldus has been less than $20.


CHRONICLE
Greenwood, S.C., has been grappling with a tough education issue: the name of its new elementary school.
The children of Greenwood (pop. 60,000) were given an opportunity to recommend and vote on names, and the winner, by a 3-to-1 ratio: Springfield.
Some parents were outraged.
Springfield, they said, happens to be the name of the school that Bart Simpson attends in the television show "The Simpsons."


Dr. Charles J. McPeak; Surgeon, 75
Dr.
Charles J. McPeak, who practiced surgery in Manhattan for 40 years, died on Friday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
Dr.
McPeak, who lived in Manhattan, was 75.
The cause was cardiac arrest after surgery for a broken hip, said his wife, Maida.


Harry Kondoleon Is Dead at 39; Wrote of the Desolation of AIDS
Harry Kondoleon, the author of 17 plays and 2 novels who in recent years made his life and his writings a testament to the ravages of AIDS, died yesterday in his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 39.
The cause was AIDS, said his sister, Christine Kondoleon.


Journal; Loving Jeffrey Dahmer
Even in a country where everything from parricide to political scandal is instantly transformed into a multimedia freak show, the art exhibition that just closed at the Tatou gallery in Beverly Hills might turn heads.
There, at prices up to $20,000, connoisseurs purchased paintings by John Wayne Gacy, the condemned serial killer who murdered 33 boys and young men in a Chicago suburb in the 1970's.
"I guess he killed people better than he painted," one patron told The Los Angeles Times.
But that doesn't mean there isn't a market for the killer's self-portraits, or that some enterprising scholar won't offer learned views on the parallels between the Gacy oeuvre and, say, the early Hitler watercolors.


Takeover Tables Turning On Northrop, Some Contend
Since last Thursday, when the Northrop Corporation lobbed its $60-a-share offer to take over the Grumman Corporation alongside an earlier $55-a-share bid from the Martin Marietta Corporation, speculators and analysts have contended that Northrop itself is vulnerable to a takeover.
The eagerness of stock traders to bet on that bit of wisdom was starkly visible yesterday, as the price of Northrop's shares soared by $1.875, to $43.75, a new 52-week high, on the flimsiest of circumstances.


PGA Investigates Purse-Splitting Charges
The PGA Tour announced yesterday that it was investigating allegations of purse-splitting at unofficial events on the Senior PGA Tour.
DEANE BEAMAN, the PGA Tour's commissioner, declined to specify either the number of events at which the purse-splitting allegedly occurred or the identity of the events.
"We have strong indications that there have been errors of judgment here, and we are investigating," said Beaman.


Goody's Family Clothing Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Israelis' Hearing on Hebron Boycotted by Islamic Aides
Islamic officials and other Palestinians turned down invitations to testify today at a hearing of the Israeli commission investigating the Hebron massacre after Islamic leaders in Jerusalem urged no cooperation with the Israelis.


Thomson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Leader of Lubavitch Is Worse, an Aide Says
The condition of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the Grand Rabbi of the Lubavitch Hasidim, who suffered a stroke last week, worsened yesterday, an aide said.
The aide, Rabbi Yehuda Krinsky, said in a written statement that tests performed at Beth Israel Medical Center indicated a "deterioration" resulting from last week's stroke and that the rabbi was unconscious and in "very critical" condition.


Richard Starr, 94, Middle East Expert And Archeologist
Dr.
Richard Francis Strong Starr, an archeologist who explored the ancient world in the days of arduous travel and later served the Government as an expert on the Middle East, died on March 9 at Morningside House in Leesburg, Va.
He was 94 and lived in Upperville, Va.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Big B reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Elsa Lorne Harvey, 62, Comic-Book Publisher
Elsa Victoria Lorne Harvey, chief executive of Lorne-Harvey Publications in Larchmont, N.Y., died on Tuesday at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
She was 62 and lived in Larchmont.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Miller (Herman) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Preparing for Another Season of Reaching for the Brass Ring


Review/Dance; 'Equus,' a Boy and His Neurosis
Dance Theater of Harlem has been, from its start 25 years ago, a company rooted in classical-ballet technique but devoted to no particular style or theme.
The range of interests and the vision of Arthur Mitchell, founder of the troupe with Karel Shook, were clear on Tuesday night when the company presented the second of five programs in its ambitious anniversary season at the New York State Theater.
One of two strongly danced revivals, Domy Reiter-Soffer's "Equus," is a narrative ballet about a boy, his psychiatrist and his horse.
The other revival, Mr.
Mitchell's pure-dance "Fete Noire," offers an inspiring and poignant look back to the troupe's earliest years.


UConn Survives Scare, Then Goes Full Throttle
Brown, which plays in a different league -- literally and figuratively -- came into the game tonight with virtually no chance against third-ranked Connecticut in the opening round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association women's tournament.
After all, UConn (28-2) is the Big East champion and seeded first in the East Regional.
Brown (18-10), by contrast, had to beat Dartmouth in a playoff Sunday for its first tournament berth.
And when Connecticut opened with a 9-0 run, while Brown turned the ball over on its first three possessions, an anticipated rout appeared to be developing.
But then Brown threw a scare into UConn and most of those in a crowd of 7,246 at the Gampel Pavilion before finally succumbing to the Huskies, 79-60.


Spanish Youths Shunning the Army in Droves
After one out of three men of draft age claimed to be conscientious objectors last year, Spain has suddenly realized it may soon be unable to fill the ranks of its army.
The statistics are compelling.
The number of 18-year-olds giving reasons of conscience for avoiding military service rose from 6,407 in 1986 to 13,130 in 1989 to 68,202 in 1993.
And the estimate for this year is around 100,000, which represents almost half those eligible for the draft.


Sports &amp; Recreation Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Corrections
A front-page article on Jan. 31 about Herbert London's quest to become Governor of New York referred incorrectly to the scholarship under which he attended Columbia in the class of 1960.
He played basketball at Columbia and believes his athletic ability influenced the award.
But under Ivy League rules, Columbia does not now give athletic scholarships and did not when Mr.
London attended; aid is officially based on need.
A reader telephoned on March 11 to report the error and said his previous calls on the subject had been misdirected at The Times.


Review/Dance; A Burst of Life's Energy Long Pent Up
Everything is in flux in "Sounddance," the turbulent, explosive masterwork that Merce Cunningham has mysteriously kept out of public view since 1980.
On Tuesday night, the Merce Cunningham Dance Company gave the 1975 piece a grand revival that promises to be a major highlight of the entire dance season.
The audience at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan) sprang to its feet for a rousing ovation at the end.
It was an understandable kinesthetic response to the vigorous whirlpool of activity on display.


Chicago Machine Savors Its Victory
For one nostalgic moment on Tuesday, by the northwest side "El" stops and the taverns and hardware stores along Pulaski, Damen and Irving Park Avenues, where precinct foot soldiers handed out palm cards and told people who already knew to vote for Dan Rostenkowski, it was as if it were 1959 again and Old Man Daley were alive.
Whatever is left of the fearsome Democratic machine built by Mayor Richard J. Daley, its parts were reassembled for perhaps the last great battle of its influential but beleaguered native son, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee and possible savior of the Clinton health care plan.


Congressional Economist Backs Arms Budget Plan
Congress's chief economist said today that the Pentagon's $1.2 trillion long-range budget was sufficient to pay for the troops and equipment the military says it needs to carry out its future fighting strategy.
The official, Robert D. Reischauer, director of the Congressional Budget Office, told the House Armed Services Committee that the Defense Department might have overstated projected savings from base closings and underestimated environmental cleanup expenses and possible cost overruns on new weapons.
But he said the budget office was "relatively sanguine" about the affordability of the plan.


Raiders Match Broncos' Offer to Brown
The Los Angeles Raiders insured that they will keep TIM BROWN by matching the four-year, $11 million offer the Pro Bowl wide receiver received from the Denver Broncos.
The Raiders announced their decision yesterday, two days before their deadline to match the offer or lose Brown.
"This was not a tough decision," said STEVE ORTMAYER, the Raiders' director of football operations.
"While there's some outstanding value out there in the unrestricted free agent market, there was no one we felt who had the value of a Tim Brown for this team."


St. Louis Coach Enjoying The Travel
A half an hour after putting his Billikens through practice, Charlie Spoonhour leaned back in a plastic folding chair, reflecting on the currents that carried him from Mulberry, Kan., where he was born, to Rogers, Ark., where he was raised, to numerous points thereafter in small midwestern locales.
Finally he reflected on how he had arrived in Wichita, for one of his proudest moments.
In his second year as the head basketball coach at St.
Louis University, Spoonhour led the Billikens to a 23-5 record and their first National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament appearance since 1957.


The Flower Show Has a Fallow Year
THE snow has melted and the snowdrops are up. So where's the New York Flower Show?
There isn't one, New York.
The blizzard a year ago broke its back, and the Horticultural Society of New York, which has sponsored the event for 68 years, decided to call timeout.


Olympics on CBS
To the Editor:
Now that the Olympic Games are over and the dust has settled, I feel compelled to write about your Feb. 20 inaccurate editorial on CBS and its Olympic coverage.


U.S. Bancorp to Trim Its Staff by 10%
In a move that its chief executive said was being taken in hopes of averting a takeover, U.S.
Bancorp, the largest banking company based in the Northwest, said today that it would cut 10 percent of its work force, or 1,400 jobs, in six months, despite record profits.
In a news conference at the company's headquarters here, Gerry B. Cameron, the chief executive of the banking company, announced a sweeping plan intended to improve the company's efficiency.
He said he hoped the cuts would convince Wall Street to raise the value of the company's stock enough to dissuade any hostile takeover efforts.
Mr.
Cameron said it was the company's policy not to comment on takeover rumors.


CHRONICLE
Question: What do you get when you put CARLOS SANTANA, BUFFY SAINTE-MARIE, BOBBY SEALE, DANIEL BERRIGAN, DOLORES HUERTA, PETE SEEGER, MICHELLE SHOCKED and SPIKE LEE in a room together?
Answer: A television commercial for Ben &amp; Jerry's ice cream.


Seaver Is Not WPIX's Pick
Paul Olden, the radio voice of the Jets, is close to an agreement to join the Yankees' announcing crew on WPIX-TV/ Channel 11, likely replacing Tom Seaver, and working alongside Phil Rizzuto and Bobby Murcer.
An agreement could be completed by the end of the week.
"We're talking pretty seriously about it and it's certainly looking promising," said Olden, who most recently called baseball games for ESPN and grew up in Southern California listening to the Dodgers' Vin Scully.
"I'd really like to get back to baseball."


Faculty Strike Closes Israeli Universities
To the Editor:
Coverage of Israel has focused on the Palestine Liberation Organization negotiations and the tragic acts of violence intended to disrupt those negotiations.
Unfortunately, left almost unmentioned is a faculty strike that closed Israel's universities in early January (when I was a visiting professor at Hebrew University from Southern Illinois University).


Public Relations Has Potent Image; At Journalism Schools, It Now Ranks Ahead of Newspapers
The twice-monthly meeting of the New York University public relations club will now come to order.
The topic of tonight's workshop, attended by half a dozen undergraduates who aspire to careers in the field, is that indispensable skill of our day: how to spin a news story.
But first a bit of old business.
Neither Joyce Hauser, a former television talk show host who is the club's faculty adviser, nor Luis Perez, a practicing p.r. man who is tonight's invited guest, cares for the term spinning.
Before getting down to cases, they want to put a spin on spin.


Skating Group Is Angry; Kerrigan Is Silent
Nancy Kerrigan chose not to comment, but figure skating authorities reacted with frustration and anger last night at being left uninformed by Oregon authorities about the plea bargain in which Tonya Harding resigned from the United States Figure Skating Association.
"We have been informed by the Portland authorities of the plea bargain in Oregon under which Tonya Harding has pled guilty to a felony," said a statement issued by the Kerrigan family.
"Nancy and all of us have been through a lot lately. We need time to digest this news and discuss it as a family, and therefore we cannot comment further at this time."


Essay; The Poly Lobby
The "poly lobby" the legion of psychological charlatans who claim their machines can unerringly detect lying -- suffered a severe setback when it was revealed that Aldrich Ames, the accused Russian mole, passed two polygraph exams.
The merchants of sweat at the F.B.I. moved quickly to protect their livelihood by putting out word that the machines worked -- but that incompetent C.I.A. polygraphers had read the results wrong.


G.M. in Pact With Ohio U.A.W. Local
The General Motors Corporation and the United Automobile Workers union reached a tentative agreement today that may end a three-day strike at two parts plants in Dayton, Ohio.
By depriving assembly plants of critical brake parts, the strike had already shut down factories elsewhere, idling thousands of workers.
Before the tentative agreement was announced late this afternoon, G.M. had shut a car assembly plant in Lansing, Mich.; a pickup truck assembly plant in Fort Wayne, Ind., and a dump truck assembly plant in Janesville, Wis.


Greenwell Remains in Red Sox Tradition
Left field is a place of longevity for the Boston Red Sox.
TED WILLIAMS.
CARL YASTRZEMSKI.
JIM RICE.
And now MIKE GREENWELL.
For most of the last 55 years, they have been the Red Sox regulars at that position.
That string is more likely to stay intact now that Greenwell has signed a two-year contract extension through 1996.


Joseph Watkins, Government Official, 84
Joseph Watkins, a former director of New York State's Municipal Service Division, died on March 9 at his home in Albany.
He was 84.
The cause was cardiac arrest, according to the Levine Memorial Chapel in Albany.


Personal Slap in the Health Debate
Tempers flared today when a California Congressman asserted that a Republican Congresswoman had obtained her knowledge of health care through "pillow talk" with her husband, a gynecologist in New Britain, Conn.
Representative Pete Stark, a California Democrat who heads the Ways and Means Committee's Subcommittee on Health, made the comment about Representative Nancy L. Johnson, a Connecticut Republican, during a meeting in which the panel was considering proposals to limit drug prices.


U.S. Surgical Will Cut 900 Jobs to Lower Costs
The United States Surgical Corporation said yesterday that it would eliminate 900 jobs, including 9 of its 30 vice presidents, in a cost-cutting sweep that was welcomed on Wall Street.
The surgical products maker, which is based in Norwalk, Conn., said Bruce S. Lustman, 46, the chief operating officer, would be among those leaving.
It said most of the cuts would be in Connecticut.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIANT TECHSYSTEMS INC., Edina, Minn., a munitions and weapons manufacturer, said it had been awarded an $86.9 million contract to supply tank ammunition to the Army.
M.A.
HANNA CO., Cleveland, Ohio, a formulated polymers company, agreed to buy North Coast Compounders, North Ridgeville, Ohio, a producer of thermoplastic elastomers and other materials, for an undisclosed price.


The Nets Go West But the Kings Coast
Kings 132, Nets 111
Mitch Richmond scored 25 points and Olden Polynice had 16 points and 12 rebounds last night in Sacramento's 132-111 home-court rout of New Jersey.
The Kings used 46 fourth-quarter points to lead by as many as 29 points in the final period, turning the tables on a 132-102 loss to the Nets at the Meadowlands Arena on Nov. 14.
New Jersey Coach Chuck Daly was ejected with 11:17 left in the game during a decisive 14-1 run that gave Sacramento a 94-70 lead.
Derrick Coleman paced the Nets with a 29 points, and Kenny Anderson had 19.
Spurs 110, Trail Blazers 102
Dale Ellis and David Robinson scored 27 points each and Ellis came within 2 of becoming the first National Basketball Association player with 1,000 3-point goals as San Antonio beat visiting Portland.


Budget Wizardry in New Jersey
Popular, yes. Prudent, no. That describes Gov. Christine Todd Whitman's first budget.
She has delivered what she promised New Jersey voters.
She is cutting taxes without at the same time cutting school and municipal aid in a way that forces property tax increases.
But she works this wizardry with a large dose of gimmicks to cover a deficit that her tax cuts enlarged.


INSIDE
Nuclear Impasse Derails U.S. Talks With North Korea
The United States canceled high-level talks with North Korea scheduled for next week because of the North's refusal to permit international monitors to complete their inspection of a key nuclear installation.
Page A10.
Pros Seek Extra Extra Point
The N.F.L.'s competition committee will propose allowing the 2-point conversion after touchdowns, and its adoption is almost certain.
Page B11.
Textbook Changes Rejected
A publisher has refused demands by Texas officials to revise a health textbook's treatment of sex.
Page A21.
Gene for Colon Cancer Found
Scientists have discovered a gene that accounts for many cases of hereditary colon cancer.
Page B8.


Review/Music; New Singers in 'Barber'
With the exception of Enzo Dara's exuberant comic turn as Dr.
Bartolo, the Met's "Barber of Seville" had new singers in all the major roles on Tuesday night.
Vladimir Chernov, the Russian baritone who has swiftly established himself as a major Verdi singer at the Met, ventured out of his accustomed territory to sing Figaro.
"Largo al factotum" left no doubt of the rich, vibrant, rock-solid timbre of his voice and also of his considerable technical agility.
But as the opera went on, he seemed to lack something in the way of collegial comic ebullience; too often he was singing admirably off on his own.
There were moments when his portrayal of Figaro's self-possession ended up as mere arrogance.
Stanford Olsen initially seemed underpowered as the Count; his light tenor paled next to Mr.
Chernov's powerful sound.
But the refined ease of his coloratura singing combined with comic agility to produce a satisfying performance in the end.
Susanne Mentzer had the measure of Rosina, although her mezzo-soprano had a dull, covered tone at the beginning of "Una voce poco fa" and didn't blossom out as fully as one might have wished.


No Headline
"I would just like to say that I am really sorry I interfered." -- TONYA HARDING.  [ B15:2. ]


A New Russia: Now Thrive the Swindlers
With the economy in shambles and the legal system a joke, Russia has become a breeding ground for flim-flam artists, post-Communist swindlers who take advantage of people's confusion, desperation and what remains of their trust.
Scams have a long tradition in Russia.
In "The Government Inspector," Gogol created an impostor who was able to make an entire provincial town believe he was someone he wasn't.
And there was Ostap Bender, a literary character of the 1920's who bedazzled Soviet bureaucrats and other fools with schemes so elaborate they barely knew they had been robbed.


Invitation to a German Rightist Is Canceled
BONN, March 16 --
The New York-based Council on Foreign Relations is withdrawing a speaking invitation next month to Franz Schonhuber, chairman of a far-right group in Germany, an officer of the group said today.
Mr.
Schonhuber, head of Germany's Republican Party and a member of the European Parliament, had been invited to speak at a luncheon at the council, a private research group, on April 11.


57 Fundamentalists Are Reported Killed By Algerian Forces
Algerian security forces have reportedly killed 57 suspected Muslim militants in the last five days in operations apparently unconnected to a mass jailbreak last week in which about 1,000 men escaped.
The official press agency A.P.S., quoting security forces, said today that the 57 people killed since last Friday included three men responsible for the murder of a television journalist, Abdelkader Hireche, on Feb. 28.


Prosecutor May Check Billings of No. 3 Justice Aide
The special prosecutor investigating President Clinton's real estate dealings in Arkansas is considering whether to examine the billing practices of Webster L. Hubbell, the Associate Attorney General, while he was in private practice in Little Rock, Ark., law-enforcement and Congressional officials said today.
If the prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr., should decide to investigate the billings of Mr.
Hubbell, who announced his resignation on Monday, it would draw another top Clinton Administration official into the widening criminal inquiry that had initially focused on Mr.
Clinton's real estate dealings with James B. McDougal, the owner of Madison Guaranty, a failed savings and loan association in Arkansas.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Keeping Amaryllis Going
Q.
My amaryllis flowers are now dying, and I'd like to know what to do to keep them going. -- David Fisher, Hollis Hills, Queens.


For Settlement Orchestra, a Big-Time Downbeat
The concertmaster strutted across the stage, put his violin under his chin and tuned up the orchestra -- a nice, solid, cheery A. The stage lights came up, the chatter in the audience died down and out from the wings lumbered Kurt Masur, the music director of the New York Philharmonic.
A late-afternoon performance at Lincoln Center?
No, only a rehearsal, and not with the Philharmonic: these 33 string players have never set foot on the stage at Avery Fisher Hall.
Not yet, anyway.
They play in an orchestra at the Third Street Music School Settlement, which opened its 100th anniversary celebration by inviting Mr.
Masur to lead a rehearsal of a 110-year-old piece, the "Holberg" Suite by Grieg.


For a Furniture Maker, a Taste of a Global Future
It was August, when this part of the country sags under a slathering of humidity and heat.
T.
Scott Berry was up the road from here at a dealers show in Tupelo, displaying some of the furniture he makes.
He was in the back of a warehouse, not doing much of anything, when he got a call from the desk.
A man was there to see him.
"So I go out and there's this guy standing there," Mr.
Berry recalled.
"I almost threw him out, but I said, O.K., I'll talk to him."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  U.S.
AND ISRAEL COURT SYRIA  With the P.L.O. still balking at returning to peace talks, the U.S. and Israel sought to regain momentum toward an accord in the Middle East by trying to entice Syria into resuming talks with Israel.
A1


2d Arrest in Mosque Melee
A Bronx man yesterday became the second person arrested for his role in a Jan. 9 melee at a Harlem mosque in which several police officers were injured.
The suspect, Garod Duckett, 29, of 935 Waring Avenue in the Brookdale section, faces assault and weapons charges, said Sgt.
Tina S. Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
The first suspect, Anthony Hollis, 29, was arrested on Jan. 19.
In the Jan. 9 incident, officers went to the Nation of Islam mosque, Muhammad's Mosque No. 7, at 2033 Fifth Avenue, in response to a 911 call of an armed robbery, which turned out to be a hoax.
In a fight with worshipers, one officer was pushed down a stairway and another was punched in the nose and her gun was taken, though it was later recovered.


Review/Dance; Honoring A Master Of Movement On the Screen
It is impossible to think of Hollywood's best musicals of the 1950's without the warm human insight that Michael Kidd poured into those films through his choreography.
The Kidd touch was always recognizable.
It could be seen in the growing compatibility between Cyd Charisse and Fred Astaire as they strolled through Central Park, or when Danny Kaye, transformed into an idiot savant, partnered Diana Adams, one of George Balanchine's distinctive muses, in a hilarious ballet spoof.
Even more likely, the Kidd signature popped up as characterization through energy, epitomized by a lovesick male clan going courting with an acrobatic challenge dance in "Seven Brides for Seven Brothers."


Health Panel Backs Costs Based on Size of Families
Having already decided that employers should help buy health insurance for their workers, a Congressional subcommittee voted today to set much higher premiums for people with children than for those who have no children.
The House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, drafting a bill to revamp the nation's health care system, decided that single people and childless couples should not have to subsidize the cost of coverage for children.
Rather, the cost would be borne by the parents of such children and by companies that employ the parents.


The Broadway Ticket Game: Bargain-Hunters Can Play
THE complaint is heard so often it's mundane.
You've even made it yourself: tickets for Broadway shows are too expensive.
But it's only three months until your anniversary, so you decide to bite the bullet.
A couple of seats for a big musical would be a great way to celebrate.
You can't go to midtown Manhattan, so you call one of the ticketing services, order the seats -- not bad, 20th row center -- and pay $65 apiece, plus $4.50 or $5 each for a service charge, and maybe a handling charge, too.
Finally, the big evening arrives.
You go to the theater and sit down.
Just as the curtain goes up, the seats next to you are filled by another couple, who are gushing about what a great deal this is.


Agassi's Magic Makes Edberg Disappear
Now appearing in the role of dangerous floater, resident upset technician, physical specimen extraordinaire and glibbest man to decorate the Lipton draw, 31st-ranked Andre Agassi kept his comeback at full throttle this afternoon by ambushing second-seeded Stefan Edberg in the quarterfinals.
Agassi has already warned the world that his mission to take tennis by storm following last year's timeout to rebuild his wrist and jump-start his mental momentum has assumed nothing less than messianic proportions.


Clinton Planners Facing A Quiet Fight on Welfare
The officials drafting President Clinton's welfare proposal are being hit with a behind-the-scenes campaign by some of their closest friends in the antipoverty world, who fear the proposal is taking a Draconian turn that may hurt the nation's poorest families.
Marian Wright Edelman, the head of the Children's Defense Fund and one of Hillary Rodham Clinton's closest friends, has sent a blistering memorandum to the Cabinet, warning that one of the welfare options being considered will "violate every standard of decency and fairness."


Dissing the President
A week after embarrassing New York City by snubbing the President of the United States, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Police Commissioner William Bratton haven't even gotten their stories straight about how and why it happened.
The snub occurred when both men were no-shows at a crime forum Bill Clinton held in Brooklyn last week.
Mr.
Giuliani's excuse looks pretty lame.
He said he didn't like the format of the forum last Thursday; too much like some television talk shows, he suggested, too publicity-oriented.
More so than the televised crime debate the publicity-shy Mr.
Giuliani taped in Washington this week?
Or than the crime forum on Wednesday sponsored by The New York Post, at which he also appeared?


Review/Film; Harvey Keitel in a Family Movie. Really.
On screen, Harvey Keitel has done things that would shock you so hard (as the phrase goes) they'd kill your whole family.
So what is Mr.
Keitel doing in a family movie?
In the PG-rated "Monkey Trouble," he lurches through the role of a snaggle-toothed, greasy-haired Gypsy organ grinder whose monkey has special pickpocketing skills.
Wonders never cease: Mr.
Keitel turns out to be innocently funny this time.
And "Monkey Trouble" is one of those rare children's films to which you can actually take small children.
Falling loosely into the Swell New Pet genre (think "Beethoven"), "Monkey Trouble" tells what happens when the Gypsy's monkey runs away.
He is found and nicknamed Dodger by Eva Gregory (Thora Birch), a girl who could use a secret friend.
Eva's mother (Mimi Rogers) and stepfather (Christopher McDonald) have a new baby, and they're the kind of couple who sit around singing "The Itsy-Bitsy Spider" to their new progeny.
Understandably, Eva is upset.
Dodger turns out to be the perfect remedy.


North Korea Reneges
If North Korea keeps international inspectors from taking samples at a key nuclear site, Washington will have little choice but to put off Monday's high-level meeting with Pyongyang.
Those talks are aimed at opening North Korea to even more intrusive nuclear inspections in exchange for political and economic rewards.
As long as North Korea reneges on inspections it has already agreed to, there is no point in talking about new inspections.
But before Washington takes further punitive actions, such as resuming provocative military exercises with South Korea, it needs to give the North another chance to make good on its pledge to allow the inspectors access.
Washington should avoid steps that will foreclose further dialogue.





No-Refund Retainer Fees Are Outlawed in New York
In a decision that could ultimately alter the billing practices of many lawyers even outside New York, the State Court of Appeals today unanimously outlawed the custom of charging a client an advance fee that is not refundable no matter how little work the lawyer then does on the client's case.
The state apparently became the first in the nation to outlaw these fees, called non-refundable retainers, which are common in New York and around the country.
One study has shown that from 1982 to 1992, 27 percent of all complaints to a New York State legal oversight panel concerned non-refundable retainers.


Young's Injury Puts Trade for J. T. Snow on Hold
The California Angel scouts were in the stands, ready to watch Anthony Young make his audition.
Bill Bavasi, the Angels' general manager, was in Arizona awaiting the reports.
And Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' g.m., appeared to be quite interested in trading Young for J. T. Snow, the Angels' switch-hitting first baseman.
But Young stood them all up.


The Waltz of the IPO's: Flirtation With Capital
Initial public offerings are Wall Street's debutantes.
And at a time when debutantes ought to be out of favor, their waltz cards continue to be surprisingly full, a new survey shows.
When a private company sells stock to the public, the sale is known as an initial public offering, the debut of a stock for subsequent sale and repurchase by other investors on stock exchanges.
The sale raises both cash and prestige for a business.


Gundaris Pone, 61, American Composer Who Bridged Styles
Gundaris Pone, a composer, conductor and music professor at the State University College at New Paltz, N.Y., died on Tuesday at Benedictine Hospital in Kingston, N.Y.
He was 61 and lived in New Paltz.
The cause was cancer, said Karen Summerlin, a spokeswoman for the college.


In the Humble Ashes Of a Lone Incinerator, The Makings of Law
Every day, like enormous worker bees tending a hive, an endless procession of trucks haul 1,300 tons of garbage to Chicago's trash incinerator and carry away 400 tons of resulting ash to a modern, plastic-lined landfill in the nearby town of Elwood, Ill.
The ash is the end product of 14 percent of all the garbage that Chicagoans toss out, and it is tainted with two toxic elements: lead and cadmium.
Whether the city is disposing of it safely is a question in dispute.
Whether it is doing so legally is a question for the United States Supreme Court, which is due to decide before the current term ends in three months.


Maybe the Cow Votes Democratic?


TVWeekend; And Still More About Child Abuse
If child abuse should ever be made boring, television would be the obvious culprit with its glut of talk shows, news essays and movies endlessly poking at the unsettling subject.
Latest entry: "Ultimate Betrayal" on CBS on Sunday.
It's not that the film itself is objectionable; it's just that the topic of child abuse has become the unfortunate victim of media overload.
As with the atrocities in Bosnia, sadly enough, extensive exposure invites emotional paralysis.
"Ultimate Betrayal" is based on a true story, although, in familiar television flimflammery, certain events and characters have been fictionalized.
In May 1990, two adult sisters claiming severe childhood abuse sued their father in the Denver courts.
The father, Edward J. Rodgers Jr., refused to appear in court.
He was a former F.B.I. agent who had become a Colorado authority on child abuse.
The sisters, supported by their two other sisters but angrily denounced by their two brothers, were awarded $2.3 million in compensation and the case led to a proposal for a Child Abuse Accountability Act to change statute-of-limitations rules.
It is currently before the United States Congress.


Top Arkansas Lawyer Helped Hillary Clinton Turn Big Profit
Starting just before Bill Clinton was elected Governor of Arkansas, Hillary Rodham Clinton made about $100,000 in one year in the commodities market with the help and advice of a friend who was the top lawyer for one of the state's most powerful and heavily regulated companies.
The investments, made in a commodities trading account that was opened three weeks before Mr.
Clinton was elected Governor in 1978, substantially altered the finances of the Clintons.
At the time, Mr.
Clinton was Attorney General.
He and his wife were rising stars in Little Rock whose salaries were modest by the standards of their peers.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; CBS may be losing other sports, but March Madness still causes it to cheer.
MARCH Madness -- the name given to the National Collegiate Athletic Association's men's basketball tournament that began yesterday -- is a kind of divine lunacy for CBS.
Big advertisers pour mass quantities of money into the event.
And CBS doesn't have to beg companies to buy in or trash its rate card.


Art in Review
Barbara Kruger
Mary Boone Gallery  417 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through April 30
Barbara Kruger's latest installation-cum-harangue at Mary Boone might be compared to some Monarch Notes version of Leni Riefenstahl's "Triumph of the Will," providing that the German film maker had grasped Hitler's evilness.
Charismatic, hatemongering leaders, in fact, are among the several targets of this seductive, elegantly orchestrated if ultimately unsatisfying assault on the senses.
Should you wonder, its central image is that of a huge magnet with hundreds of nails clinging to it.
Get it?


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  ACCOMPLICE IN HEBRON?
Testimony by Israeli soldiers today indicated that Baruch Goldstein might have had an accomplice when he gunned down at least 29 Muslim worshipers in Hebron.
A1  RABIN MEETS WITH POPE  Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin met with Pope John Paul II to seek his help in getting Mideast peace talks restarted, but did not say he would back down on granting Palestinian security demands.
A12


Sports of The Times; In Final 64, This School Has a Prayer
HE always dreamed big.
Back when he was organizing the Moral Majority and was playing national politics in the 1980's, Jerry Falwell used to envision a certain football game in his lifetime:
Notre Dame, the Fighting Irish, the most famous Roman Catholic university in his country, would be playing the Flames of Liberty Baptist College, the evangelical Christian school he was building in Virginia.


Today's Man reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $86.5 million of notes divided in two parts: $58.5 million of notes due in 1997 priced at 100 to yield 5.395 percent through Carroll McEntee and $28 million of notes due in 1996 priced at 100 to yield 5.03 percent through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Both issues are noncallable.
The bank is also selling $100 million of multi step-up notes due in 2001 priced at 100 to yield 5.65 percent through First Tennessee Bank.
The issue is callable in two years. *
Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae, is selling $200 million of notes due in 2001 priced at 100 to yield 6.6 percent through First Boston Corp.
The issue is callable in two years.


U.S. SURGICAL REPORTS PRELIMINARY LOSS FOR 1993
The United States Surgical Corporation yesterday announced a preliminary loss for 1993 after completing a restructuring and cost-cutting program.
The maker of surgical products, based in Norwalk, Conn., said unaudited results showed a loss of $138.7 million, or $2.48 a share, on revenues of $1.04 billion.


Healthtrust Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Arafat Says Safety Must Precede Talks
Yasir Arafat insisted today that he would not resume talks with Israel without assurances that an international force would protect Palestinians in the occupied territories, particularly in Hebron.
Mr.
Arafat, who is chairman of the Palestinian Liberation Organization, and other P.L.O. officials appeared to flatly reject Israel's suggestion of a Palestinian police force under Israeli command in Hebron, saying such a force could be intimidated by the Israeli Army and by armed settlers.


Ex-Owner Of Toxic Site Wins Ruling On Damages
A Federal judge today rejected New York State's claim for $250 million in punitive damages against the Occidental Chemical Corporation for the environmental disaster at Love Canal, but he criticized the company's handling of the infamous chemical dump.
The decision by Judge John T. Curtin in Federal District Court said that while Occidental was negligent "on a number of occasions," the state failed to prove that the company acted with "reckless or wanton disregard of safety or rights," the standard he said was necessary to assess punitive damages.


Escaping Mean Streets, a Student Still Struggles; From Mount Vernon, N.Y., to an Upstate College Is a Stretch for an 18-Year-Old Girl
The news that Q'hana Gethers was failing gym because she never attended class seemed to exhaust the final reserves of her college mentor's patience.
"Maybe you saw a different transcript last semester than I did," Kahan Sablo, multicultural affairs coordinator at Canton Technical College, told her pointedly, while Miss Gethers stared at the floor in his office.
"I can see having a hard time with math, but this is something where you put on your tennis shoes, you participate and you get a good grade. I'm going to ask you again: Do you want to pass next semester?"


Scholastic Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Custody Settled in Case of Boy Who Disappeared
The tangled and bitter custody feud over 15-year-old Shai Fhima appeared to be resolved yesterday when his divorced parents reached an agreement to share custody of him and to begin seeking ways for the teen-ager to observe the Orthodox practices of Judaism that he prefers.
Under the main provisions of the agreement, the teen-ager will be reunited with his parents after two years of a secret life with Orthodox families that began in April 1992 when he vanished from his mother's New Jersey home, and she charged that he had been abducted and brainwashed by an ultra-Orthodox rabbi in Brooklyn.


Russia Seeks Link to NATO But Nationalists Are Bitter
Opening the way to a possible military partnership with the West, Russia said today that it might soon join the loose alliance with NATO that many former Eastern Bloc countries hope will lead to full membership.
"At the end of this month we will be ready," Defense Minister Pavel S. Grachev told reporters after meeting with Secretary of Defense William J. Perry at military headquarters.


Talbots Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a racial dispute involving a high school prom misstated the population of Wedowee, Ala.
It is about 800, not 900.


CHRONICLE
OSCAR DE LA RENTA zigs while others zag on the fur front.
He will design for Alixandre Furs, taking the place of CALVIN KLEIN, who decided not to renew his contract with Alixandre after PETA -- People for Ethical Treatment of Animals -- spray-painted his Seventh Avenue showroom.
Among other fashion houses that have foresaken furs after protests are Anne Klein and Donna Karan.


Whitman Calls for Less Secrecy Surrounding Juvenile Offenses
In a move to help courts and law-enforcement agencies better deal with serious juvenile offenders, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman called for legislation today to lessen the secrecy surrounding juvenile criminal records and court proceedings.
The package of administration bills, to be introduced in the Senate on Monday, would increase public access to juvenile records and would allow law-enforcement agencies to share information with other states and Federal agencies, as well as with local school officials.
The bills also would require the fingerprinting of delinquent juveniles for acts "that would constitute crimes if committed by adults." Current law does not require fingerprinting for offenders under age 18.  'Everyone in the Dark'
"It was painfully clear to me that the secret nature of the current system keeps everyone in the dark," Mrs.
Whitman said.
"As they stand, our confidentiality laws serve no one or no purpose."


Cuomo Urges Wider Welfare Fingerprinting
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that the state should expand its experimental program of electronic fingerprinting for welfare recipients to New York City.
Mr.
Cuomo has previously called for an expansion of the anti-fraud program, which is being tested in Rockland and Onondaga Counties.
But he had never specified where else it should be put into effect.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "NO MAN'S LAND," Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
Revival of Harold Pinter's drama about two elderly poets, starring Christopher Plummer and Jason Robards; directed by David Jones.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $50.
Information: (212) 719-9393.
"INNOCENT ERENDIRA," Gramercy Arts, 138 East 27th Street, Gramercy Park.
Drama about a young girl forced into prostitution by her grandmother, based on the novella by Gabriel Garcia Marquez; starring Miriam Colon; directed by Jorge Ali Triana.
Presented by Repertorio Espanol.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $20 and $25.
Information: (212) 889-2850.


Steelers Add Ex-Buccaneer
RAY SEALS, a defensive end who had a team-high eight and a half sacks with Tampa Bay last season, agreed to a three-year, $2.8 million contract with the Pittsburgh Steelers. (AP)


Soweto Journal; De Klerk Takes His Campaign to Terra Incognita
President F. W. de Klerk has practiced his new image on black audiences in rural Zululand, on Transvaal farmworkers bused to their masters' lawns, on bystanders at a black taxi stand.
For two months he has donned tribal hats and chewed roast corn and told desultory crowds, "I'm white, but my heart pumps the same red blood as the red blood in the heart of every South African."


Congressional Roundup; Senate Panel Snips Piece of the Budget
The Senate Budget Committee surprised Democratic leaders by voting 13 to 8 today to cut an extra $23 billion from Mr.
Clinton's proposed five-year, $8.5 trillion spending package.
Although $23 billion is a lot of money, today's vote was every bit as symbolic as substantive.
The budgets are so huge, and the economy so unpredictable, that the impact of the latest cuts, if they survive the remainder of the legislative process, is tough to forecast.


Review/Film; Taking Aim At the Oscars And Others Scantily Clad
There are always priceless moments during the Academy Awards ceremony, those special moments that are impossible to watch with a straight face.
After you've seen the big Oscar parody that is the centerpiece of "Naked Gun 33 1/3: The Final Insult," when the real thing turns up on Monday night it may be hard to tell the difference.
Movies have always been the prime target of the "Naked Gun" series, and this time Lieut.
Frank Drebin (Leslie Nielsen) goes right to the source when he is assigned to thwart a terrorist at the Oscars.
The result is a series of wickedly funny scenes, none better than the production number in which Pia Zadora, playing herself, sings and dances to a brassy Las Vegas arrangement of "This Could Be the Start of Something."
This third installment of the silly and often hilarious send-up of cop cliches is slower to start than the earlier "Naked Gun" movies.
As always, it is a scattershot mix of throwaway lines, topical references and sight gags (a newspaper headline that reads: "Dyslexia for Cure Found").
Drebin is now married to Jane (Priscilla Presley).
She is a hot-shot lawyer and he is retired, so he cooks and hangs around the house.
Mr.
Nielsen sets the tone with his authoritative deadpan approach.
The key to this series' success is the way he maintains his dignified demeanor without winking at the audience, even when he is wearing fuzzy pink slippers.


On Stage, and Off
New Smith Role Model
"I have been interviewed by many people, and I'm self-conscious at this point how people interpret what I'm saying. And that's true simply because so much of what I've said has been taken out of context or simply misunderstood. But in her case, she's such a careful observer of people, that I was self-conscious about being too well understood. I was nervous she would pick up things I was unconscious of, and then show them to me."
The speaker was Lani Guinier, President Clinton's erstwhile nominee for the post of Assistant Attorney General for civil rights.
Her subject was Anna Deavere Smith, whose one-woman show "Fires in the Mirror" replicated the words and manner of witnesses to and participants in the Crown Heights racial disturbances of 1991.


School Censors Violate the Rights of Children
To the Editor:
In "The Censorship Sweepstakes" (editorial, March 10), you say the Southampton middle school's cancellation of a student production of "Peter Pan" is a "tad more defensible" than a related and equally specious California decision to eliminate from statewide 8th and 10th grade English tests writings of Annie Dillard and Alice Walker because the Southampton students are "younger and more impressionable."


Devils' Rookie Outshines Sabre Veteran
The Devils took advantage of the Sabres' average goaltending and shortage of defensemen and breezed to a 6-1 triumph tonight at Memorial Auditorium.
Martin Brodeur, the Devils' rookie goaltender, proved far superior to the veteran Grant Fuhr at the other end.
Brodeur's only slip on the 29 shots he faced was Randy Moller's goal with 5 minutes 7 seconds to play that spoiled Brodeur's bid for his second shutout in a row.


AAR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Chief White House Usher 'Grounded'
The White House refused today to allow the head of the office that runs the Executive Mansion to testify before a Congressional subcommittee whose Republican members had hoped to ask about the abrupt dismissal of a member of his staff.
A White House lawyer contended that the official, Gary Walters, the chief White House usher, had no obligation to appear before Congress because he was a member of President Clinton's personal staff.
But some Republicans on Capitol Hill suggested that the White House may have been motivated by a desire to prevent Congressional scrutiny of the unusual dismissal.


Old Dominion Ousts Manhattan On Foul Shots in Final Seconds
Old Dominion 76; Manhattan 74
Kevin Swann sank four free throws in the final 22 seconds as Old Dominion defeated Manhattan, 76-74, in a first-round National Invitational Tournament in Norfolk, Va.
The Monarchs now face Bradley, a winner Wednesday night over Murray State.


Pilson of CBS Facing Own March Madness
The future of Neal Pilson as the president of CBS Sports will be decided within days.
Rumors that Pilson would be replaced by Joe Abruzzese, CBS's senior vice president of sales, have circulated for more than a week.
"We expect an announcement," Pilson said yesterday.
"I don't know exactly when. If not tomorrow, in a few days." Abruzzese, asked whether he would be Pilson's successor, said: "I have to go to a meeting I'm already late for."


Tektronix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Six Airlines Settle Suit By Government on Fares
The Justice Department settled an antitrust suit today against six major airlines that agreed to changes in a computerized reservation system the Government said was used to fix air fares.
Without admitting or denying the accusation, the airlines -- American Airlines, Delta Air Lines, Continental Airlines, Northwest Airlines, Trans World Airlines and Alaska Airlines -- agreed to end the practice of communicating proposed fare increases to each other through the computerized system maintained by the Airline Tariff Publishing Company.
The company, owned by a group of airlines including the six named in the lawsuit, was also named and agreed to the settlement.


COMPUTERVISION IN DEAL WITH ROLLS-ROYCE AEROSPACE
The Computervision Corporation, based in Bedford, Mass., said yesterday that it had signed a $21.4 million agreement with Britain's Rolls-Royce Aerospace, a contract Computervision said was the largest in its 25-year history.
Rolls-Royce Aerospace will purchase Computervision's Cadds 5 computer-aided design software and Engineering Data Management software, along with consulting services and technical support.
Russell E. Planitzer, the chief executive of Computervision, said the deal could eventually be valued at more than $60 million.


U.S. Approach to Japan: 'Economic Acupuncture'
Having succeeded in its efforts to pressure Japan to open its most lucrative cellular phone market to Motorola Inc., the Clinton Administration plans to keep up the pressure on Tokyo to unilaterally open other markets with a strategy that some disdainfully call "managed trade," but that might best be thought of as "economic acupuncture."
That policy seeks to bring down Japan's trade barriers not with a single, big blow that would destabilize the whole United States-Japan relationship, but instead through a series of carefully targeted pressure points aimed at loosening some of Japan's other tightly constricted markets.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALCATEL SUBMARCOM, Paris, a unit of Alcatel Cable S.A., will share a $128 million contract with Fujitsu Submarine to supply and install a fiber optic undersea telecommunications system linking Thailand, Vietnam and Hong Kong.
GENERAL SIGNAL CORP., Stamford, Conn., a manufacturer of equipment for the process control, electrical and industrial technology industries, announced a program to repurchase up to 3.4 percent, or 1.6 million shares, of its common stock during the next two years.


Confusing Israeli Testimony Poses Possibility of Hebron Accomplice
The possibility that Dr.
Baruch Goldstein had an accomplice in the Hebron massacre arose today in the testimony of Israeli soldiers who had been on guard duty at the mosque where at least 29 Palestinians were gunned down on Feb. 25 while kneeling in prayer.
From the start, the Israeli Army has said Dr.
Goldstein acted alone, even though some Arab victims insist that the Hebron killer, a settler from neighboring Qiryat Arba, had help.


Desert Playground for Rich Is Turf for Racial Gang War
In the last six months, the sting of tear gas in the hot desert air has signaled the arrival of violent racial conflict to this wealthy playland of 10,000 swimming pools and 85 golf courses.
Last October and again last month, groups of black and Hispanic students at Palm Springs High School battled each other, and the police had to use pepper spray to break up the melees.
These days, with tensions still raw, the school has reinforced security, but it is also bringing students together to talk about their problems.


No Headline
"What's going on is that Congress has passed significant employment laws like the Civil Rights Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act, and companies are basically opting out of the law." CLIFF PALEFSKY, a San Francisco lawyer who represents plaintiffs in discrimination cases.  [ A1:6. ]


Review/Film; Buttoned-Down People, Unbuttoned Memories
On an awfully long ocean voyage, two buttoned-down English travelers named Nigel (Hugh Grant) and Fiona (Kristin Scott-Thomas) meet Oscar (Peter Coyote), a determined raconteur.
Getting away from Oscar is impossible, even if it's well worth a walk off the gangplank.
Oscar is determined to pry Nigel away from his spouse and regale him with red-hot memories of Oscar's own rocky romance.
Oscar and Mimi (Emmanuelle Seigner), who is also very conspicuously on board, have had a sufficiently tumultuous time of it to land Oscar in a wheelchair.
One of Oscar's memories is of how Mimi first told him he would be paralyzed.
She had good news and bad news, she said.
The part about the wheelchair?
"That WAS the good news," Mimi told him.
"The bad news is that from now on, I'm taking care of you."


2 Suspects Held in Officer's Slaying


Price Stays On Level of His Own
Nick Price is occupying another plane right now, some astral spot in time where everything about his golf game is in synch, where every drive is in the fairway and every putt is in the hole.
If there were such a thing as a hermetically sealed game, that would be Price's.
At the moment -- and for most moments in the preceding 18 months -- Price, 37, is playing a game with which not many people are the least bit familiar.


REAGAN DELIVERS VOLLEY AT NORTH
Ronald Reagan once called Oliver L. North "a national hero." But now that the onetime national security aide is turning on him in the pursuit of his own political ambitions, the former President is calling him a liar.
Mr.
Reagan was responding to assertions by Mr.
North that he had lied to Congress under the former President's orders.
"I do have to admit that I am getting pretty steamed about the statements coming from Oliver North," Mr.
Reagan said in a letter made public today.
"I never instructed him or anyone in my Administration to mislead Congress on Iran-contra matters or anything else. And I certainly didn't know anything about the Iran-contra diversion."


Benjamin DeLoache, Singer and Teacher, 88
Benjamin Patterson DeLoache, a baritone who was a professor emeritus of voice at the Yale University School of Music, died on Tuesday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 88 and lived in New Haven.
Mr.
DeLoache made his singing debut in 1928 with the Philadelphia Orchestra under Leopold Stokowski.
He later made more than 30 solo appearances with Stokowski, including a leading role in the American premiere of Alban Berg's opera "Wozzeck."


At Home Abroad; A Friend Differs
"I think the United States has wrong-footed itself unnecessarily in its argument with Japan," Prime Minister Paul Keating said.
"If it argues that Japan should open its markets to the rest of the world, having secured so much itself in the multilateral trading system, it cannot lose that argument. But if it then argues that the way to do it is through managed trade and quotas imposed on a market economy, it's bound to lose the argument."


Adversity the Sixth Man For Now-Hot Kentucky
Four of the eight entrants in this Southeast Region lower bracket -- Kentucky, Duke, Marquette and Michigan State -- together have won nine national championships.
There are few strangers here.
No team, however, enters with the hoopla and scrutiny that Kentucky attracts.


With NATO Ready to Strike, U.N. Sought to Warn Serbs
The top United Nations official overseeing peacekeeping operations in Bosnia and Croatia tried to get in touch with Serbian leaders to urge them to move their artillery before approving a NATO air strike against Serbian guns on Saturday, Western diplomats said today.
The attempted warning by Yasuski Akashi, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's representative in the region, has contributed to a stormy debate over whether United Nations command procedures for using air strikes to protect peacekeeping troops are too slow.


Michigan Survives Pepperdine In Overtime
The uncelebrated and relatively undersized Green Wave of Pepperdine came within seconds of pulling off the most stunning upset of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament tonight.
The West Coast Conference team from Malibu, Calif., seeded 14th in the Midwest Regional, took the Wolverines of Michigan, seeded third, into overtime before yielding, 78-74.


Two Arrested In the Slaying Of an Officer
After tracing a parked sports car and the pistol left on its front seat, the New York City police arrested two men and were questioning a third man yesterday in the slaying of a young officer during a robbery that went awry.
The two men arrested on charges of murder were identified as Rodolfo Rodriguez, 20, and Javier Miranda, 27, both of Washington Heights.
Mr.
Rodriguez, a Dominican immigrant who is suspected of firing the fatal shots, had been arrested a few weeks ago and charged with selling cocaine to an undercover agent, the authorities said.
At the time of Tuesday's shooting, he was free on his own recognizance awaiting trial.


Orthodox Jewish Education Doesn't Teach Killing of Innocents
To the Editor:
In "From Orthodox Jewish Education to Hebron" (letter, March 9), Prof.
Shlomo Sternberg asks for a public statement of contrition from Baruch Goldstein's former teachers and principals.
While we all deplore and condemn the senseless murder of innocent individuals -- all created in God's image -- by a person gone mad, we cannot comply with his request for acquiescence in his libel of Orthodox Jewish education.


Review/Film; A Day With the People Who Make the News
It's a busy day for the staff of The New York Sun, the raffish newspaper that is the subject of "The Paper," Ron Howard's strenuously eventful new comedy-drama.
In the 24 hours spanned by the film, the audience witnesses, among other things, one birth, one affair, one shooting and one cancer diagnosis.
To make sure all bases are covered, newspaperwise, there is even one full-throated cry of "Stop the presses!"
Naturally, there's a story behind each of these little epiphanies.
But it is never a story colorful or fresh enough to suit The Sun's supposedly bold, savvy style.
Mr.
Howard trumpets the bighearted boisterousness of this tale without really straying from the calm, predictable waters of his earlier "Backdraft" and "Parenthood," films most memorable for their eagerness to please and near-total lack of individual personality.
Mr.
Howard has a talent for keeping his storytelling on an even keel, but it's not possible to be a yuppie Damon Runyon.


The Phoenix Sends Cal, and Maybe Kidd, Packing
Twice with the game on the line, Jason Kidd left his feet and got nothing.
Now, with his team eliminated from post-season play, Kidd's next move could be to leave college to get millions.
"The media's already put me in the N.B.A., but I'm in no hurry," said college basketball's most celebrated playmaker after the University of California-Berkeley, the fifth-seeded team in the West Regional, was knocked out of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament in the first round by 12th-seeded Wisconsin-Green Bay, 61-57, at the Dee Events Center today.
"I'll go back to school and make my decision."


Review/Opera; Swedish Modern Styling On Verdi's 'Don Carlos'
At least on the surface, the work that the Swedish Folkopera brought to the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday night was Verdi's "Don Carlos." The basic elements of the opera were in place, and at first glance it could almost seem business as usual.
This version of Verdi was not, at any rate, set on Mars or in the backroom of a bordello.
But this was also not really "Don Carlos," and there were times I wasn't sure exactly what it was.
It was as if the interior of a well-known building had been reconstructed while the facade remained the same.
Occasionally the results were jarring, even ludicrous; sometimes they were refreshing.
The performance deserved a few of the boos it received on Wednesday, yet it also merited some of the applause.
It can be seen tonight, tomorrow night and Sunday afternoon by those curious about contemporary transformations of repertory opera.


Celia Yeack-Scranton; I.B.M. Researcher, 42
Dr.
Celia Yeack-Scranton, a physical sciences researcher for the International Business Machines Corporation in San Jose, Calif., died on Monday at the Mission Oaks Hospital in Los Gatos, Calif.
She was 42.
The cause was ovarian cancer, said her husband, Robert Scranton.


Senior Adviser To Clinton Gets Jury Subpoena
A grand jury investigating President Clinton's ties to the Whitewater investigation today subpoenaed George Stephanopoulos, one of the President's closest advisers, to testify.
Meantime, under pressure from Republicans to investigate the Whitewater case, the Senate tonight voted, 98 to 0, to instruct its leaders of both parties to meet to try to arrange public hearings.
The vote does not necessarily mean hearings will take place any time soon.


Defense! Defense! Knicks Net 8th in Row
The Knicks tied a modern-day defensive record and continued their winning streak in the process last night.
Holding an opponent to under 90 points for the eighth consecutive game, the surging Knicks raised their winning streak to a season-high eight by blitzing the Milwaukee Bucks, 105-83, at Madison Square Garden.


Reviews/Film; Godard Orchestrates a Search for Faith
"Helas Pour Moi" is about the search for faith, memory, truth and love: the deep human emotions ordinarily masked by the rigorous intellectual form of Jean-Luc Godard's films.
But here is Mr.
Godard in a strangely lyrical and contemplative mood.
The film opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, with its title awkwardly translated on screen as "Woe Is Me." A better alternative would be "Alas for Me," which captures Mr.
Godard's meditative tone.
Like his 1985 film, "Hail Mary," this new work depicts the possible appearance of the divine in ordinary contemporary lives.
But where "Hail Mary" outraged some Christians by reinventing one of their most sacred myths, here Mr.
Godard plays it safe by reaching back to Greek mythology for his god figure.
The story, he has said, is based partly on the legend in which Zeus impersonated Amphitryon in order to seduce Amphitryon's wife.
In Mr.
Godard's version, Amphitryon is named Simon Donnadieu (Gerard Depardieu).
His wife is Rachel (Laurence Masliah) and the God who borrows Simon's body is a man in a trench coat and slouched hat, with a gravelly voice that holds the rumble of thunder behind it.


Times Plans a Price Increase On Sundays in the Northeast
The New York Times announced yesterday that the suggested newsstand price for The Times on Sundays in the Northeast -- but outside the New York City metropolitan area -- would increase on April 10 to $2.50, from $2.
The price increase affects an area from Maine to Virginia.
In Greater New York, the price will remain $2.


Reviews/Film; 2 Brothers, Identical Except for One Thing
The best way to approach "Suture" is to consider it a witty, stylish goof on psychiatry, identity and murder mysteries.
Elegantly photographed in black-and-white, it may seem to be about blacks, whites and racial bias.
But creating a clever and visually striking surface is the most important issue in the film, the first feature written and directed by Scott McGehee and David Siegel, collaborators with backgrounds in art and design.
The story begins with the eerily calm, authoritative voice of a psychiatrist making pronouncements about identity.
Looking down from above, the camera captures a startling image.
A black man dressed in white stands on one side of a white shower curtain; a white man dressed in black stands on the other.
They are pointing guns at each other.
The flashback story of "Suture" leads full circle, back to this point and beyond.


Diner's Journal
Sweet Smell of Excess
Most of the time a homeless person stands on Madison Avenue near E.A.T.
Cafe.
No wonder.
Who could spend $4.50 for a cup of cappuccino and $5 for a croissant without feeling able to spare a little change?
These outrageous prices do nothing to deter the customers.
Last Sunday morning, a long line of people stood by the deli cases, eager to eat the city's most expensive potato pancakes ($14.50) and egg salad sandwiches ($14).
Although the decor barely deserves the name, the room was filled with an eclectic mix of celebrities, tourists and neighborhood children.


Jets Hire a New Assistant
The Jets have hired a new defensive assistant and given him a weighty task: quality control.
The man assigned to the newly created position is STEVE TRIMBLE, a 35-year-old former professional defensive back who was recruited from the National Football League's coaching fellowship program.


Pogorelich Delays Tour
Because of a finger injury, the pianist Ivo Pogorelich has postponed part of his North American tour, including two recitals at Carnegie Hall.
The recital scheduled for Monday at 8 P.M. is now to take place on May 16; tickets for the original date will be honored.
The March 29 recital will not be rescheduled.
Refund information: (212) 247-7800.


Ross Signs With the Falcons
The Atlanta Falcons agreed to a contract yesterday with defensive back KEVIN ROSS, an unrestricted free agent from the Kansas City Chiefs.
Ross will be paid $4 million over three years, The Atlanta Journal reported. (AP)


Brick Scavenger Is Killed When a Wall Collapses
One of four men who were scavenging bricks -- at 15 cents apiece -- from an abandoned building in the Bronx was killed yesterday when a wall collapsed and crushed him.
The police said that the four men were being paid by a construction company.
It is common in the poorest areas of the city, officials said, for the bricks of abandoned and partially destroyed buildings to be taken for recycling into patios in the suburbs or decorator fireplaces in the city's more expensive neighborhoods.


CHRONICLE
In another part of the forest (Washington), another black-tie crowd was roasting but mostly toasting PAUL DUKE on his retirement after 20 years as moderator of the public television program "Washington Week in Review."
Mr.
Duke's successor, KEN BODE, said that unlike other political talk shows, this one does not stage "verbal food fights."


Giuliani Visits Hospital to Pay Respects to the Lubavitcher Rebbe


Stocks Advance on Good Inflation News
When the stock market got a third day of good economic news yesterday, traders fought their tendency to ferret out the specter of inflation in even the cheeriest reports.
Instead, they bid up all the leading stock indexes, and the smaller-company Nasdaq composite index set a record.
Economically sensitive stocks like Caterpillar and Alcoa, as well as oil and chemical companies like Exxon and Du Pont, rose.
Technology stocks like Tele-Communications, Oracle and Lotus, helped lift the Nasdaq index.


Bonuses Triple for Chrysler Officials
After a year of soaring sales, stock prices and spirits at the Chrysler Corporation, the company more than tripled bonuses for its top executives, according to a proxy statement made public today.
Robert J. Eaton, Chrysler's chairman and chief executive, received a bonus of $1.9 million in 1993, up from $575,000 in 1992.
For the year, he earned $6.79 million in salary, bonus, stock awards and stock options.
In addition, Mr.
Eaton exercised stock options in the company worth another $4.47 million.


Rupert Bruce-Mitford Dies at 79; Expert on Saxon Ruin in England
Rupert Bruce-Mitford, a British archeologist who was an expert on the seventh-century archeological site at Sutton Hoo, in southeastern England, died on March 10 at John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford, England.
He was 79 and lived in Bampton, near Oxford.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Silcorp Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 26


Corrections
An article on March 8 about President Clinton's defense of his wife against accusations of interference in the Whitewater investigation rendered one of his remarks incorrectly.
He said, "If everybody in this country had a character as strong as hers, we wouldn't have half the problems we've got today." (He did not say "half as strong.")


With Subpoena Power, Cuomo Goes After Millions in Nickels
Stepping up his 10-year crusade to recover millions of unclaimed nickel deposits on unredeemed bottles and cans, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he would use special subpoena power to audit the books of the state's beverage industry.
Five years ago Mr.
Cuomo created a special investigative commission, referred to in law as a Moreland commssion, to investigate how the beverage industry was using the estimated $70 million a year it took in from unclaimed deposits.
Mr.
Cuomo says the industry has kept $800 million in unclaimed deposits since the bottle-deposit law went into effect in 1983.


Phillips-Van Heusen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Leucadia National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Count Tyson of Monte Cristo?
For most people, prison becomes a lifetime revolving door, a grim and brutal ritual from which nothing of value is learned.
For a precious few, though, confinement begins a journey similar to the one that transformed an illiterate, two-bit hustler named Detroit Red into the charismatic and richly literate public figure who was Malcolm X.
As Malcolm X wrote in his autobiography, the journey began with words: ". . . as my word-base broadened, I could for the first time pick up a book and read and now begin to understand what the book was saying. Anyone who has read a great deal can imagine the new world that opened."


New York Players Advance in Bridge
Two players from the New York area survived a cliffhanger Wednesday in the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championships at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals here, but face an uphill task today.
Ron Gerard of White Plains and Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan are teamed with Norman Kay of Narberth, Pa., Sidney Lazard of New Orleans and George Steiner of Seattle.
In the quarterfinal they trailed by 9 international match points going into the final 16-deal quarter, and snatched a victory by 3.


Art in Review
Dieter Appelt
Sander Gallery  19 East 76th Street  Manhattan  Through April 30
Duration and decay are persistent themes in Dieter Appelt's photographs.
Mr.
Appelt, an influential teacher in Berlin, often uses exposures that are hours long in an attempt to record the effects of the passage of time.


Restaurants
Why are there so many bad Chinese restaurants in New York? Blame it on the politicians.
The first wave of immigrants from Southern China came to this country from the Pearl River Delta in 1848.
The earliest to arrive were men who went to work in the gold mines, on the railroads and on farms, intending to send for their families once their fortunes were made.


About a Zulu King, Yet Not a Zulu Novel
To the Editor:
In "Papuans and Zulus" (Op-Ed, March 10), Saul Bellow misidentifies Thomas Mofolo's "Chaka" as a "Zulu novel." It is no more this than Anthony Burgess's "Napoleon Symphony" is a French novel.
Although Mofolo's book is about a Zulu king, it was written in Sesotho around 1909 and translated into English in the 1930's.


Butler Int'l(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Seikaly and Heat Stay Red-Hot  Rony Seikaly had 28 points, 14 rebounds and 4 blocked shots last night to lead the Miami Heat past the visiting Dallas Mavericks, 115-98.
With the victory, the Heat remained the National Basketball Association's hottest team, extending its record to 13-3 since the All-Star Game break.
Miami has won 3 in a row and 11 of the last 13.
Glen Rice scored 24 points and Brian Shaw added 13 points and 11 assists.
It was the Mavericks' 10th straight loss.
Jimmy Jackson led Dallas with 25 points, while Tim Legler added 17 points off the bench. (AP) SuperSonics 107, Timberwolves 92: In Minneapolis, Shawn Kemp had 21 points, 14 rebounds and 4 steals to lead Seattle over Minnesota.
With the victory, the SuperSonics became the first team to clinch a playoff berth.
Seattle has the N.B.A.'s best overall record (46-16) and best road record (21-12). (AP) Rockets 112, Warriors 99: Vernon Maxwell scored 25 points to lead Houston to the victory at home over Golden State.
Three of his teammates had double-doubles: Otis Thorpe had 21 points and 21 rebounds, Hakeem Olajuwon 19 points and 14 rebounds, and Robert Horry 15 points and 10 rebounds. (AP) N.H.L.
Penguins Again Master Bruins  Jaromir Jagr and Martin Straka scored on breakaways as visiting Pittsburgh defeated Boston, 4-2, last night, the Penguins' eighth straight victory over the Bruins.
The victory moved Pittsburgh into a tie with Boston for second place in the Northeast Division.
Both teams are 2 points behind the Montreal Canadiens with 13 games left in the regular season. (AP) Nordiques 4, Sabres 1: In Quebec, Garth Butcher and Mike Ricci scored short-handed goals to help Quebec stretch its unbeaten string to seven games with the victory over Hartford.
Bob Bassen, who opened the scoring midway in the first period, and Aleksei Gusarov, with an empty-netter in the last minute, had the other goals for the Nordiques, who are 5-0-2 in their last seven games.
Quebec moved within 5 points of Florida, which holds the eighth and final playoff position in the Eastern Conference.
The Nordiques have 14 games to play, one fewer than the Panthers. (AP) GOLF  Five Early Birdies for Baird  Butch Baird birdied five of the first six holes yesterday and shot a six-under-par 65 to lead after the first round of the $100,000 Senior Series tournament in Galveston, Tex.
Baird, with eight birdies and one double-bogey, leads Dick Hendrickson and Randy Glover by one stroke.
Hendrickson's round included one of eight eagles recorded on the 6,296-yard Galveston Country Club course.
The winner of the 54-hole event, which ends tomorrow, receives $15,000. (AP) Keggi Leads L.P.G.A.
Event: Caroline Keggi, who contracted the E-Coli bacteria from drinking water at this tournament last year, shot a six-under-par 67 to take a one-stroke lead after one round of the L.P.G.A.
Standard Register Ping in Phoenix.
She tied for 31st in this event in 1993, then bottomed out because of the illness and her reaction to an antibiotic.
In all, she entered 25 tournaments and won only $29,411.
Yesterday, Keggi had seven birdies and one bogey in the first 11 holes.
Sharing second at 68 were Connie Chillemi, Kelly Robbins and Val Skinner. (AP) EUROPEAN BASKETBALL  Greek Teams in Semifinals  Panathinaikos of Athens beat defending champion Limoges of France, 87-73, and Olympiakos of Piraeus defeated Buckler of Bologna, 65-62, yesterday to advance to the semifinals of the European championships in Athens.
In the semifinals, to be played April 19-21 at Tel Aviv, the two Greek teams will face each other, before two Spanish teams, Barcelona and Juventud Badalona, play.
Panathinaikos's 37-year-old playmaker, Nick Galis, formerly of Seton Hall, scored 30 points.
Michael Young scored 20 for Limoges. (AP) BOWLING  Oakes Leads Long Island Open  Bill Oakes won seven of eight matches last night to take the lead after four rounds of the Professional Bowlers Association $140,000 Leisure's Long Island Open in Sayville.
Oakes, of Lawton, Okla., is trying to win his first title in his sixth year on tour.
He had a high game of 279 on his way to a total pinfall of 6,266.
Del Ballard Jr. is second with 6,209 total pins.
Ed Richardson is third (6,192), David Traber is fourth (6,115), and the P.B.A.
Hall of Famer Nelson Burton Jr. is fifth with a 6,105 pinfall. (AP)


Eagle Food Centers Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Review/Film Festival: Normal People Are Nothing Special; Directors Series Opens on a Note Of Raw Emotion
EACH year at this time, the New Directors/New Films series invites New York's dedicated film audience to test its foresight.
And it's best to bring hindsight to the task.
Look backward, and you'll see how solidly this series is supported by its own track record.
Recent selections have included "Proof," "Slacker," "Orlando," "The Living End," "The Music of Chance" and "Metropolitan," to name only a few of the festival's most auspicious finds.
Part of the challenge is guessing which new films will take their place in this distinguished lineup and which will be more like "A Wopbopaloobop a Lopbamboom." (That was a grim 1990 selection from Luxembourg, a film with no relation to whatever Little Richard had in mind when he coined the phrase.) Whether each New Directors film is headed for glory or oblivion, it's likely to arrive here with little advance word and even less other baggage.
The viewer is encouraged to take chances, and why not?
This is pot luck of a high order.


Gant to Receive 30 Days' Pay
The Atlanta Braves say they will pay RON GANT $901,639.20, or 30 days' termination pay, rather than trying to pay him none of his $5.5 million contract.
When the Braves released the injured outfielder Tuesday, the team president, STAN KASTEN, said the owners' Players Relations Committee advised the team not to pay at all.
The Braves could have argued that Gant, who broke his right leg in a dirt bike accident Feb. 3, violated his contract by placing himself at risk.
But Kasten said yesterday that advice was rejected. (AP)


Clinton Decides Not to Nominate Solarz to Be Ambassador to India
After months of delay and conflicting reports, the White House told former Representative Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn that President Clinton would not nominate him as Ambassador to India and Mr.
Solarz withdrew his name, he and senior Administration aides said today.
Senior Administration officials said the President instead intends to nominate Frank G. Wisner, the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy and a senior career diplomat who has been ambassador to Egypt and to the Philippines, for the post in New Delhi, which has been empty for a year.


Automation Off Course in Denver
If all BAE Automated Systems had to do was design a system to whiz luggage around a suburban warehouse here, with a whir and a clicketyclack, its record would be perfect.
Or if it had to handle 100 bags a minute, as it does for United Airlines in San Francisco, it would have suffered no embarrassments.
But in Denver, BAE is now struggling to coax 4,000 automated baggage carts run by 100 computers and a web of motors and radio transponders into carrying 1,400 bags a minute.
Several weeks ago, in a test of what will be the nation's largest baggage handling system, bags went flying, tumbling and bursting open, with some sliced in half -- that is, when the system consented to run at all.
Fortunately, the bags did not belong to anyone.
Airport Opening Delayed
As a result, the new Denver airport failed last week to meet its planned opening, which had already been delayed from October because of changes in plans among other reasons.
Airlines that have financed the $3.2 billion airport estimate their losses in the tens of millions of dollars.


A James Bond With $100 Tries Out a Tribal Casino
THERE I was studying the seven cards that had been dealt me in Pai Gow poker.
No, I was not in some sinister dive in Macao.
I was in the cheery, one might even say wholesome, environs of the Foxwoods Resort and Casino in Ledyard, Conn., trying to project aplomb and savoir faire as my two $5 chips lay at risk on the green felt table before me.
In fact, I had no idea what I was doing.


School Censors Violate the Rights of Children; Yes, in Virginia, Too
To the Editor:
Re "The Censorship Sweepstakes" (editorial, March 10): Please do not leave Virginia out of your hall of infamy.
Fairfax County, the richest per capita in the country, also appears to be among the least enlightened, judging by their treatment of my 1981 children's book, "Families."


Arafat Says Safety Must Precede Talks; Rabin Assures Palestinians
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said today that Israel felt a "moral commitment" to protect Palestinians living under occupation.
But at a news conference after he met here with Pope John Paul II, Mr.
Rabin gave no indication of any new plans to meet Palestinian demands for greater security in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The P.L.O. has become more vociferous about security since a Jewish settler killed at least 29 Muslims in Hebron, in the West Bank, on Feb. 25.


Sony Executive to Head Paramount Units
Viacom Inc. today named Jonathan L. Dolgen, a motion picture and television executive with a reputation as a steely negotiator and tough businessman, to run the movie and television divisions of Paramount.
The announcement was made by Sumner M. Redstone, chairman of Viacom, and Frank J. Biondi Jr., the president and chief executive.
Four weeks ago, Viacom survived a five-month battle with QVC Network Inc. and took over Paramount Communications Inc. in a $9.7 billion deal.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on March 10 about Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr., the retired Navy admiral who is a director of several companies, misstated the political affiliation of Harry F. Byrd Jr., the Virginia Senator whom the admiral unsuccessfully sought to unseat in 1976.
Senator Byrd was an independent at the time, not a Republican.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 30 about the National Arts Club and a dispute among tenants at the club's building on Gramercy Park misidentified the club's founder.
According to the National Cyclopaedia of American Biography, the club was proposed and founded by Charles de Kay, a poet and the literary and art critic for The New York Times, not by Stanford White and Henry Clay Frick.
A descendant of Mr. de Kay telephoned The Times shortly after the article was published, but the correction was delayed because of the writer's four-week absence and because of communication lapses between the writer and editors.


TV Confession Is Seen As Lawyer's Strategy
Before Ricardo S. Caputo turned himself in to the police nine days ago, claiming that he killed four women in the 1970's, he spent two hours with a television correspondent and a network camera crew, describing the voices and premonitions that he said drove him to murder.
It was a big scoop: Mr.
Caputo has spoken to no reporters since his arrest at the end of the interview.


Green to Spare for a Sunny St. Patrick's Parade
The sunshine danced like laughter on the shiny surfaces of Manhattan buildings, but the prickly wind turned the knees of the pipers in kilts a cruel shade of pink.
Everything that goes with a St.
Patrick's Day in New York City was there in emerald abundance, but the day was somehow different.
Certainly all the standards were there on what organizers say was the 233d organized celebration of the fifth-century saint who brought Christianity to Ireland.
There were men with green beards, babies with green teddy bears, women with shamrocks bouncing wildly from springs attached to their heads.
There were breakfasts of black pudding and Irish coffee, strutting pompon girls, prayers in St.
Patrick's Cathedral and scores of more modest shrines.


Martha Rogers, 79, An Author of Books On Nursing Theory
Dr.
Martha E. Rogers, a nursing administrator at New York University for 20 years who helped establish nursing as a profession with responsibilities apart from traditional medical care, died on Sunday at her home in Phoenix.
She was 79.
She died of pulmonary failure complicated by emphysema, said her brother-in-law, J. Paul Coleman of Johnson City, Tenn.


Mac Frugal's Bargains-Close-Outs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Dowbrands Europe In Consolidation
Dowbrands Europe, an arm of Dowbrands Inc. that makes consumer products like Glad trash bags and Ziploc food storage bags in Valbonne, France, said yesterday that it had consolidated its pan-European account at TBWA International in Paris.
The account, with billings estimated at $10 million, was previously divided among TBWA's office in Madrid and two other agencies, Ata Tonic in Milan, Italy, and BDDP Group in Boulogne, France.
TBWA was awarded the account over the other two finalists, BDDP and Groupe FCA in Paris.


Carlos Jacott; Restaurateur, 69
Carlos Jacott, owner of the popular Mexican restaurant El Parador Cafe in mid-Manhattan for 32 years, died last Saturday in New York University Medical Center.
He was 69 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was leukemia, his family said.


METRO DIGEST
INSURER MISLED EXAMINERS, REPORT SAYS
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield repeatedly obstructed state insurance examiners and tried to mislead them about the company's operations and finances, said a report made public by the New York State Insurance Department.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


RUSSIAN ECONOMY HAS I.M.F. CHECKUP
A crucial visit to Moscow this week by the head of the International Monetary Fund comes at an awkward time for the Russian Government.
Three months into 1994, it has no approved budget and no political strategy for dealing with a backlog of economic problems that include a continuing production slump, a mounting internal debt and a wobbly hold on inflation.
Thus, Michel Camdessus, the fund's managing director, who arrived here today, will have few guideposts to help him decide whether Russia qualifies for a second loan of $1.5 billion from the fund and if negotiations for a long-term, standby agreement can begin in earnest.


President of Cornell Plans To Retire by Next Year
The president of Cornell University, Frank H. T. Rhodes, who oversaw a major expansion of the university as well as one of the largest fund-raising campaigns ever undertaken by an American university, announced his retirement yesterday.
Dr.
Rhodes, 67, the longest-serving Ivy League president, said he would leave office by June 30, 1995.
He said he had planned to retire earlier but stayed on to make sure that Cornell's $1.25 billion fund-raising campaign, begun in 1990, reached its goal.
His retirement announcement coincided with the university's announcement that the campaign had reached the $1 billion mark ahead of schedule.


Oppenheimer &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Kemper Board Rebuffs G.E. On $2.2 Billion Takeover Bid
The board of the Kemper Corporation formally rejected the General Electric Company's $2.2 billion takeover bid today, as expected.
But analysts said the rebuff was just a prelude to further negotiations, a higher offer and an eventual deal -- if not with G.E., then with another acquirer.
Kemper's rejection of the unsolicited $55-a-share offer was conveyed in a blunt letter faxed from David B. Mathis, Kemper's chairman and chief executive, to John F. Welch Jr., his counterpart at G.E.
Mr.
Mathis stressed Kemper's desire to remain an independent stock brokerage, life insurance and asset management company and accused G.E. of trying to steal Kemper with a "low-ball proposal."


Art in Review
Lorna Simpson  'Standing in Water'
Through March 25  Sam Gilliam  'Golden Element Inside Gold'
Through July 1  Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris  120 Park Avenue, at 42d Street


U.S. Plans Overhaul on Secrecy, Seeking to Open Millions of Files
At President Clinton's instruction, the National Security Council has drafted an order that would overhaul Government secrecy rules, make public tens of millions of classified documents from the cold war and reduce the number of new secret records, Government officials said today.
The order would create the least secretive policy on Government records since the birth of the modern national security apparatus in 1947.


Rotten Reasons For Tunnel Stench
In the heat of summer, there was a foul stench and clouds of flies around the mouth of the Holland Tunnel in Jersey City.
The source of the problem has just been found, and it is not for the weak of stomach.
Health inspectors and city officials entered an abandoned warehouse yesterday and found scores of dead rats -- along with many living cousins -- and piles of fish that had lain there, rotting, for 19 months.


Christopher Is Drawing Fire In Washington on China Visit
Secretary of State Warren Christopher's trip to Beijing has come under attack from inside and outside the Administration, both for its timing and for the way Chinese officials publicly humiliated him as he tried to lecture them on human rights.
Hoping to silence his critics, who include senior officials at the White House and the Treasury and Commerce Departments, Mr.
Christopher took the offensive today at a House Appropriations subcommittee meeting.
He said canceling his trip to Beijing after China's arrest of more than a dozen dissidents would have been a "grave error."


SOME EMPLOYEES LOSE RIGHT TO SUE FOR BIAS AT WORK
Prompted largely by fears that Federal juries will grant large monetary awards in bias cases, more and more companies are requiring their employees to submit claims of discrimination, including sexual harassment, to binding arbitration.
Some companies are unilaterally imposing the restriction on their nonunion employees, while others are insisting that job applicants forfeit their right to sue as a condition of employment.
Still other companies are making such an agreement a condition for promotion, stock options or other benefits.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
3.05
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.44
3.51
2.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.76
3.77
3.01
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.40
6.36
5.89
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.82
6.80
6.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.67
7.65
7.73
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.96
5.98
5.98
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Try Capsules, Not Medicinal Marijuana
To the Editor:
As a longtime researcher on the effects of marijuana and its principal active ingredient, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, or THC, on the lungs, I reply to a Feb. 16 article on marijuana as medicine and "Making the Pain Go Away" (editorial, March 4).


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Optioned Joe Randa and Joe Vitiello, infielders, and Les Norman, outfielder, to Omaha of the American Association, and Jeff Granger, pitcher; Lance Jennings and Chad Strickland, catchers; Gary Caraballo and Shane Halter, infielders; and Darren Burton, outfielder, to Memphis of the Southern League.
Sent Mike Loynd, pitcher, and Ed Caceres, infielder, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.


CHRONICLE
The wilderness writer PETER MATTHIESSEN ventured into the untamed Terrace Room of the Plaza Hotel on Wednesday night, where he was set upon by a pack of his natural predators (other writers) in evening clothes.
The occasion was the third annual Rainforest Alliance Champion Award Dinner and Roast.
Led by GEORGE PLIMPTON, Mr.
Matthiessen's attackers, among them WILLIAM STYRON and E. L. DOCTOROW, went straight for their quarry's weak spots, including his tennis game.


For 2 Slaying Suspects, Quiet Lives, Odd Hours
The two young men charged yesterday with the murder of Police Officer Sean McDonald migrated to New York City from the Caribbean not long ago in search of opportunity, and they ended up in the perilous streets of Washington Heights, where drugs and guns are as common as the throbbing beat of salsa.
Interviews yesterday with acquaintances and landlords indicated that the suspects, Rodolfo Rodriguez, 20, and Javier Miranda, 27, both came from the Dominican Republic, but neither was known to have relatives in the city, and they rented cheap rooms in buildings about five blocks apart.


Leon Schaefler, 90, A Manhattan Lawyer
Leon Schaefler, who practiced law in Manhattan for more than six decades, died last Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 90 years old.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.


Art in Review
Chris Burden
Gagosian Gallery  136 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through April 2
Like many of his younger colleagues, Chris Burden assumes the perspective of a child in his commentarial art.
A few years ago, he filled a room with hundreds of toy-size submarines suspended from threads to illustrate a statistic of military spending; more recently, in "Medusa," he created an immense globe covered with model trains to suggest a world overrun by ecological catastrophe.
Sometimes the ideas work, sometimes they don't.
The delicacy of the ships gave an unexpected spin to their message, but the jeremiad of "Medusa" was too obvious to warrant all the fuss.


At the Bar; Spot quiz: What are you punished for as a schoolchild but not as a lawyer?
Before becoming a lawyer, Andrew Spark sold time shares in Florida condominiums.
It was a nasty business, one reminiscent of David Mamet's "Glengarry Glen Ross," and it left Mr.
Spark sensitive about consumer fraud.
That, he says, is why he recently sent Theodore Eastmoore, president of the Young Lawyers Division of the Florida bar, a letter reflecting intergenerational tension among lawyers.
"I am writing to you about what I and many other young lawyers consider to be a serious and increasingly problematic practice against which the Young Lawyers Division should take a stand," wrote Mr.
Spark, who, like Mr.
Eastmoore, works in Sarasota.
"Specifically, I am writing about the practice of senior attorneys taking credit for work performed by junior attorneys."


INSIDE
New Grazing Plan Is Issued
A new Administration proposal would double grazing fees and protect the environment on hundreds of millions of acres of Western lands.
Page B6.
Russia May Join Club
Russian officials say they are considering seeking membership in a new loose alliance being formed with NATO and Eastern Europe.
Page A8.
Reagan Calls North a Liar
President Ronald Reagan, who once called Oliver L. North "a national hero," is now calling his onetime national security aide a liar.
Page A16.
Quiet Attack on Welfare Plan
Officials drafting the Clinton welfare plan are being hit with a behind-the-scenes campaign by close friends in the antipoverty world.
Page A18.
Solarz Is Not India-Bound
Washington told former Representative Stephen J. Solarz that he would not be nominated as ambassador to India, and he withdrew.
Page A14.


The Spoken Word
"CROSS-GENERATIONAL VIEWS OF FEMINISM: A CONTINUING DIALOGUE," Fulcrum Gallery, 144 Mercer Street, SoHo.
A discussion featuring Barbara Aubin, Kara Lynch, Duston Spear and Lisa Bateman, artists; Susan Grabel, a sculptor, and others.
Tonight at 8.
Admission: $4.
Part of the "Artists Talk on Art" series.
Information: (212) 385-2862.
"HOLLYWOOD AND THE FRENCH NEW WAVE," Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
A series of screenings and discussions on the relationship between classic Hollywood films and French New Wave films.
Sunday at 12:30 P.M.: Alfred Hitchcock's "Strangers on a Train" (1951) and Claude Chabrol's "Bonnes Femmes" (1960); with David Sterritt, author of "The Films of Alfred Hitchcock." Fee: $6, which includes museum admission.
Information: (718) 638-5000.


U.S. Extends British Air's Tie to USAir
The Government today granted a one-year extension of a code-sharing agreement between USAir and British Airways that combines the reservations systems of the two carriers, and makes joint marketing easier.
The decision is a boon to the financially troubled United States airline, as well as to the British carrier, which has invested $400 million in USAir and seeks to expand its operations in the United States.
Under a treaty between Washington and London, British Airways has landing rights at 16 cities in the United States.
The code-sharing agreement gives the carrier connections with 250 more cities served by USAir.


Congressional Roundup; House Defeats Plan to Outlaw Budget Deficit
The House today rejected a proposed constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget after the turn of the century.
Supporters fell 12 votes short of the two-thirds majority required for a constitutional amendment in the 271-to-153 vote.
Only one Republican, Benjamin A. Gilman of Middletown, N.Y., voted against it, along with 151 Democrats and the House's only independent, Representative Bernard Sanders of Vermont.
Ninety-nine Democrats and 172 Republicans voted for it.


Skating Association Schedules Hearing in June on Harding
The United States Figure Skating Association has tentatively decided to proceed with a disciplinary hearing against Tonya Harding in late June, even though the skater resigned from the skating association as part of her plea bargain agreement with Oregon authorities.
The association's nine-member executive committee convened via a telephone conference call today to discuss a number of issues regarding Harding, including its position should Harding seek reinstatement, according to Claire Ferguson, president of the skating association.
A Question of Money
Preliminary discussions were also held about whether the organization should seek to recover $50,000 in legal fees accrued in the Harding case, Ferguson said.
The association may also seek to recoup training funds if it was determined that Harding used them improperly.


Fairer Schooling for Michigan
This week citizens of Michigan voted courageously to toss out decades of tradition in public school financing.
It is the first statewide, voluntary shift away from property taxes, as a rising national chorus of disgruntled homeowners and civil rights activists seek more equitable ways to provide one of society's most basic services.
Education in America has traditionally been seen as a local concern.
Hence the reliance on property taxes, which are also less vulnerable to economic fluctuations, to finance school systems.


Harding Plea Bargain Is Called a Time-Saver
The prosecutor in the Nancy Kerrigan assault case said yesterday that despite evidence that might have convicted Tonya Harding on more serious charges, justice was served by offering her a plea bargain arrangement on a single felony count of interfering with the prosecution.
"Her indictment would have led to a prolonged, disruptive media frenzy that would have tied up the court and this office for a year," Norman W. Frink, the deputy district attorney for Multnomah County in Portland, Ore., said in a telephone interview.
"And at the end of the day, that might not have achieved more than this plea."


Oryx Energy to Sell Oilfields and Cut 20% of Work Force
The Oryx Energy Company said yesterday that it planned to sell half of its domestic oilfields and cut its work force by 20 percent.
As a result, the company said it would take a $103 million charge against its first-quarter earnings.
Oryx's actions come at a time when crude oil prices remain depressed and many United States oil companies are curtailing spending on domestic oilfields in favor of overseas projects where costs are lower and prospects are more appealing.


For Friars, the Big East Is Setup for the Big Fall
After a scrappy performance last weekend to win the Big East tournament and an automatic bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, Providence went down hard to Alabama tonight in a first-round game at the Southeast Regional at Rupp Arena.
The No. 8-seeded Friars were upset by No. 9 seeded Alabama by 76-70.
The Crimson Tide (20-9) will play Purdue (27-4) on Saturday.
The Boilermakers advanced with a 98-67 victory over the University of Central Florida.
Kansas (26-7), which defeated Tennessee-Chattanooga by 102-73, will meet Wake Forest.
The Demon Deacons (21-11) advanced by defeating the College of Charleston by 68-58.


Books of The Times; On Another List: Scholars Saved From the Nazis
In the United States and elsewhere, there were daring "Schindlers" who also kept lists.
In different ways, far-sighted Americans rescued thousands of victims of the Third Reich's assault on the minds of people in every profession.
Although few of these Americans risked their lives, they were often maligned by their own countrymen.
On the eve of World War II, their humanitarian efforts met surprising resistance in the State Department and even in some universities.
The Johnson list was probably the most valuable.
Alvin Johnson, the intrepid director of the New School for Social Research in Manhattan, saved nearly 200 European scholars from the Nazis.
Many of these refugees later became indispensable Americans.
Some of their activities have been touched upon before in biographies and documentary films, but what "Intellectuals in Exile" usefully provides is historical perspective from the German as well as the American side of the story.


Congressional Roundup; Crimes Bill Grows Longer and Longer
After two days of debate, the House Judiciary Committee approved 13 crime bills and a flurry of amendments tonight and sent the package to the full House, which is to consider it on Wednesday.
The provisions included allowing the prosecution of 13-year-olds as adults for certain crimes and applying the death penalty in spying cases like that in which Aldrich H. Ames was accused of being a double agent.


Review/Film; When a Girl Seeks Out Her Father and Finds Two
Shot in Brooklyn and Manhatttan, "The Girl in the Watermelon" is loaded with local flavor and with the wry comic sense of its heroine, a smart 17-year-old named Samantha Mayerofsky.
Sam carries a battered copy of Freud in her backpack, is inspired by typical adolescent anger at her mother and is engaged in a search for her missing father.
Part Freud and part sitcom, "The Girl in the Watermelon" is also deft enough to turn its hackneyed subjects into a charming, up-to-the-minute urban fairy tale.
The film will be shown tonight and tomorrow as part of the New Directors/ New Films series at the Museum of Modern Art.
Sam's mother, Diane, is still young and about to marry a man her daughter calls the Toad.
When an outraged Sam peeks into Diane's diary from 1976, she learns that her father might not be Samuel Mayerofsky, whose photograph she worships and who died in a motorcycle accident before Sam was born.
It seems there are two other paternal candidates she has never heard of.
She writes to both men.
In true fantasy fashion, the post office and good fortune both work to her advantage, and she finds them.


Settlement Reached In Sex-Bias Lawsuit
A researcher who had sued Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx for sex discrimination announced today that she had reached a $900,000 settlement in the case.
The researcher, Dr.
Heidi S. Weissmann, a former associate professor of radiology at Einstein, called the settlement "a bittersweet victory" that should alert other medical schools and hospitals that they could pay a high price for tolerating discrimination against women and scientific misconduct.


Fed Watchers Foresee Further Rate Increases
Despite favorable inflation numbers this week, most Federal Reserve watchers still expect the next rise in short-term rates to come right around next week's meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.
If the Fed does not move on Tuesday, the day of the meeting of its policy-making group, a jump in short-term interest rates will come by the end of the month or early in April, the analysts said.


Roger A. Chaufournier; World Bank Executive, 70
Roger A. Chaufournier, a former regional vice president of the World Bank in Washington, died on Tuesday at his home in Potomac, Md.
He was 70.
He died of cancer, said his daughter, Stephanie Chaufournier of Manhattan.


Nortek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Micron Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3


Accounts
*
Luigino's Inc., Duluth, Minn., to Hal Riney &amp; Partners Inc., Chicago, to handle advertising for its Michelina's pasta and sauce brands, previously handled on a project basis by Pedone &amp; Partners, New York.
Billings were estimated to exceed $5 million. *
M/I Schottenstein Homes Inc., Columbus, Ohio, to Hameroff/Milenthal/Spence, Columbus, to handle its account, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


Samuel Perry, 53, Psychoanalyst Honored for AIDS Studies, Is Dead
Dr.
Samuel Wesley Perry 3d, a Manhattan psychoanalyst noted for his studies of the mental aspects of illness and injury, including burns and AIDS, died on Tuesday at his home in Tenafly, N.J.
He was 53 years old.
The cause of death was pancreatic cancer, said his wife, Anna.


Corrections
A chart on Feb. 28 examining New York's municipal work force, and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposed cuts in it, mislabeled one entry in a table showing employment per capita in selected categories in the nation's largest cities.
The category in which New York has 6.8 workers per 1,000 population is public transit, not transportation.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The cost of Prudential Securities' regulatory settlement of fraud charges involving limited partnership sales could potentially more than double because of a recent decision involving the compensation fund established in that agreement.  [ Page D1. ]


Rebel Leader Says Zapatistas Won't Disarm Yet
Disputing the Government's optimism about the prospects for a quick end to the peasant uprising in southern Mexico, the military commander of the insurgents says they will refuse to lay down their arms until at least after a new President is elected in August.
In an interview early Wednesday at a rebel-held village in the Lacandon rainforest, the guerrilla leader known as Subcommander Marcos suggested strongly that his Zapatista National Liberation Army would reject the peace agreement offered by the Government this month.


Dr. Martin Panzer, 68, Teacher and Physician
Dr.
Martin Panzer, a family doctor who practiced medicine in Massapequa, L.I., for 35 years, died on Wednesday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
Until last year, when he moved to Palm Beach, Fla., Dr.
Panzer lived in Massapequa Park.
He was 68.
The cause was a coronary occulusion, said his daughter, Susan Panzer.


Prudential Liability May Go Up
The cost of Prudential Securities' $371 million regulatory settlement of fraud charges involving limited partnership sales could potentially more than double because of a recent technical decision involving the compensation fund established in that agreement, regulators said yesterday.
But Prudential executives disagreed, saying that the decision, involving the residual values of partnerships still held by investors, would cost the firm substantially less than $100 million, and probably less than $25 million.


WAR CRIMES TRIAL OPENS IN FRANCE
With relatives of Jews deported to Nazi death camps demonstrating outside the courthouse, Paul Touvier took his place inside a bulletproof glass booth here today and became the first Frenchman to go on trial for crimes against humanity committed during World War II.
The frail, balding 78-year-old, who served in a pro-Nazi militia during the German occupation of France, has been charged with ordering the execution of seven Jews in the Lyons suburb of Rillieux on June 29, 1944.
If found guilty, he faces a maximum punishment of life imprisonment.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Monday about the distribution of cable television channels characterized the business performance of the Television Food Network incorrectly.
The channel began operating in November with six million subscribers, the third-largest number for the start-up of any cable channel.
It was not among a group of channels that began operating with far fewer subscribers.


New York Accuses Employer Of Underpaying and Bribery
The owner and a project manager of a construction company frequently used by New York City agencies were arrested for underpaying workers and for trying to bribe a city official who found out, District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan said yesterday.
The owner, Rey J. Nieto, won dozens of contracts over the last five years from various city agencies, which set aside some of their contracts for minority-owned businesses, by arguing that he is Hispanic and that he hired mostly Hispanic workers, investigators said.


Review/Theater; The Beatles, All of Them, With Elvis And Liberace
An Elvis sighting on West 44th Street. Liberace, too. And the Beatles, together again.
Specifically, Elvis, Lee and the Fab Four are to be found at the Belasco Theater, where the Famous People Players are practicing their lively, colorful brand of black magic in a show called, appropriately enough, "A Little More Magic."


School Censors Violate the Rights of Children; Ban Stowe's Novel?
To the Editor:
I was dismayed to read your March 8 report that a middle school in Southampton, L.I., had canceled a production of "Peter Pan" as insulting to Indians.
Sherry Blakey-Smith, director of the Southampton School District's Indian Education Program, tipped her hand when she defiantly asserted, "We wouldn't do 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' in a school."


Commercial Metals Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Inside Art
Magic Carpet
The Metropolitan Museum of Art is losing an important treasure in its Islamic galleries: a late-16th- or early-17th-century medallion carpet on loan to the museum from Prince Paul Francois Roman Sanguszko.
Known as the Sanguszko Carpet, it is 19 feet 6 inches long and well preserved for a carpet this old.
It is considered rare because of its vibrant colors and figural designs; in both the body of the carpet and around its border are hunt scenes, mythological creatures and angels.
When word spread that the Prince, whose title is Polish but who lives in Sao Paulo, Brazil, wanted to sell the carpet, experts in the Islamic field said, Sotheby's expressed an interest in auctioning it.
"We would have loved to sell it," said Matthew Weigman, a spokesman for the auction house.
"But we were not involved with the negotiations." Alain Saman, a lawyer who is a spokesman for Prince Sanguszko, could not be reached for comment, his office said this week.
But officials at the Metropolitan said Prince Sanguszko first offered the rug to the museum.
The price was reportedly $4 million.


Gesek to Be Redskins' Center
The Washington Redskins signed Dallas Cowboys offensive lineman JOHN GESEK yesterday.
The 285-pound Gesek, who played guard at Dallas, will switch to center, the position he prefers.
Washington's current center, RALEIGH McKENZIE, is expected to move to right guard. (AP)


Egypt Condemns Nine Islamic Militants


Barnes &amp; Noble reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Off and Running at Hialeah
The flamingos were still herded on the banks of the lagoon, the statue of the great Citation was still gleaming in the yard, the royal palms were still towering over the flowers massed along the main drive entering Hialeah Park.
But as Hialeah opened its 58-day season today, the traditions of 66 years of elegant racing were surrounded by the hassles of the present over old issues like racing dates and new issues like simulcasting.
And because simulcasting helped nearby Gulfstream Park run up $560 million in bets during the last two and a half months, it clearly was the central issue in the continuing struggle for racing dates for Gulfstream, Hialeah and Calder, the three rival tracks in south Florida.


Review/Art; Sculptors in the Shadow of a Minimalist Master
The German-born American sculptor Eva Hesse left an indelible stamp on Minimalism.
By the time she died of brain cancer at the age of 34 in 1970, she had converted the style's often rigid, repeating forms into containers of charged feeling.
She had also proved that new materials like resin, latex and everyday string could reflect an artist's touch as powerfully as paint or clay.
Her art came in squares and spheres, but in also bulbous phallic shapes and chaotic linear skeins; her pieces sat on the floor, but also hung suggestively from walls and ceilings; her methods included casting, but also rather obsessive wrapping and, at certain points, a practice of shading reliefs with delicate gradations of gray and black.


Ex-Adviser Is Sentenced to Jail in Miami Athletes' Fraud Case
A former assistant academic adviser at the University of Miami was sentenced today to three years in prison, ending the nation's first case of Federal-student aid fraud involving an athletic program at a major university.
The Government, which investigated the case for nearly three years, found that the adviser, Tony Russell, had helped students illegally receive up to $2,400 a year in Federal aid, totaling more than $200,000.
In return, Russell received kickbacks of $85 to $100 from each of the students for about $15,000 between 1989 and 1991.


School Censors Violate the Rights of Children; 'Schindler' Blacklisted
To the Editor:
Add to the censorship sweepstakes list (editorial, March 10) the Plymouth, Mass., school board.
In a decision reminiscent of earlier days in Boston, the board decided that "Schindler's List" is not suitable for viewing by high school students.
What could be a more educational vehicle than this heralded film, which tries to deal with some of the more inexplicable events of World War II?


Quakers Win, but Don't Call It an Upset
There was no storming the floor.
There was no delirium or disbelief.
Pennsylvania's Quakers, the two-time, undefeated Ivy League champions, just continued to do what they have done all season.
They made the extra pass, forced turnovers, made the right decisions and won.
They just did all those things at once, on a larger, more rewarding stage.
The 11th-seeded Quakers defeated Nebraska, the Big Eight tournament champion, 90-80, in the first round of the East Regional tonight at Nassau Coliseum.
They ended a 10-game Ivy League losing streak in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament and became the league's first team to advance to the second round since Princeton in 1983.


Sonics' Pierce to Have Surgery
Seattle SuperSonics guard RICKY PIERCE, the team's leading scorer the past two seasons, will undergo surgery today to remove bone spurs from his left foot. (AP)


Home Video
A New Partner?
If predictions bear out, PBS is about to take a new partner for its home-video operation.
Program producers, some of whom say they are still owed video money by PBS's former partner, Pacific Arts of Los Angeles, question whether this deal will be any better than the old one.


Simmons Jumps to Cardinals
CLYDE SIMMONS, a star defensive end with the Philadelphia Eagles, signed yesterday with the Phoenix Cardinals, reuniting himself with his former coach, BUDDY RYAN.
The 29-year-old free agent reportedly signed a five-year contract worth about $14 million.
A two-time Pro Bowler, Simmons had 76 1/2 sacks in eight years with the Eagles, five of them when Ryan was coaching Philadelphia.


On My Mind; Cotton Candy Justice
Maybe we should all wave a thank-you at Tonya Harding as she sets off to earn her first million, selling interviews and performing in ice shows.
Maybe, because of her confession to felony, Tonya worship will end.
Maybe all the sob-persons who had written so feelingly about how she must be pitied because look how she had to struggle up from poverty, and all the fans who screamed their ecstasy, seeing in her a perfect mirror image of their own tawdriness, and the journalistic hucksters who held up fistfuls of cash to get her attention, maybe these people will make their own confession:


Frustrating Routine For Yanks' O'Neill
One year later, Paul O'Neill understands the routine.
He knows the quickest path to Manager Buck Showalter's office.
He knows when to knock softly on the door or barge through it, and he knows when to speak diplomatically or raise his voice.
One year later, O'Neill wants to abandon this rare but frustrating routine by playing every day.
O'Neill did not make demands and he did not toss bats around the clubhouse to amplify his point, but he is hopeful that in his second season in New York his name will be consistently etched in the starting lineup.
With Luis Polonia in left field and the uncertain status of Danny Tartabull's surgically repaired right shoulder, O'Neill is dreaming of remaining in right field from April until October, even against left-handed pitchers.
But it may be just that, a dream.


F.B.I. Arrests Reputed Leader of Philadelphia Mob and 23 Others
The reputed boss of organized crime in Philadelphia, John Stanfa, and 23 other people have been indicted on 31 racketeering-related charges, including murder, kidnapping, extortion and arson, officials here announced today.
The officials said the Federal indictments, which came after a 30-month investigation, involved virtually all of the top mob leaders in Philadelphia and southern New Jersey.
F.B.I. agents arrested most of the men early this morning, including Mr.
Stanfa, 53, who lives in Medford, N.J.
Three others were declared fugitives.


Administration Offers Plan To Raise Fees for Ranchers
The Clinton Administration issued a new proposal today to double grazing fees and protect hundreds of millions of acres of Federal lands in the West.
The proposal was immediately criticized by both sides in the long-running dispute between ranchers and environmentalists over grazing on public lands.
Neither side was satisfied with the Administration's approach to the central issue: how much flexibility to give local interest groups while protecting the arid range in 17 states.


Congressional Roundup; Tobacco Industry Tests Its Influence
Smoking and anti-smoking forces clashed today in a preview of what will probably occur next week when a House subcommittee takes the first vote on far-reaching legislation that would ban smoking in most public places throughout the country.
The vote by the subcommittee on health and the environment, which is expected to take place on Tuesday, will provide a gauge of the tobacco industry's influence in Congress.
More and more cities, states and businesses are banning smoking.


Steinrotter Retires as Winner
The script was written today for Diann Roffe-Steinrotter, the world-class skier whose final curtain call in racing turned out to be an extraordinary victory here in the super-giant slalom.
The 26-year-old Roffe-Steinrotter, who staged an equally surprising victory by winning the Super-G in the Lillehammer Olympics last month, barreled through the Vail gates with a ferocity and fearlessness not seen among the 16 other women in this final World Cup event of the season.


Art in Review
John Pfahl
Janet Borden Gallery  560 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through April 23
Aspects of John Pfahl's recent landscape photographs are prefigured in his work from the 1970's, a selection of which makes up the exhibition here.
In both, Mr.
Pfahl makes luscious color images that have the artificial allure of nature-calendar photographs; in both, though, he undercuts that soothing prettiness by including ironic and unsettling elements.


Lawyer Takes Abortion-Rights Case to Top Albany Court
A lawyer representing abortion-rights groups today asked the New York State's highest court to decide whether the State Constitution protects the right to an abortion.
The case challenges the constitutionality of a state prenatal-care program for low-income women that does not pay for abortion.
The case, known as Hope v.
Perales, represents the first time the State Court of Appeals has been asked to decide whether the State Constitution guarantees the right to abortion.


A Brisk Pace, and Day, for St. Patrick's Parade


For Children
'Night Light for Kids'
The Drawing Center  35 Wooster Street  SoHo  (212) 219-2166  Recommended ages: 3 to 6  Sunday
The writer Fran Lebowitz never wished she was Eloise of Plaza Hotel fame when she was a child.
"But I wouldn't mind being her now," she said.
Ms.
Lebowitz will be reading the Kay Thompson book about Eloise, which she chose for its wit.
"I always wished I were Heidi, instead," Ms.
Lebowitz said.


Review/Photography; Seeing the Forest Through Tangles of Underbrush
The vast vistas that have characterized American landscape photographs since the days of 19th-century masters like Timothy O'Sullivan and Carleton Watkins are nowhere to be seen in Ray K. Metzker's work.
Instead of breathtaking panoramas and wide open spaces, Mr.
Metzker's recent images, now at the Laurence Miller Gallery in SoHo, offer tangles of underbrush and dense screens of branches and leaves.
Often Mr.
Metzker violates the respectful distance at which landscape images are usually taken, sticking his camera down among weeds and grasses, or allowing branches to snake up to his lens.
If the plants and trees were people, such behavior would be considered rude, at best, and might be enough to provoke a fight.


Cool in Game, Calm After Victory
Amid the craziness, the high-fives, the hugging and the congratulations, he was somber and serious.
Like the team leader he is, Barry Pierce, a senior swingman, protected the ball as the seconds ticked away, until 11th-seeded Penn had officially defeated sixth-seeded Nebraska, 90-80, at Nassau Coliseum tonight in the first round of the East Regional.
The crowd gave a standing ovation.
Everyone was jubilant on the Quaker sideline.


Market Place; Starbucks buys the java and Au Bon Pain suffers caffeine jitters.
TRADERS and caffeine go hand in hand.
So they can be forgiven if they were a little too quick on the trigger Tuesday, when the Starbucks Corporation, a Seattle-based chain of specialty coffee shops, announced that it was buying Coffee Connection Inc., the purveyor of a competitive brew.
Coffee Connection, of Boston, is privately owned.
But the news sent Starbucks stock soaring 10.1 percent to close at $24.50 by day's end, and the deal seemed to be why a Boston-based competitor, Au Bon Pain, lost 3.1 percent of its market value that day, closing at $23.50.
Yesterday, Starbucks closed at $24.25 and Au Bon Pain at $23.50.


EMPIRE BLUE CROSS MISLED EXAMINERS, ALBANY CONCLUDES
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield repeatedly obstructed state insurance examiners and tried to mislead them about the company's operations and finances, according to a report made public yesterday by the New York State Insurance Department.
Attempts at obstruction were frequent and caused significant delays in the Insurance Department's effort to unravel the finances of the troubled insurance giant, the report said.


Winnebago Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


All for a Dollar
Shares of All for a Dollar Inc. not only failed to rise yesterday but dropped sharply after a tentative agreement for it to be acquired by the Pharmhouse Corporation, another discount retailer.
The market reaction raises questions about the Pharmhouse acquisition price of 0.4173 Pharmhouse share for each share of All for a Dollar.


Immortal Performances
To the Editor:
In Europe and Latin America, where performing artists have moral rights under what we call copyright law, performing artists and their heirs would be protected against computer-synthesized performances by dead actors (Law page, March 11).


Review Narrowed By Data General
The Data General Corporation said yesterday that it had further narrowed the review on its estimated $5 million to $10 million account to two finalists from five.
The account was previously handled by Lois U.S.A. in New York, which declined to participate in the review.


Art in Review
Michel Francois
Curt Marcus Gallery  578 Broadway, at Prince Street  SoHo  Through tomorrow
This New York debut exhibition of work by Michel Francois, a 35-year-old Belgian who was included in the Documenta 9 international art exhibition, is full of little homemade objects and strange photographs, many of them descended rather too directly from Surrealism, but still perfectly enjoyable.
Scale jokes abound, especially in a piece made of clay beads strung on rope (a necklace left on the floor by a giant child) and a cake of yellow soap on a stick the size of a watermelon.
A blue oval edged with a man's belt and cantilevered to the wall is titled "My Waist if I Was Pregnant."


Scavenger Killed in Collapse of Bronx Building


Lotus Link To A.T.&amp;T. Lifts Stock
A.T.&amp; T. and the Lotus Development Corporation officially announced a widely anticipated marketing and development deal yesterday that will make the popular Lotus Notes computer software available to businesses dialing into an A.T.&amp; T. public network.
The agreement, considered a market coup for Lotus and its innovative Notes product, had been leaked to the news media last month and sent Lotus's stock up 10 percent in one day.


Bosnia Foes Agree on Movement Across the Siege Lines at Sarajevo
The Bosnian Government and Serbian leaders signed an agreement today allowing limited movement for people, food and medicine across siege lines beginning Wednesday morning in a step they said would ease the Serbian stranglehold on Sarajevo for the first time in 23 months.
"This is a first, modest and very important step," said the United Nations military force's civil-affairs chief, Sergio Vieira de Mello, after witnessing the signing by Hasan Muratovic, a Bosnian Government minister, and Momcilo Krajisnik, president of the Bosnian Serbs' parliament.


Pennsylvanians Await Abortion Law
After five years of legal challenges and a confused two-day enforcement effort last month, Pennsylvania's 1989 Abortion Control Act goes into effect on Sunday.
Lawyers and abortion providers across the state said that most of the problems that led to the enforcement delay had been resolved and that they expected a smooth transition to the new law.
The statute requires a 24-hour waiting period, parental consent for girls under 18 and counseling by a doctor on alternatives to abortion.


Club Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Off Balance
Like a villain in a bad horror movie, the balanced budget amendment pops back to life every time it is killed.
The proposal was defeated by only 12 votes in the House on Thursday -- just weeks after it was rejected by the Senate -- encouraging its supporters to gear up for another try next year.
The amendment is bad economics, but it will keep coming back until we debunk the economic myths perpetuated by the debate.
Foremost, we need to understand what the national debt is and is not.
It is not something we owe to other countries; it is a debt of the Government to its own people.
Abraham Lincoln had it right in his 1864 annual message to congress: "Held as it is for the most part by our own people, it has become a substantial branch of national, though private, property. . . . Men can readily perceive that they cannot be much oppressed by a debt which they owe to themselves."


There's Also Honesty In Building Managers
To the Editor:
Your March 9 and 10 articles on real estate management corruption may confer guilt by association on many honest professionals, who diligently operate New York City cooperative and condominium buildings.
By carefully controlling overhead and employing dedicated people willing to work long hours for reasonable salaries, many small and medium-size management companies provide excellent service to their clients.
In some cases, when companies become large, the executives cannot monitor the daily functions of their agents, and greed, which is difficult to control, enters the picture.


Chairman of Bankers Trust Was Paid $10 Million in 1993
Some of the biggest rewards on Wall Street can actually be found at a bank.
The highly profitable Bankers Trust New York Corporation, the banking company that most resembles a securities trading firm, paid its chairman $10 million last year, an amount equal to about 1 percent of its profits.


CHRONICLE
Musicians come, musicians go.
The pianist MISHA DICHTER would sooner leave home without his American Express card when he travels to Russia next weekend than leave behind his piano tuner, RON CONERS.


Greeks Regard Macedonia as a State of Mind
To the Editor:
Re "Mischief in Macedonia" (editorial, March 8): There seems a general confusion about the reasons Greece "has worked itself into a rage" about the former Yugoslav entity's use of the name "the Republic of Macedonia." Macedonia is not a geographical term as you suggest.
Macedonia is a cultural term denoting an ancient Greek populace, the Macedons, whose most famous person was Alexander the Great.


Firing the Messenger
Two months before national elections, Hungary's right-of-center Government has sacked 200 radio and television journalists, allegedly for budgetary reasons.
It is no accident, to use a locution often heard in Communist times, that those dismissed included Hungary's most popular and independent broadcasters.
Though the post-Marxist regime pretends to denounce the old autocratic ways, its moves against the press are indistinguishable in principle from those under Communism.
Heading the list of those dismissed are the presidents of Hungarian Television and Hungarian Radio, who were appointed in 1990 with the agreement of all major parties to put the state-owned system under an autonomous corporation, along the lines of Britain's BBC.
New guidelines were instituted to assure independence, vastly annoying the Government, which assumed it would get the same favored treatment as its Communist predecessors.
In the words of an ultranationalist Government official, Istvan Csurka: "If these media are the most important power factor, it is justified for the winners of the first free election to gain possession of them."


Care Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Critic's Notebook; Trials of an Opera Troupe That's 2d Fiddle
Many major cities -- New York, London, St.
Petersburg, Prague, Paris, Munich, -- have two opera houses. (Berlin has three.) In all those cities, in one way or another, the second company must constantly struggle to define its role.
The big company does the big operas, meaning not only Wagner and Strauss but also the smaller core-repertory staples: Mozart, Verdi, Puccini, maybe even Janacek and Berg.
That leaves operettas and musicals, ballets, lighter operas, modern operas, marginal operas, perhaps also mainstream operas, perhaps friskier productions, often opera in the language of the audience.
In recent years, no secondary opera company has struggled more with such questions of identity, and made more U-turns in its search for a direction, than the Volksoper in Vienna.
The city has a powerful operetta tradition, and the Volksoper in recent decades has been its primary preserver.
But it has done American musicals, too, and all manner of more or less successful experiments.


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Guillevin Int'l reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


U.N. Resolution on Mosque Massacre
Following is the text of Security Council Resolution 280, which was approved today, calling on Israel to prevent violence by settlers and to protect Palestinian residents and reaffirming support for the peace efforts between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization: THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
SHOCKED by the appalling massacre committed against Palestinian worshipers in the Mosque of Ibrahim in Hebron, on 25 February 1994, during the holy month of Ramadan,


Bridge
The final of the prestigious Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship began here this afternoon between teams led by Ron Gerard of White Plains and Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex.
After 16 deals of a scheduled 64, Gerard led Deutsch by 15 international match points.
The Gerard team, including George Steiner of Seattle, Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan, Norman Kay of Narberth, Pa., and Sidney Lazard of New Orleans, is the oldest in the event, with an average age about 60.
They snatched a dramatic 2-imp semifinal victory Thursday night, after clinging throughout to a small lead against a favored group led by Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C.


The Rangers' Center Doesn't Seem to Be Holding
Just another day in paradise for the Rangers.
First, they suspended Cory Hirsch.
Then they lost to the Chicago Blackhawks, 7-3, at Madison Square Garden.
Another one of their centerman may be suspended.
And their coach could be disciplined by the National Hockey League.
Aleksei Kovalev, who has been suspended three times this season, could sit out a fourth time after he was ejected in the second period for ramming Chicago defenseman Chris Chelios into the boards.


U.N. Security Council Condemns the Hebron Slayings
After three weeks of tortuous negotiations, the Security Council condemned the Hebron massacre today.
But the United States strongly disavowed a suggestion in the Council's resolution that Jerusalem was part of the Israeli-occupied territories, and insisted that the city's future must be negotiated.
The United States said the language on the status of Jerusalem would have led it to veto the resolution if not for the decision by Syria, Jordan and Lebanon to resume discussions with Israel next month and the agreement between the Palestinian Liberation Organization and Israel to have high-level contacts aimed at restarting the stalled peace effort.


Suit Settled In a Death In Teaneck
The parents of a black teen-ager fatally shot by a white Teaneck police officer in 1990 have settled their Federal civil rights lawsuit against the town.
An official familiar with negotiations between the couple, Phillip and Thelma Pannell, and with Teaneck's insurer, the Scottsdale Insurance Company of Arizona, said the Pannells agreed to accept $195,000 to abandon the two-year-old suit.
Their son, Phillip Jr., 16, was shot in the back by Officer Gary Spath on April 10, 1990.


Muslims and Bosnian Croats Give Birth to a New Federation
Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government and Bosnian Croats signed an agreement today that links their territories into a single federation, a move that aims to isolate the Bosnian Serbs and pressure them to make peace as well.
Administration officials said that the agreement was one indicator that an overall peace might be in the offing in Bosnia.
The brightened prospects, they said, are also a result of American and Russian pressures on the Bosnian Serbs to make territorial concessions to the new Bosnian federation.


Yankees Show Little Interest in Old-Style Stadium Renovation
New York City's plan to restore Yankee Stadium to the look it enjoyed in the days of Babe Ruth and Joe DiMaggio appears headed for a formidable roadblock: the Yankees do not seem interested.
George M. Steinbrenner, the principal owner, has not commented since the plan was formally presented by Deputy Mayor John S. Dyson to Yankees officials last month as part of a $270 million package of stadium improvements and other inducements to keep the Yankees in the Bronx after their lease expires in 2002.


Review/Dance; The Past Meets the Future at an Anniversary Gala
When a ballet company reaches its 25th anniversary, it has to fit in a gala benefit somewhere.
For Dance Theater of Harlem, this festive anniversary was celebrated on Thursday night, midway through the company's season at the New York State Theater.
The program's high point was the revival of Valerie Bettis's 1952 version of "A Streetcar Named Desire," one of the dance-dramas of the past that the company has made a highly persuasive specialty.
Led with astonishing power by Virginia Johnson as Blanche and Hugues Magen as an eye-riveting Stanley Kowalski, this symbol-laden period piece came flamboyantly alive.


Sampras Still Going, And Agassi On the Rise
It was a cheerless match, very much a business meeting between two contemporaries whose career paths have often crisscrossed over a tennis lifetime but have lately taken them in disparate directions.
While Pete Sampras is displaying nothing but confidence, competence and an apparent invulnerability, Jim Courier, the man Sampras supplanted atop the ranking almost a year ago, has experienced a modest downward spiral that has dropped him to fifth place in the world.
Courier would rather be where Sampras is, facing the circuit's comeback conquistador, Andre Agassi, Sunday in Lipton's final.


Dallas Gets Three-Nation Labor Office
A new Labor Secretariat charged with enforcing workplace standards throughout North America will all but certainly be based in Dallas, national and local officials said today.
Beginning Jan. 1, the office will enforce a side agreement on working conditions and labor law under the North American Free Trade Agreement signed by the United States, Canada and Mexico.
President Clinton sought the labor provisions after United States union leaders contended that Nafta threatened to reduce the United States work force to the condition of Mexico's.


U.S. MAKES STRIDES AIMED AT REVIVING MIDDLE EAST TALKS
After weeks of intense negotiations, the United States announced steps today to help peace talks resume between Israel and the Palestinians and cleared the way for the passage today of a United Nations Security Council resolution condemning the massacre last month in Hebron.
At a hastily called news conference, Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced that Syria, Lebanon and Jordan agreed to come back to the peace talks in Washington next month.


Norman Dacey, 85; Advised His Readers To Avoid Probate
Norman F. Dacey, an estate planner and author whose book "How to Avoid Probate" infuriated many lawyers in the United States, died on Wednesday at the London Clinic in London.
Mr.
Dacey, who lived in Oughtherard, Ireland, was 85.
The cause was complications from a circulatory disease, said his son, J. Donald Dacey.


Foreign Chip Share in Japan Rises but U.S. Reacts Coolly
Foreign companies' share of Japan's semiconductor market surged to 20.7 percent, its highest level ever, in the fourth quarter of 1993, a development that could help defuse another potentially explosive trade dispute with the United States.
But the United States Government and the American computer chip industry reacted coolly to the news, calling on Japan to take additional measures to insure that progress continues.


Agents' Commissions Come Under Criticism
THE Metropolitan Life Insurance Company is still sorting through its records to identify the 92,000 or so customers it estimates are eligible for refunds of policies improperly sold by some of its agents from 1989 through 1993.
The nature of the misdeeds varied.
Agents in Tampa, Fla., misled customers across the country by describing life insurance policies as retirement or savings plans.
Agents near Pittsburgh specialized in persuading customers to trade in or borrow from old policies to buy new ones, even though the exchange was not in the best interest of the customer.


Change in Festival Schedule
"Drumroll," a Russian film that was to have been shown tomorrow and on Monday at the Museum of Modern Art as part of New Directors/New Films series, will not be shown because a print did not arrive from Moscow.
Another Russian film, Aleksandr Rogoschkin's "The Chekist," has been substituted as the main feature, and is to run with the originally scheduled short, "Portrait of a Boy With Dog." Screenings are tomorrow night at 9 and Monday at 6 P.M.


N.Y.U. Gains National Final
As the last few seconds ticked off the clock tonight and the New York University basketball team began to realize that it would be playing for a national championship on Saturday, the players were unusually subdued.
"That was weird," Captain Adam Crawford said.
"But we realize we must have a big game tomorrow."
They do because they seized the lead for good with a 16-2 run late in the first half and secured a 75-68 victory when Thomas Bowman converted a 3-point play with 1 minute 10 seconds to play against St.
Thomas of Minnesota in the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III semifinals at Buffalo State College.


Looking to Asia, Bentsen Sees History in Making
Since taking office, the Clinton Administration has tried to focus American business away from its traditional European markets and toward Asia, and Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen took another step in that direction today.
He convened finance ministers from 17 Pacific nations here after tantalizing an audience of American investors in Los Angeles with the observation that the Asia-Pacific region would be starting the equivalent of 18 Santa Monica Freeway projects every day for a decade.


UConn's Been Humble; Now for Some Swagger
When the warning sirens stopped sounding to the north, on the other side of Long Island Sound, the University of Connecticut's 18-point first-round victory over Rider College could be seen for what it was.
The Huskies, nearly all of whom took little or no National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament experience into the game, took a comfortable, if sloppy, first step against an opponent that succeeded in creating awkward situations.
Where the Huskies had grown accustomed to the congestion and contact of Big East Conference play, they were exposed to the unsettling luxury of a smaller opponent and larger open spaces.
"You feel like you're in a different place," said Donny Marshall, the junior forward and emotional leader.


A College Student's Careful Planning Creates a Successful Business
Eric S. Rubin's real estate business in Boston is no small accomplishment for a 26-year-old.
This year he expects revenues to exceed $500,000.
Few would have chosen selling property as a career during the Northeast's four-year real estate bust.
Mr.
Rubin survived by keeping expenses low, focusing on the relatively stable market for student housing and expanding carefully in anticipation of the market's revival.
Perhaps his most important decision was to buy an existing business rather than start from scratch.


Harding Learns Limits of a Felon's Life
Three weeks after appearing before a worldwide audience at the Winter Olympics, Tonya Harding appeared today at the sheriff's office to be photographed and fingerprinted, and then appeared before probation officers to be instructed on the requirements and restrictions in her new life as an admitted felon.
Among other restrictions, she cannot carry a firearm, change addresses without notifying authorities or leave the state or country without written permission.


P.L.O. Praises Resolution
The P.L.O.  praised the adoption today of the Security Council resolution condemning the Hebron massacre, but stopped short of saying it would immediately resume peace talks with Israel.
"We consider the adoption of the resolution an important step toward the establishment of peace," Yasir Abed Rabbo, the official spokesman for the P.L.O.
Executive Committee, said after the vote.


Patagonia Fortunes Fade in Cloud of Volcanic Ash
The wind whipped dust across Jack MacLean's 50,000-acre sheep ranch, where the fences are falling down, the weeds are a foot tall, and the shearing shed is coated with a thick layer of dust.
"We've hit rock bottom here," said Mr.
MacLean, a 68-year-old descendant of Scottish immigrants.
"It will be years before this land can recover and be used again."


Judge Rules Caputo Is Fit To Stand Trial
Reversing a court decision of 23 years ago, a judge in Nassau County today found Ricardo S. Caputo fit to stand trial in the first of four murders he says he committed in the 1970's.
His lawyer immediately said he might contest the decision, but added that if the case goes to trial, Mr.
Caputo will plead not guilty by reason of insanity.


Ryan Starts His Defense With Simmons
With two hours to spare, Phoenix Cardinals Coach BUDDY RYAN delivered on his promise to sign a big-name free agent.
His team signed CLYDE SIMMONS, the two-time Pro Bowl defensive end from the Philadelphia Eagles, in a deal announced late Thursday night.
"I promised you we would have a deal done by midnight, and we darn near ran out of time," Ryan said at a news conference that began after 10 P.M.
Mountain time.


U.N. Says Bosnian Serbs Press 'Ethnic Cleansing'
Serbian nationalists have pressed ahead with a campaign to expel thousands of Muslims, Croats and Gypsies from western Bosnia despite United Nations protests, reports from the area and from a United Nations official here indicate.
"The Banja Luka area is the worst place in Bosnia in terms of human-rights abuses," said Kris Janowski, Sarajevo spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, speaking of western Bosnia's largest town.
"It's a campaign of murder and intimidation, and nothing effective is being done about it."


Black and Hispanic Officials Assail Giuliani Over Hospital
Assemblyman Clarence Norman Jr. and more than a dozen other black and Hispanic elected officials accused Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday of using minority-owned construction companies as scapegoats when he ordered a moratorium in the $1 billion reconstruction of Kings County Hospital Center last month.
Mr.
Norman, the Brooklyn Democratic Party leader, suggested that race was a factor when the Mayor, who did not attract many votes in black neighborhoods in the election last November, stopped work on the huge hospital in central Brooklyn.


Mai Zetterling, 68, Film Actress With a Second Career in Directing
Mai Zetterling, the Swedish actress who went on to a career as one of Europe's busiest female film directors, died on Tuesday in London.
She was 68 and had homes in London and in Banne, France.
The cause was cancer, said her agent, Joyce Edwards.


Breast Implant Companies Dispute Claim of Settlement
Six months ago, lawyers for women who had silicone breast implants and for the companies that made the devices announced that they had reached a tentative agreement on a $4.75 billion fund to compensate the women for health problems.
But negotiations continued.
Then, late on Thursday, it was again announced that a settlement had been reached.
"It's a done deal," said the lead lawyer for the plaintiffs' negotiating team, Stanley Chesley


On Second Thought, Hanging This Outside May Not Be a Good Idea


Hexcel Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


British Paper Deal Appears Set
The battle for control of The Independent newspaper effectively came to an end today when the British Government said it would not hold antitrust hearings on a deal that would give a majority stake in the ailing publication to a group including the owner of the tabloid Daily Mirror.
Michael Heseltine, the Trade and Industry Minister, said he had approved the group's request to allow the deal to go through immediately because the survival of the paper was in jeopardy.
In making his decision, Mr.
Heseltine rejected a request from a rival bidder, Anthony F. J. O'Reilly, the chairman of H. J. Heinz &amp; Company of Pittsburgh and the owner of Ireland's largest newspaper publisher, that the deal be subjected to an inquiry by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
A Case of 'Urgency'
"I am satisfied that The Independent and The Independent on Sunday titles are not economic as going concerns and as separate newspapers and that if the papers are to continue, the case is one of urgency," Mr.
Heseltine said.


Ex-Rep. Green Announces for Governor
Declaring that the Republican Party "cannot run a right-wing ideologue" for governor, former Representative Bill Green announced his candidacy yesterday.
He offered himself as "a moderate who is conservative on fiscal issues and sensibly compassionate on social issues," as well as a supporter of both the death penalty and abortion rights.
The 64-year-old Mr.
Green, who represented the Upper East Side in Congress for seven terms before losing in 1992 to Carolyn B. Maloney, became the third Republican to join the field.
Another moderate, Richard M. Rosenbaum, plans to announce his candidacy next week, joining two more conservative candidates who have already joined the race: Herbert London and State Senator George E. Pataki. 10 Others Considering a Race
At least 10 other Republicans are considering the race, many saying they are willing to run if the party's now divided leadership unites around them, as if by spontaneous combustion.


Seton Hall Collapses After Taking Early Lead
Everything was unfolding quite nicely for Seton Hall in its tournament opener here tonight at the Thunderdome.
Michigan State did not score a field goal until nearly seven minutes into the game.
Seton Hall's defense was chiefly responsible and its offense was clicking.
The Pirates led by 11-2 and then by 19-10.
They were up by 27-19 with only 4 minutes 24 seconds left in the first half.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philomusica Chamber Ensemble  erkin Concert Hall


Gottschalks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Can Workfare Work?
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has cautiously embraced the idea of requiring recipients of New York state welfare, called home relief, to clean parks, fill potholes or work at other unskilled public tasks.
His instinct is correct: Welfare recipients who can work should.
Workfare -- tying work to welfare -- holds out the promise of producing cleaner sidewalks and safer streets cheaply.
Work could also be uplifting for the poor who can't find private jobs.
But the idea of workfare has been around for as long as welfare itself.
Indeed, home relief recipients are already required to look for work.
But history shows that putting workfare into practice is harder than it sounds.
Most of the 220,000 home relief recipients are not physically or emotionally capable of useful work.
Those who are need training, transportation, child care and, above all, close supervision.
A program that appears nearly without cost quickly turns expensive, which is why local governments that start workfare often slip back into simply mailing welfare checks.


Chaparral Steel Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


CHRONICLE
A quartet of overnight guests!
It may not be music to everyone's ears, but it sounds fine to CAROLINE STOESSINGER, a pianist, when the guests are the Stamic String Quartet of Prague and will perform with her on Sunday.


Observer; Get a Horse, Maybe?
Here's an American curiosity: Every parking lot in the land has reserved spaces for handicapped drivers, but there is no provision anywhere for people whose handicap is that they are not drivers.
This group includes people who either can't afford a car or can't drive.
If they are lucky enough to live in New York, with its good public transit system, they may not even feel handicapped, but in most American places they quickly realize that they are the crippled whom America forgot.


Don't Faint in Seattle
To the Editor:
"Heart-Stopping News" (editorial, March 3) states that "The lucky residents of suburban Seattle have a 1 in 5 chance of surviving cardiac arrest, a testament perhaps to their superb emergency services." The high survival rate is often attributed to the high per capita number of cardholders in cardiopulmonary resuscitation in Seattle, the result of the Fire Department's educational programs.


President Says Investments By Wife Were Perfectly Legal
President Clinton said today that his wife, Hillary, had engaged in "perfectly legal" business practices when she earned $100,000 on an investment in the commodities market in 1978.
Mr.
Clinton said his wife had benefited from the advice of "one of our best friends" in an entirely ethical manner.
The friend was James B. Blair, who at the time was the primary outside lawyer for Tyson Foods Inc., of Springdale, Ark., the nation's biggest poultry company and a major supporter of Mr.
Clinton's gubernatorial campaigns.


Flight Attendants Allowed to Sue Over Issue of Second-Hand Smoke
A unanimous decision by a state appellate court in Florida has created the first legal battleground to address the health consequences of cigarette smoke on nonsmokers.
A three-judge panel of the Third District Court of Appeal of Florida, sitting in Miami, ruled that a suit brought in 1991 by 30 former flight attendants of various airlines against the Philip Morris Companies and seven other major cigarette makers could proceed as a class action in a Miami trial court.


Discount Auto Parts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 1


U.N. Needs Beefing Up, Not Weakening
To the Editor:
Richard Armitage, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs in the Reagan Administration, offers a view of the United Nations and the Secretary General's role at odds with the Charter to which we are a signatory ("Bend the U.N. to Our Will," Op-Ed, Feb. 24).
Even more tragic is his conception of the United Nations as a mere instrument designed to implement United States foreign policy.


A Marine Wins a 5-Year Fight


Saints Pick Up Everett From Rams
The New Orleans Saints signed JIM EVERETT to a two-year contract yesterday, sending an undisclosed draft choice to the Los Angles Rams in exchange for the rights to the quarterback.
Everett said he negotiated a lower salary for the chance to play for the Saints.
Both Everett and Saints officials refused to say how much Everett would be paid.


Judge Lectures 2 Held in Officer's Death
Two men charged with killing a police officer in a robbery in the Bronx were castigated by a judge at their arraignment yesterday as investigators disclosed many new details of the fatal confrontation in a tailor shop and a cornucopia of evidence, including the existence of several eyewitnesses to the shooting.
The suspects, Rodolfo Rodriguez, 20, and Javier Miranda, 27, both Washington Heights residents who migrated from the Dominican Republic, appeared in Bronx Criminal Court before Judge Eduardo Padro and were held without bail on murder, robbery and gun charges in the slaying of Officer Sean McDonald on Tuesday night.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on March 8 about politics in Maine misstated the state's record in Presidential elections.
Maine has voted for the loser more often than any other state only since 1936, not throughout the history of the country.


Green Bay Isn't Over Its Head Below Rim
The subject was Dick Bennett's players, and how he got them to the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay.
Did he tell the recruits: Come to Green Bay, the weather's great?


Sports of The Times; Searching For the Underdogs
THE two-hour drive between Wichita and Oklahoma City on I-35 is sprinkled with views of acres upon acres of pretty much the same thing: flat, vacant fields screaming now in quiet celebration of spring's imminent arrival.
Sun is bright, temperatures in the 70's and the region -- like the nation -- is bursting with college basketball.


Mutual Funds Built to Weather a Storm
In the last six weeks, the Dow Jones industrial average has fallen more than 100 points from its flirtation with 4,000, but it is still at historically high levels that many stock market analysts and financial planners predict will not last.
So would-be investors are in a quandary.
Should they invest when share and mutual fund prices are so high?
Or wait until prices drop?


Winning New York Munis Took Credit Risk
Most of the winning New York municipal bond funds took on credit risk and won: They held big chunks of middle-tier New York issues that have rallied sharply since their ratings were lowered in early 1992.
Flagship, for example, had half its portfolio invested in debt rated BBB (just above junk-bond status) at the end of December, and Value Line had 59 percent then, according to Morningstar Inc., the mutual fund research company in Chicago.


Raquel Adonaylo, 67, Musician and Teacher
Raquel Adonaylo, a soprano who was on the faculty of the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia, died on Tuesday at her home in Rosemont, Pa.
She was 67.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said Rony Rogoff, a family friend.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
STANLEY COREN, a dog trainer and professor of psychology at the University of British Columbia, in Vancouver, is spending a lot of his time in the doghouse these days.
Since copies of the uncorrected proofs of his forthcoming book, "The Intelligence of Dogs" (Free Press), began circulating a month ago, dog owners in Canada and the United States have been complaining about his intelligence ratings of their best friends.
The book ranks 79 breeds by instinctive intelligence, how easily a dog adapts to its environment, and obedience potential.


Business Digest
Markets  Financial markets were alarmed at what traders saw as encroachment of the Administration on the independence of the Federal Reserve after the Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, was summoned to the White House for what the Administration said was a routine meeting with President Clinton.  [ Page 39. ] The Dow climbed 30.51 points in the third-busiest day ever, with nearly 450 million shares traded.
The trading volume was pushed up by the "triple witching hour" expirations of options and futures and the anxiety over the meeting between Mr.
Greenspan and President Clinton.  [ 39. ] Treasury securities plunged as the Clinton-Greenspan meeting also rattled the bond market.
Bonds gave up almost all their gains for the week, with the yield on the 30-year bond rising to 6.90 percent, from 6.82 percent.  [ 48. ] Prices of precious metals rose on the widespread turmoil in the financial markets.
Gold jumped $4.60 an ounce, to $387.60, in New York.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
3.24
2.88
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.47
3.44
2.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.83
3.76
3.06
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.48
6.40
5.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.90
6.82
6.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.67
7.67
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.99
5.96
5.95
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Officers Not Charged in Death
A grand jury voted not to indict five New York City police officers in the death of an epileptic prisoner in police custody last May.
Page 25.


Braves' Jones Injures Knee
By the bottom of the seventh inning of their 6-5 victory over the Yankees tonight, the Atlanta Braves had lost their probable left fielder for a long time and their probable closer for the night.
Chipper Jones, the No. 1 pick in the 1990 amateur draft, damaged the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee trying to sidestep Jim Leyritz's tag at first base in the fifth inning.


Gibsons and Martins And Dobros, Oh Yeah!
MANY Staten Islanders fret over seceding from the city on the other side of the bridge.
Stanley Jay frets over bridges and frets.


Review Likely to Find Taxes Were Underpaid by Clintons
A review being conducted by President Clinton's personal lawyer is likely to conclude that the Clintons lost less money from their Whitewater investment than they have claimed and may therefore have underpaid their income taxes, associates of Mr.
Clinton said today.
The review, by accountants working for the lawyer, David E. Kendall, may be concluded as early as next week, the associates said.
They said the Clintons were considering whether to make the findings public after sharing them with Robert W. Fiske Jr., the special prosecutor who is looking into the Whitewater matter.


Fighting Over a Figure for Macy
Two years ago when R. H. Macy &amp; Company was struggling desperately to avoid bankruptcy, Laurence A. Tisch made a $1 billion offer to save the company only to be stopped by a senior creditor who objected.
Macy filed for bankruptcy protection, and Mr.
Tisch retreated behind the scenes, although he remained the most influential and active outside board member.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article on March 10 about new financial disclosure rules for the municipal bond market misstated the position of the Public Securities Association.
The association, which represents municipal bond dealers, has supported the need for issuers of bonds to report regularly on their financial status after the initial sale of the bonds.


Church's Servants Had Loyal Following
The Rev.
Dimitrios Frangos and the Rev.
Germanos Stavropoulos spent much time together as trusted aides to their archbishop, attending to the daily details of the Greek Orthodox Church and growing close, especially after Father Stavropoulos's father died several years ago.
The younger man would often drive Father Frangos home to Queens after work or meetings.
That routine was shattered Thursday night, when the two were killed when their car was struck by a car the police said was driven by a woman under the influence of drugs.


One Sport Where the Pros Are Still People; Bowlers Lug Their Own Gear to the Tour's Long Island Stop
For Tom Delutz Jr., it was the dream, always the dream.
From his toddler years, when he tossed gutter balls down the alleys of Cardinal Lanes in Queens, to his student days, when he made All-American at William Paterson College in Wayne, N.J., the drive, the desire, the dedication were all marshaled to satisfy a single, consuming ambition:
To bowl.


Pilson Is Out at CBS Sports
NEAL PILSON, whose seven-year tenure as the president of CBS Sports spanned the giddy highs of last month's Winter Olympics and the lows of losing major league baseball and pro football, and was reassigned yesterday to a position as senior vice president of the CBS Broadcast Group, effective April 11.
In his statement, Pilson, 53, said that "quality has been the benchmark for our work." No successor was named, but JOE ABRUZZESE, CBS's senior vice president of sales, is a leading candidate.


Mize Plays With Surgical Precision
Ten days ago he was under anesthesia on an operating room table, having surgery on his knee.
Today Larry Mize was unconscious again, this time on the slick greens of Arnold Palmer's Bay Hill Club, and he was the one doing the operating.
Mize, wearing a brace on his right knee, one-putted seven greens on his way to a round of 69.
He has averaged 27 putts a round over the treacherous 7,114-yard layout here, and his 36-hole total of 137, seven under par, has put him in a tie for the lead of the Nestle Invitational.


As Social Ills Stir, French Premier's Ratings Sag
When Edouard Balladur was named Prime Minister last year, the French seemed ready for his reassuring, grandfatherly style, and in no time, they turned the 64-year-old Gaullist into the front-runner to succeed President Francois Mitterrand in next year's elections.
Cautious by nature, though, Mr.
Balladur said he was puzzled to find that he was popular while the French economy was stagnant and unemployment was still rising.
In fact, he often cautioned aides that the seeds of social unrest lay beneath the country's apparently calm surface.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Jan. 24 about competing wine magazines referred imprecisely to two critics, Dan Berger and Robert M. Parker Jr., who have written for Wine Enthusiast magazine.
Neither man has signed a contract to write for the magazine.
This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


15 Massachusetts Public Schools Are Entrusted to Private Managers
In the nation's widest experiment in letting private groups run alternative public schools, Massachusetts today turned over 15 schools to private management, including the first schools to be run by the for-profit Edison Project.
In naming 13 different organizations to run the new schools, which will be designed from scratch, the state will have an unusual ability to compare the results of various reform strategies.
Edison, for instance, will introduce a longer school year of 210 days, 30 more than the state requires.


Review/Film; A Mother Returns, Not So Repentant
Yves Simoneau's inept psychological thriller, "Mother's Boys," uses every cinematic trick in the book to make Jamie Lee Curtis look like the most ominous spiderwoman ever to spin a web of doom around an all-American family.
When the actress isn't photographed in deep shadow, she is shown dressed in black, furiously puffing on a cigarette.
With her sharp features and deep-set eyes, Ms.
Curtis certainly has the physical equipment to appear threatening.
But when she begins to speak in her usual no-nonsense, girl-next-door voice, the illusion of evil evaporates instantly.
In "Mother's Boys," Ms.
Curtis is painfully miscast as Jude, a disturbed woman who will stop at nothing to win back the family she abandoned three years earlier.
Unable to seduce her husband, Robert (Peter Gallagher), who has filed for divorce and plans to marry Callie (Joanne Whalley-Kilmer), an assistant school principal, she focuses all her energy on poisoning the minds of her three sons.


Review/Film Festival; A Poet Tries to Live as an Informer
It's easy to say that the personal and political cannot be separated, especially when describing Eastern Europe during the cold war years.
"Betrayal" gives that glib idea a sympathetic human shape.
This is the story of a poet who insists he will never sell his soul to Government agents, then desperately tries to survive by selling off a tiny portion of it.
"Betrayal," directed by Radu Mihaileanu, a Romanian writer and film maker now living in Paris, is to be shown today at 6 P.M. and tomorrow at 3:15 P.M. at the Museum of Modern Art as part of the New Directors/New Films series.
The film is an absorbing, intellectually forceful and emotionally wrenching account of a poet's bargain with the Devil.
Though the film is set in Romania, it has less to do with the particulars of that country's politics than with the way individuals deal with repressive states.
A brief prologue, set in the late 1940's, shows the poet, George Vlaicu, writing an anti-Stalin editorial that lands him in prison.
Eleven years later he is still in an isolated cell, hardly able to shape his fingers around a pencil.


A Powerful Strategy: Increase Your Savings
THIRSTING for fizzier returns in this flat market?
The answer may lie where few investors look: their wallets.
The strategy, as plain as a proverb from Ben Franklin, is to save more.
If an investor saved $600 a month and earned the historical equity average of about 10 percent a year, by the year 2009 he would have about $250,000, said Terry Siman of Executive Financial Services in Spring House, Pa.
But by saving $700 monthly, the pot would grow to $291,000.


Dr. Harold C. Wiggers, College President, 83
Dr.
Harold C. Wiggers, president and dean of the Albany Medical College of Union University for 21 years, died on Wednesday at the Pitt County Memorial Hospital in Greenville, N.C., where he lived.
He was 83.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter Janet Smith.


Murder Charge After 2 Priests Die in a Crash
A 28-year-old woman who admitted smoking the drug PCP as she drove along the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway has been charged with murder after causing a crash Thursday night that killed two top officials of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America, the police said.
The two officials, the Rev.
Dimitrios Frangos, 81, chief secretary to Archbishop Iakovos, and the Rev.
Germanos Stavropoulos, 51, archdiocesan chancellor, were pronounced dead shortly after 8:30 P.M. at the scene of the accident near the bottom of the Northern Boulevard exit ramp off the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway.


No Headline
There are people in the ranks of the New York City Police Department who should be doing 20 years to life for some of their crimes. -- WILLIAM J. BRATTON, Police Commissioner.  [ 1:3. ]


Lewis Shollenberger, Journalist, 77
Lewis W. Shollenberger, a wire service and broadcast journalist in Washington for 20 years, and a former director of Radio Liberty for three years, died on Tuesday at the Meadow Lakes Health Center in Hightstown, N.J., where he lived.
He was 77.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, said his daughter, Carol Del Grosso.


INSIDE
Bentsen Looks to Asia
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen is meeting with finance ministers from 17 Pacific countries as the U.S. focuses on Asian trade.
Page 39.
Caputo Fit for Trial in Killing
A Long Island judge found Ricardo S. Caputo mentally fit to stand trial in the first of four murders he says he committed in the 1970's.
Page 25. 2-Way Bosnia Pact Signed
The Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government and Croats signed a federation agreement, adding to the pressure on Serbs to make peace.
Page 4.
2 Arts


Texas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Bonds Plunge on Greenspan Meeting
After regaining stability this week on favorable inflation news, Treasury securities plunged yesterday when a meeting between President Clinton and the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, sent shivers through the bond market.
Traders said that the morning meeting at the White House, which the Administration insisted was routine, caused bond prices to fall sharply because of speculation that the President might be trying to meddle in Federal Reserve interest rate decisions just ahead of the central bank's regular policy-making meeting on Tuesday.
Speculation on Motives
Some traders suggested that the President might be trying to head off an interest rate increase, after complaining on Monday about the recent jump in interest rates.
Many economists have predicted that the Fed will raise its short-term interest rate target by at least a quarter of a percentage point at or soon after next week's meeting.


Regents Alter AIDS Guide; Ask Teaching on Condoms
The New York State Board of Regents voted today to revamp its guidelines on AIDS instruction to advise teachers that H.I.V. infection can be prevented in ways other than sexual abstinence, including condom use.
The unanimous vote to change the AIDS teaching guide came after the board, which governs state education policy, had been strongly criticized by the State Health Commissioner, legislators and AIDS organizations for exclusively advising teachers to emphasize abstinence as the way to prevent H.I.V. transmission.


Bentsen Says China Would Lose Trade Status Now
Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen said today that if the Clinton Administration had to decide whether or not to renew China's preferable trade status now, it would not do so because of Beijing's human rights behavior.
Mr.
Bentsen, speaking in Los Angeles this morning before flying to Hawaii to be the host of a conference of Asian Pacific Finance Ministers, was asked about the status of the Administration's China policy after Secretary of State Warren Christopher's visit to Beijing, which was marred by repeated arrests of Chinese human rights advocates during his stay.


Walter Lingle Jr., 86, P.&amp;G. Vice President
Walter L. Lingle Jr., an executive vice president of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company from 1954 to 1969, died on Wednesday at the Deupree-St.
Luke Retirement Community in Cincinnati.
He was 86.
The cause was a stroke, his daughter Susan Moeller said.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE HOCKEY  Harvard to Face Rensselaer in Final  Harvard beat Brown with its power play and Rensselaer outshot Clarkson early in the semifinal games of the Eastern College Athletic Conference tournament last night at Lake Placid, N.Y.
Harvard won, 5-1, and Rensselaer, 6-2.
The two will play tonight for the championship that comes with a bonus, an automatic bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association's 12-team tournament that begins March 25.
The Crimson (24-4-4) has not taken the E.C.A.C. title since 1987 and the Engineers last won it in 1985.
Sean McCann scored three goals for Harvard, all in the first period and all in power-play situations.
Rensselaer (21-9-4) produced 5 goals from its first 10 shots at Jason Currie, the Clarkson goalie who has been fighting the flu.
Currie got better but it was too late and Neil Little, the R.P.I. netminder, kept the Golden Knights far behind with his 22 saves, many spectacular.
Boston University 5, Northeastern 2: Jacques Joubert scored a pair of goals to lead Boston University to victory over Northeastern in a Hockey East semifinal at Boston Garden.
B.U., now 31-6, set a season victory mark and is assured of a berth in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Massachusetts-Lowell (23-8-5) defeated New Hampshire, 3-2, in the other semifinal.
The championship game is tonight.
N.H.L.
Panthers Rally to Tie Edmonton  Bob Kudelski's goal with 9 minutes 43 seconds left helped the Florida Panthers overcome a three-goal rally by Edmonton for a 4-4 tie in Miami last night.
The tie gave Florida a 2-point lead over the Islanders and Philadelphia Flyers for the eighth and last playoff spot in the Eastern Conference. (AP) N.B.A.
Manning Comes Through for the Hawks  Danny Manning grabbed a loose ball for a breakaway dunk with 2.9 seconds to play last night, sealing the Atlanta Hawks' 81-78 victory over the Indiana Pacers at Indianapolis.
The Pacers, shooting for a 12th straight home victory -- and a club record as a National Basketball Association team -- rallied from a 79-74 deficit with 2:40 remaining to close within 1 point at 79-78.
But Indiana missed its final four field goal attempts. (AP) Hornets 82, Jazz 78: Alonzo Mourning scored 21 points, grabbed 11 rebounds and blocked 6 shots to lead Charlotte to its fourth straight home victory and their first against Utah in six tries at Charlotte, N.C.
The Hornets are four and a half games behind the Nets in the chase for the final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference. (AP) Magic 113, Cavaliers 96: Shaquille O'Neal scored 38 points and grabbed 15 rebounds to lead Orlando to victory over visiting Cleveland.
Dennis Scott added a season-high 28 for the Magic, which solidified its hold on the fourth playoff seed in the Eastern Conference.
The Magic hold a two-and-a-half-game lead over Miami and 3-game lead over Cleveland. (AP) Bulls 87, SuperSonics 84: Scottie Pippen scored 22 points and the Chicago Bulls withstood a fourth quarter rally to beat visiting Seattle.
The victory was Chicago's fourth straight and fifth in its last six games. (AP) BOWLING  Monacelli Moves to Top of the Stepladder  Amleto Monacelli of Venezuela won six of eight matches last night and will be the leading qualifier for the stepladder finals of the Professional Bowlers Association Long Island Open in Sayville.
Monacelli finished with a 15-9 match-play record, knocking down 10,324 pins in 42 games for a 235 average. (AP) FENCING  Harvard's Van Leeuwen Wins Foil Title  Kwame van Leeuwen of Harvard beat Andy Gearhart of Penn State, 15-10, yesterday to win the N.C.A.A.
Men's Foil Individual Championship at Waltham, Mass.
After one day, Princeton led with 60 points, followed by Yale with 59. (AP)


Gendis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Jabil Circuit Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Georgetown on Target When Tension Mounts
Georgetown, known primarily as a defensive team, made a dramatic change tonight when it had one of its best performances of the season.
The architect of the performance was George Butler, a 6-foot-2-inch guard who was playing in junior college this time last season.
He scored 18 of his 25 points in the second half as the ninth-seeded Hoyas bounced eighth-seeded Illinois from the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament with an enthralling 84-77 victory in the first round of the Midwest Regional.


American Rice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
St. John Passion  Church of St. Ignatius Loyola


Long-Term Contraceptives' Cost Called Excessive
The overpricing of long-term contraceptives like Norplant has deprived poor women of some of the most effective means of avoiding unplanned or unwanted pregnancies, Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders said today.
At a hearing of the House Small Business Committee's panel on regulation, business opportunities and technology, Dr.
Elders said Norplant, a device inserted under the skin, and Depo Provera injections could significantly expand the contraceptive options of women if they were more reasonably priced.


The Receding Nuclear Rivalry
Amid all the talk about renewed rivalry, Russia this week took two welcome steps toward nuclear cooperation with the U.S.
It shut down the three nuclear reactors that were still producing plutonium for nuclear arms.
And it agreed to mutual monitoring of nuclear storage sites where both countries will store plutonium extracted from dismantled warheads.
These moves will help reduce and secure the volume of fissionable material in circulation -- thereby limiting the chance that other countries with nuclear ambitions can get their hands on that material.
The next useful step is for the two nations to speed deactivation of nuclear forces scheduled to be dismantled under two strategic arms treaties.


Applied Power reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  3 OFFICERS ARRESTED IN STING OPERATION  Three police officers from a Harlem precinct were arrested on charges of assault and robbery, after a police sting operation videotaped them breaking into an apartment, beating up an occupant, searching for drugs and stealing cash, the authorities said.
Page 1.
WOMAN CHARGED WITH MURDER IN CRASH A woman who admitted smoking the drug PCP as she drove along the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway has been charged with murder after causing a crash that killed two officials of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America, the police said.
Page 1.
The victims of the crash, the Rev.
Dimitrios Frangos and the Rev.
Germanos Stavropoulos, spent much time together as trusted aides to their Archbishop.
Page 28.
JUDGE LECTURES DEFENDANTS IN KILLING Two men charged with killing a police officer in a robbery in the Bronx were castigated by a judge at their arraignment as investigators disclosed many new details of the fatal confrontation in a tailor shop.
Page 27.
GIULIANI ASSAILED ON HOSPITAL Assemblyman Clarence Norman Jr. and more than a dozen other black and Hispanic elected officials accused Mayor Giuliani of using minority construction companies as scapegoats when he ordered a moratorium in the $1 billion reconstruction of Kings County Hospital Center last month.
Page 26.
YANKEES SHOW LITTLE INTEREST IN PLAN New York City's plan to restore Yankee Stadium to the look it enjoyed in the days of Babe Ruth and Joe DiMaggio appears headed for a formidable roadblock: the Yankees do not seem interested.
Page 26.
REGION  SUIT IS SETTLED IN YOUTH'S DEATH The parents of a black teen-ager who was shot to death by a white police officer in Teaneck, N.J., in 1990 have settled their Federal civil rights lawsuit against the town.
Page 29.
REGENTS VOTE TO ALTER AIDS GUIDE The New York State Board of Regents voted to revamp its guidelines on AIDS instruction to advise teachers that H.I.V. infection can be prevented in ways other than sexual abstinence, including condom use.
Page 29.
EX-REP.
GREEN ANNOUNCES FOR GOVERNOR Declaring that the Republican Party "cannot run a right-wing ideologue" for governor, former Representative Bill Green announced his candidacy.
He offered himself as "a moderate who is conservative on fiscal issues and sensibly compassionate on social issues," as well as a supporter of both the death penalty and abortion rights.
Page 29.
VENDETTA ALLEGED IN CHIEF'S SUSPENSION The police chief of Harrison, N.Y., has been suspended without pay in what one town official called a political vendetta by the Town Supervisor.
The charges against the chief, Albert Klein, 64, a 36-year veteran of the Harrison Police Department, were not made public, and Chief Klein refused to comment.
Page 28.
About New York by David Gonzalez 26


Why Experiments on Animals Have No Value
To the Editor:
A report by the Tufts University Center for Animals and Public Policy concludes that the use of animals for research has fallen 50 percent since 1968 (news article, March 3).
While the Tufts scientists work to reconcile the positions of animal protectionists and a medical establishment that constantly choruses the need for such experimenting to advance human health care, a growing number of physicians and scientists worldwide challenges the value of animal experimentation for human medicine.


Treat the White House Kitchen as a Stage; Disagreement on Style
To the Editor:
Prof.
Monroe E. Price, while gilding the truth in "Clinton's Chef Cooked His Own Goose" (Op-Ed, March 12) perpetuates the stereotype of the surly, arrogant French chef, to the disservice of the Clintons and Pierre Chambrin.
Mr.
Chambrin is a United States citizen of French heritage, trained in classic cuisines and preparation.
The First Lady's staff oversees Mr.
Chambrin's menus.


5 Officers Cleared in Death of a Beaten Prisoner
A grand jury has voted not to indict five police officers in the death of an epileptic prisoner who died in police custody in a hospital last May, the Manhattan District Attorney announced yesterday.
Even though New York City's Chief Medical Examiner ruled the death a homicide and said a police beating was a contributing cause, the grand jury found that the officers' use of force was justified.
The police have said that they were trying to subdue the man, Johnny Cromartie, as he tried to escape from New York Downtown Hospital.


My Half-Acre Window Box
Be careful what you wish for.
You may get the half-acre lot where all of your gardening fantasies are meant to come true.
How many apartment dwellers have dreamed of working the same magic outdoors that they do in small spaces, knowing they possess skills that far surpass the limitations of the windowsill and balcony?
What a thrill to decide where to put a tree, or what to plant in the vegetable patch.
Think of the satisfaction in gazing on an evolving color palette designed to keep flowers in bloom throughout the season.


3 Officers Held in Police Sting After Robbery Is Videotaped
Three police officers from a Harlem precinct were arrested yesterday on charges of assault and robbery, after a police sting operation videotaped them breaking into an apartment, beating up an occupant, searching for drugs and stealing cash, the authorities said.
The sting operation, in which undercover officers pretended to be running a drug den, was set up in an effort to snare the officers after investigators received reports that they had been shaking down drug dealers and stealing property on their beats.


Sayra Fischer Lebenthal, 95, Dies; A Founder of Bond-Trading Firm
Sayra Fischer Lebenthal, a Wall Street legend who was a co-founder in 1925 of the investment-banking firm of Lebenthal &amp; Company and remained active in it for 67 years, died on Thursday night at her home in Manhattan.
She was 95.
She died after a long illness, her family said.


Inquest Finds South Africa Police Aided Zulus in Terror Campaign
Senior officials of the South African Police armed and assisted Zulu nationalists in a campaign of partisan warfare, political hit squads and terrorist attacks, according to testimony disclosed today by a judicial inquest.
The report by Judge Richard J. Goldstone, the chairman of a standing commission on violence, was the strongest evidence South Africans have seen of what is popularly called a "third force" -- a conspiracy within top levels of the security forces to sabotage the transition to majority rule.


Newmont Companies Forge Closer Links in Swap Deal
Shareholders of the Newmont Gold Company approved a complex stock and asset-shifting plan with the Newmont Mining Corporation yesterday that would in effect create the world's sixth-largest gold producer.
Because each company's common stock will continue to be traded on the New York Stock Exchange, the combination of Newmont Gold and Newmont Mining stops short of a full merger.
Officials of both companies said such a merger would have resulted in a $400 million charge against future earnings related to the tax implications of the companies' good will.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7 STEPS TO AID MIDEAST TALKS
The United States announced steps that will help bring about a resumption of talks between Israel and the P.L.O. and said that Syria, Lebanon and Jordan will return to the broader Mideast peace talks.  1


Review/Film Festival; Operatic Last Hurrah
Retirement can be a wrenching experience for someone who is suddenly plunged into a life of uninterrupted leisure.
That is the prospect facing Old Han (Huang Zongluo), the main character in Ning Ying's serious comedy "Looking for Fun." Finding himself at loose ends at 65, the former janitor and doorman for the Beijing Opera Academy disconsolately wanders the streets of a city that seems poised on the brink of becoming a modern international hub.
Han, who lives an ascetic, solitary life in a dingy room whose walls are lined with newspaper, is a walking encyclopedia of Beijing Opera lore.
While ambling through a park one day, he happens across a group of retirees who are also Beijing Opera fanatics; they meet regularly to trade stories and perform favorite arias for one another.
After he impresses them with his knowledge, Han persuades them to form an amateur opera troupe and helps arrange for an indoor rehearsal space.


Getting an Early Start In the Ways of Finance
Ben Pomroy, a soft-spoken 17-year-old, puts aside $20 a month from his part-time work at a pizza parlor to invest in the stock market.
Pooling his contribution with those of 26 other students, all members of the four-year-old investment club at Burnsville High School in Burnsville, Minn., they have invested about $3,200 in a half-dozen companies.
Investing is "something I should know, for when I get into the real world," Mr.
Pomroy, a senior, said.
"This way I feel more self-sufficient."


Tomorrow Is the First Day of Spring, Honest


Review/Film Festival; Cultures (and Sexes) Clashing in England
"This is your day!" exclaims the organizer of the bus outing seen in Gurinder Chadha's "Bhaji on the Beach," a thoughtful, warmly inviting film about Asian women adapting to life in England.
"Have a female fun time!" That feeble nod to feminist solidarity avoids the fact that these women actually seem to have little in common.
They range from boy-crazy teen-agers to old ladies in saris, with a stylish visitor from Bombay who waves a cigarette holder and wears a fuchsia suit.
Their problems and prejudices are as different as their clothes.
On an organized trip from Birmingham to Blackpool, for a day and night of sampling tacky seaside ambience and avoiding the men in their lives, these women provide this film's enterprising director with a colorful cross section of attitudes.
Ms.
Chadha, who has said that she thinks of this as a very English film and that the director she most admires is Ken Loach, weaves her characters' personal crises into a broader social portrait of their adopted homeland.
She does this with impressive deftness and humor, even when addressing the ever-present matter of racism.
"They Curried My Budgie!" reads a shrill tabloid headline on the morning when the film begins.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day yesterday about a takeover bid for America West Airlines misstated part of the terms of a revised offer in some editions.
Along with $65 million in loans, an investment group led by Michael Steinhardt, a New York money manager, is offering $155 million to acquire 33.5 percent of the airline's stock, not $120 million.


Jones Pitching Himself Into a Jam With Mets
The Mets gave Bobby Jones a vote of confidence over the winter.
They could have traded him to Seattle for Omar Vizquel, an excellent defensive shortstop who would have filled what the organization then considered its biggest hole.
General Manager Joe McIlvaine nixed the deal.
Jones has done little to justify McIlvaine's faith.
He had his worst outing of the spring today at Thomas J. White Stadium, giving up nine hits, including two homers, and six runs in four innings against the Florida Marlins.
His performance was emblematic of that of the Mets, who lost by 10-1 and looked dead on and off the field.


Gun Maker on Mayhem: That Is Not Our Doing
William B. Ruger Jr. is a worried, frustrated man these days.
For 45 years, his company, Sturm, Ruger &amp; Company, has manufactured firearms for sportsmen, law-enforcement officers and security-conscious people, steadily expanding its share of the market to the point where the Ruger name is on a competitive par with Browning, Colt, Remington and Winchester.


Vendetta Alleged in Suspension Of Police Chief in Harrison
The police chief of Harrison, N.Y., has been suspended without pay in what one town official called a political vendetta by the Town Supervisor.
The charges against the chief, Albert Klein, 64, a 36-year veteran of the Harrison Police Department, were not made public, and Chief Klein refused to comment.


Broncos Sign Miller to Offer Sheet
The Denver Broncos signed ANTHONY MILLER, a four-time Pro Bowl wide receiver from the San Diego Chargers, to a contract offer sheet.


Reviews/Film Festival; 13 Years Old And Lost In Russia
Gosha Prokoshenkov, the 13-year-old boy who is the subject of "Portrait of a Boy With Dog," a documentary film by Robin Hessman and James Longley, is a Russian version of what in America might be called a throwaway child.
While Gosha tells his story in voice-overs, the movie shows him frisking in the park with his dog as well as playing with other young people, who, like him, live in a children's home in Moscow.
The 27-minute film, which will be shown tomorrow night at 9 and on Monday at 6 P.M. at the Museum of Modern Art, doesn't try to separate the facts of the boy's life from the fictions he might be inventing.
Gosha says his mother sent him to the home after an act of vandalism that his brother committed and blamed him for.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CANADIAN PACIFIC FOREST PRODUCTS LTD., Montreal, a newsprint and groundwood specialties concern, said its shareholders had approved changing the company's name to Avenor Inc.
LONESTAR CASINO CORP., Houston, and Primadonna Resorts Inc., have announced a joint venture to develop Lone Star's Pine Hills casino site in Harrison County, Miss.
PACIFIC TELECOM INC., Vancouver, Wash., signed letters of intent with U S West Communications Inc., Denver, to acquire certain rural and exchange properties in Oregon and Washington.


Beliefs
When Dr.
Baruch Goldstein massacred praying Muslims in Hebron, condemnations by religious leaders tumbled out one after another, in language that grew stronger by the hour.
The Jewish authorities were particularly sickened, calling the act a desecration of Judaism.
And even before the deadly cycle of violence reached the Brooklyn Bridge, Muslim and Christian leaders had joined the chorus of condemnations and the pleas for religious peace.


Greeks Regard Macedonia as a State of Mind; End the Intransigence
To the Editor:
The refusal in your disappointing March 8 editorial on the former Yugoslav republic's dispute with Greece to use the proper interim name of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia shows a onesidedness that lends support to the extreme nationalist views that are officially promoted by the former Yugoslav republic.


Salvador Front-Runner Has Both Sides on Edge
At the founding of the far-right Arena party in El Salvador in 1981, few would have predicted that Armando Calderon Sol, a successful but obscure lawyer from a middle-class family, would eventually become its presidential candidate.
The question that most political analysts here are asking now is not if Mr.
Calderon Sol, who enjoys a healthy lead in the polls, will win elections on Sunday, but whether he will capture the presidency outright or need to submit to a runoff.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall


Clinton-Fed Chief Talk Alarms the Markets
A Presidential invitation to the chairman of the Federal Reserve for what the White House insisted was a routine meeting today turned into an embarrassment for both men, as financial markets reacted with alarm to the appearance of Administration encroachment on the central bank's independence.
Bond prices fell sharply and stocks briefly dipped this morning after Fed and White House officials said Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Fed, had canceled a planned trip to Houston and a short speech there.
Instead, he attended the weekly meeting of the President with his top economic advisers to review the health of the economy.


Treat the White House Kitchen as a Stage
To the Editor:
Re "High Calories (and Chef!) Out at White House" (news article, March 5): We wholeheartedly agree with the White House decision to replace the resident French chef with an American, but not merely for nationalistic reasons.


Rally Ends Hectic Day For Stocks
In one of the most hectic sessions ever, the stock market plunged on Washington rumors in the morning, endured the quarterly rite of passage called "the triple witching hour," then rallied as bargain hunters snapped up brand-name stocks like Honeywell, Exxon and Boeing.
But the action was over fast.
In the opening 60 minutes, a record 220 million shares changed hands, two-thirds the volume of a typical day's session.


A Vote Against Violence
The woman who chooses abortion will often find a crowd waiting for her.
At the health care facility that will perform the procedure, people will urge her to change her mind, perhaps wave placards at her, maybe call her "baby killer." But under a bill the New York City Council passed this week, they may no longer block access to the clinic, hospital or doctor's office; nor may they assault or harass her in a way that makes her fear physical harm.
Yes, they may continue to protest her choice -- the bill doesn't impinge on their freedom of expression -- but they may not physically prevent her from exercising it.
Should they do so anyway, they will discover this bill has sharp teeth.
It allows a woman whose rights have been violated to sue for monetary damages or ask a judge for an injunction against the protesters.
For a first offense, the fine would be $1,000 and up to six months' imprisonment.
A second carries a $5,000 fine and up to a year in jail.


Canadian Utilities reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Adobe Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Classical Music in Review
St. Louis Symphony Orchestra  Carnegie Hall


Software Etc. Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Now Playing Short . . . Ahem, at Shortstop . . .
One shortstop will be elated.
One may be devastated.
One will know he obviously did something right.
One will wonder exactly what he did wrong.
One will play.
One will sit.
One day soon, the Yankees will solve the riddle.
At least that is what everyone thinks.
Enter the world of Randy Velarde and Mike Gallego, two friends who are fussing and fighting this spring to be the Yankees' starting shortstop.
They dress side by side in the clubhouse, so every day they have time to chat or chuckle about things beyond their common desires.
They have agreed not to let the issue bother them and not to let any trade rumors burden them.


Transactions
Auto Racing  SPORTS CAR CLUB OF AMERICA PRO RACING, LTD. -- Named Daniel D. Greenwood president and CEO.
Baseball  American League BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Jeff Pierce, pitcher.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Sent Pete Janicki, pitcher, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Released Tom Bolton and Mark Leiter, pitchers.
National League ATLANTA BRAVES -- Released Ron Gant, outfielder.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Sent Lance Dickson, pitcher, to Iowa of the American Association.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Sent Shane Andrews, third baseman; Tim Laker, catcher; Gabe White, pitcher; and Glenn Murray, outfielder, to Ottawa of the International League.
Sent Rodney Henderson, pitcher, and Oreste Marrero, first baseman, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Sent Doug Bochtler, Donnie Elliott, Joey Hamilton and Robbie Beckett, pitchers, to the minor-league camp for reassignment.
Basketball  National Basketball Association PHOENIX SUNS -- Activated Oliver Miller, center, from the injured list.
Placed Elliott Perry, guard, on the injured list.
Football  National Football League DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed Anthony Miller, wide receiver, to an offer sheet.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Acquired Nate Lewis, wide receiver, from the San Diego Chargers for an undisclosed draft pick in 1995.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Acquired Jim Everett, quarterback, from the Los Angeles Rams for an undisclosed draft pick, and signed Everett to a two-year contract.
Released Wade Wilson, quarterback.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Traded Adrian Cooper, tight end, to the Minnesota Vikings for undisclosed draft picks.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed Reuben Davis, defensive tackle, to a three-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Acquired Rob DiMaio, center, from the Tampa Bay Lightning for Jim Cummins, right wing, and a fourth-round draft pick in 1995.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Extended the contract of Michael F. Shanahan, chairman, through the 1995-1996 season.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Acquired the rights to Ken Belanger, left wing, from the Hartford Whalers for a ninth-round draft pick in 1994.
Signed Darby Hendrickson, center, and assigned him to St.
John's of the American Hockey League.
College  EASTERN ILLINOIS -- Named Bob McBee athletic director.
HOUGHTON -- Announced the resignation of Donn Bennice, men's basketball coach.
IDAHO -- Announced that Laurie Turner, women's baskteball coach, and Robyn Stewart, women's assistant baskteball coach, have been reassigned within the athletic department.
KENT -- Named Carl Battershell offensive coordinator.
McNEESE STATE -- Named Ron Everhart men's basketball coach.


ERLY Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Inagaki Journal; The North Finds Spring, Too, Brings Discontent
The dense blankets of snow clinging to the thatched roofs and tall windbreaks of this hamlet in Japan's far north are beginning to thaw earlier than usual this year.
On a few recent mornings there was even a promising blue sky lending a pleasant sheen to the stubbly brown rice fields.
The bright weather was a harbinger of what is usually the most hopeful season of the year on these rugged, poor plains near the Sea of Japan.
In a region that Japan's rush to affluence has largely passed by, spring has also meant the return of hundreds of husbands, fathers and grandfathers, even some grandmothers, who for generations have been forced by the meager yields and a dearth of local industry to spend half of every year in factories and construction sites in central Japan.


E. Lakin Phillips, 78, Psychology Professor
Dr.
E.
Lakin Phillips, emeritus professor of psychology at George Washington University, died on Tuesday at the university's hospital in Washington.
He was 78.
Dr.
Phillips, who lived in Chantilly, Va., retired in 1985 as director of George Washington's Counseling Center.
He was a founder and president of the board of the School for Contemporary Education for children with learning difficulties, in Annandale, Va.


Q &amp; A
Pension Contributions Q. What is the maximum contribution that an employer can make to a S.E.P./I.R.A. on behalf of an employee?
And if the employer does not contribute the maximum, can an employee make up the difference?
Alma Kubick, Tenafly, N.J.


Israel Considers Moving Jews Within Hebron
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was reported today to be thinking about moving the Jewish settlers in Hebron, taking them out of their several enclaves in that flash point West Bank town and concentrating them in one or two locations there.
Officials insisted that they had no concrete plans, adding that in any event they would do nothing until the Palestine Liberation Organization agreed to return to peace talks that have been suspended since the massacre at a Hebron mosque three weeks ago, in which at least 29 Muslim worshipers died.


Students of All Religions Celebrate Passover


Julie M. Black and Jordan Hitch
Julie Miriam Black, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Perry Black of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Spencer Jordan Hitch, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Spencer W. Hitch of Lewes, Del.
Judge Abraham J. Gafni, of the Court of Common Pleas in Philadelphia, officiated at the Philadelphia Cricket Club.
The bride, 27, graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received a master's degree in journalism from the University of Arizona.
Her father is the chairman of the department of neurosurgery at Hahnemann University Hospital in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Phyllis Black, is a professor of social work at Marywood College in Scranton, Pa.


Artist's Journey Goes On With the Help of a Son
WHEN Marjorie Michael died here last April at the age of 72, she left her husband, Gerald, six adult children and a large body of sculpture, paintings and photographs from her lifetime as an artist.
She also left behind an unpublished book -- which she finished the night before she died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (also known as Lou Gehrig's disease) -- and a son determined to keep his mother's work in circulation.
Patrick Michael, an independent building contractor who lives across the street from the house where his mother died, is now trying to sell the remaining copies of her first published book, "A Woman's Journey," and to find a publisher for the sequel, "A Woman's Space."


Pine Barrens Owners Want to Sell
As a member of the Pine Barrens Advisory Committee, I read with interest "Pine Barrens Up Against Harsh Realities"  [ Feb. 6 ] .
I, too, am not sanguine about the future of the Pine Barrens Protection Act without an infusion of Federal, state and county dollars.
As an attorney practicing land-use law for many years I believe transfer-of-development rights will not be the panacea hoped for by some proponents of the Pine Barrens Protection Act.
It is difficult to find a municipality in the United States where transfers have been successful.
There is, however, another answer.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TELEVISION  MY LIVES  By Roseanne Arnold. Ballantine, $23.


The Art Of the Deal
Robert Cenedella believes his moment may have arrived.
After 30 years of tweaking the nose of the art establishment through his paintings and writings, he thinks he has finally found the perfect canvas on which to illustrate his point -- and perhaps make some money in the process.
Mr.
Cenedella's views are not necessarily new, but his tactic is: he plans to sell shares of stock in his paintings.


Living in Easy Grandeur
OF the many grand houses created by England's 18th-century landed aristocracy, two in Wiltshire are particularly idiosyncratic and less well-known.
In the undisturbed atmosphere of Corsham Court and Bowood, what survives is not just a gathering of fine objects or the gently rolling landscapes of Lancelot (Capability) Brown.
Here we can still feel what it was like to live in that time when, for the happy few, life was indeed made to order.


A Designer Finds a Platform
A French and American audience gets a look at John Galliano's dress collection, Paris, March 5.


The Improbable Career of Horace Pippin
WHAT WERE THE prospects during the 1930's for a middle-aged black man from West Chester, Pa., who earned his living as a handyman and had never studied art, to make it as a big-time painter?
Dim to none.
But Horace Pippin, the subject of a big retrospective here at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, had one of the most improbable careers in the history of 20th-century American art.
Born into a family one generation removed from slavery, he worked as a hotel porter, iron molder and used-clothes peddler before joining the Army in 1917 at the age of 29.
While fighting with the heralded all-black 369th Infantry Regiment in France, he was shot by a sniper and lost the ability to raise his right arm.
He returned, with a Croix de Guerre, to the United States and took odd jobs to supplement his disability pension.


Katherine Welch, Raymond Solnik
Katherine Grace Welch, a daughter of Carolyn Carlson of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and John F. Welch Jr. of Fairfield, Conn., is to be married today to Raymond Evan Solnik, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Solnik of Roslyn, L.I.
Dr.
Eugene S. Callender, a Presbyterian minister, will perform the nondenominational ceremony at the Stanhope Hotel in New York.
The bride graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is the chairman of the General Electric Company in Fairfield, Conn.
Her mother is a lawyer in private practice in Fort Lauderdale.


The Breast Cancer Fabrications
There is one comforting element in last week's disturbing revelations of fabrication in the nation's most important breast cancer research program: the falsifications do not, apparently, affect any of the study's conclusions.
But the sluggish handling of this tawdry episode by research leaders and government officials is no way to keep the confidence of cancer patients who need access to all relevant information in making life-or-death decisions.
The revelations have embarrassed a federally financed research program that many experts consider the most important for breast cancer patients anywhere in the world.
Known as the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project, it is headed by Dr.
Bernard Fisher of the University of Pittsburgh and coordinates the efforts of more than 5,000 doctors at 484 medical centers and hospitals in the U.S. and Canada.


Envisioning the Future Of Liberty State Park
In recent letters to the New Jersey editor, opponents of the proposal for the long-planned completion of Liberty State Park made several allegations that simply are not factual.
As chairman of the Liberty State Park Development Corporation, the nonprofit board responsible for asisting the state in the implementation of the park's master plan, which had been developed during lengthy public hearings, I would like to express the corporation's views.
The corporation was formed in 1984 and charged with finding ways to transform portions of unusable, contaminated land into a magnificent park without the use of tax dollars.
No easy task to be sure.
Yet all of our board members believed then, and still believe, that unless we proposed environmentally and fiscally sound plans to make this public-private partnership work, we would never see the great hopes of the public and ourselves for this park realized.


The Art of Biography
To the Editor:
Sharon O'Brien's essay delved into the difficulties and rewards of writing a biography in a very personal and sensitive way.


D-day + 50 Years: Still Battling for Omaha Beach
The question of what to do about the Germans has emerged as a hitch in plans for the 50th anniversary of the Allied landings in Normandy in June, when President Clinton, President Francois Mitterrand of France and Queen Elizabeth II will be among 15 heads of state and government in attendance.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany will not be there, shut out as he was from the 40th anniversary.
Some diplomats say he would like to have been included this time to show the enduring nature of reconciliation between Germany and its wartime enemies after the defeat of the Nazis.
He is also running for re-election in October, against heavy odds.


Pulaski Project Nearing Finish
A $38 million reconstruction project on the Pulaski Bridge is drawing to a close.
The bridge is scheduled to reopen completely in June, nearly three years after its six lanes of traffic were squeezed down to two for road resurfacing work.
The project began in September 1991, to repair the drawbridge deck, replace electrical wiring and repaint the structure, said Dwight Langhum, a spokesman for the Department of Transportation.
Since then, east- and west-bound traffic on the bridge, which connects southwestern Queens with Greenpoint, has been confined to one lane in each direction.


A Rage Brewing


Lawyers Debate the Insurability of Bone-Marrow Transplants
SPEAKING at a meeting of the American Bar Association in New York City, Kathy A. Cochran of the law firm of Wilson, Smith, Cochran &amp; Dickerson in Seattle described why she thought there were no "evil forces at work" when often refuse to pay for high-dose chemotherapy with autologous bone-marrow transplants in breast-cancer cases.
"Skeptics argue that treatment for desperately ill women should not await the rigors of scientific scrutiny, as these women do not have the time to wait for science to prove the treatment. Much the same would have been said by women who received radical mastectomies at the hands of enthusiastic surgeons convinced that this was the 'only cure' for their breast cancer. Unfortunately science later proved this to be untrue in many cases."
Ms.
Cochran said it was paradoxical that customers should criticize insurers for failing to reimburse a treatment that, some companies say, has not proved to be superior.
Another lawyer, L. Susan Slavin of Slavin &amp; Steinberg, said that in most cases insurers cited contractual agreements that really did not limit the procedure, because it is merely an extension of high-dose chemotherapy, which is usually covered.
"It's just a matter of dollars and cents," Ms.
Slavin said.
"It's an expensive procedure, and every time they say no to it they save $150,000."
On Long Island, where the incidence of breast cancer is higher than the statewide average, the battle is frequently played out.
Those women with advanced breast cancer who have been told by their physicians that they have no treatment options other than transplants and whose insurers have refused to pay for the procedure are being encouraged by advocacy groups to take further action.
Insurance companies are fighting back.
Liz LoRusso, executive director of one local advocacy group, 1 in 9, said the cases of 11 women seeking reimbursements had gone to litigation and been settled in favor of the patients.
Many other battles have been fought over the telephone and through the mail, she added.
"Two to three years ago there were no attorneys trained to help us fight," Ms.
LoRusso said.
"Now there are. Women with breast cancer are viewed as very weak. Well, we're the strongest people you'll ever find, because we're fighting for our lives. We'll leave no stone unturned."
Arlene Pokorny, 47, of Melville, was given a diagnosis of breast cancer in 1979 and is now fighting her third recurrence.
At her physician's urging, she requested clearance from her insurance carrier to pay for transplants.
"I've never been denied anything," Ms.
Pokorny said.
"Now my life is hanging on a thread. I'm living in terror all the time that they'll say no."
She added that she had hired a lawyer "just in case I'll need one."
After weeks of legal proceedings her insurance company agreed to cover her transplant.
Role of Bar Associations
The chief of psychiatry service at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan, Dr.
Jimmie Holland, said: "I think this adds to the already high sense of vulnerability and uncertainty that women already feel about the disease. It's kind of a betrayal. Anxiety and depression are already felt by women with breast cancer. The need for this kind of fight just compounds it."
Ms.
Slavin said she worried about "how many women out there who, when they know their insurance company won't pay for their treatment, just walk away from the fight."
To assist women who have been denied reimbursements for transplants or other procedures or who face other obstacles from their carriers the Nassau and Suffolk Bar Associations will soon distribute brochures to breast-cancer coalitions, doctors' offices, hospitals and clinics announcing their free law program, said Tom Maligno, executive director of the associations.
"It's a chance to reach the clients who need us most and a unique opportunity for the health and legal professions to work together," he said.
What remains to be seen, however, is whether legal help will settle differences between carriers and clients.
Many insurers say they are prepared to change their contracts and claims reviews to avoid being responsible for procedures like transplants.
Kathy Olson, a spokeswoman for Mutual of Omaha, which insures more than 10 million individual and group policyholders, said there was no way that Mutual could have anticipated the surge in technology.
As a result, she said, Mutual will try to clarify its new policies to avoid disputes.
Insurers usually wait for a procedure to be accepted by medical experts before they extend coverage to it.
"In the future," Ms.
Olson said, "we'll use the percent-success rate of a treatment to measure the success of it, so that there's a clearer understanding of what is experimental."
The associate general counsel of the Blue Cross-Blue Shield Association of Chicago, Mary Ader, said: "We're working for the benefit of the subscribers. Our desire is to cure our patients. We don't want them languishing in hospitals. We want them to live, and live a healthy life."  'Sympathy and Concern'
The associate director of the cancer-therapy-evaluation program at the National Cancer Institute, Dr.
Michael A. Friedman, said that he had "enormous sympathy and concern" for people who wanted to optimize their chances of living, but that he was not sure that the relentless pressure that patients and their doctors and lawyers put on insurers was in the patients' best interest.
"Look, this is not a story that lends itself to simple truths," he said.
"In certain selected situations bone-marrow transplants can be very efficacious. But there are many unanswered questions."
Dr.
Friedman cautions patients about being too optimistic about the possibilities of transplants and suggests that they wait for the results of four trials that are under way.
The tests are intended to compare the benefits and risks of the procedure to conventional chemotherapy for treating localized breast cancer at high risk of recurrence and metastatic breast cancer.
"Patients should opt for a treatment that's indisputable, one that's ethically and scientifically correct," he said.
From the point of view of many physicians, the criticism of using transplants outside clinical trials for their patients is unfounded.
The physician in charge of the Adult Bone Marrow Transplant Program at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, Dr.
Michael Schuster, said:
"The problem is that treatments for all cancers might be viewed as experimental, in the sense that they're constantly evolving, constantly moving forward. The only way we can move forward is to introduce new treatments in the hope that we can cure a larger percentage of patients.
"If third-party payers slam the door on new treatments by using the 'E' word, then no progress will be made. We'd be using the same kind of medicine that we did five years ago."
Health-care economists say physicians are part of the problem in the equation that divides the insured from insurance companies.
Prof.
Uwe Reinhardt, a health economist at Princeton University, said:
"On the one hand, physicians tell you they were trained in school to fight for their patients and do their best. But they were not trained as guardians of the U.S. Treasury. If there's any hope that something will work, then they are morally obliged to do it.
"On the other hand, you can't run a health system on that algorithm. You have to allow nonphysicians further upstream to actually make the hard calls and not give away the Gross National Product."
Professor Reinhardt suggested that a dispassionate panel of experts intervene when a doctor proposes to treat a patient with a controversial therapy.
Many insurance companies have begun to do that, and more say they will follow that route.
Use of Independent Panel
The director of technology assessment and policy for Aetna Health Plans in Hartford, William McGivney, said that in the 20-month period that Aetna has used an independent panel to help it decide financing in more than 100 decisions, one case against it has gone to court.
"We've extended ourselves to meet the needs of our patients," Mr.
McGivney said.
"If we've got three experts who are saying no to a treatment then we're pretty sure it's not appropriate care for a patient."
Aetna, Prudential and Travelers subscribe to the Medical Care Ombudsman Program in Washington.
The director of the program, Grace Powers Monaco, said it promised to provide fast authoritative reviews of treatments.
The program will work with a patient and insurer to resolve any issues "in a sensitive and personal matter," she said.
"I think grown-ups have to be grow up about their medical care," Ms.
Monaco, a lawyer, said.
Some lawyers say they feel confident about the future.
Louis J. Castellano Jr., who successfully represented Joseph Scalamandre in a suit in Federal District Court in Uniondale, said the value in overturning a denial of coverage by Oxford Health Plans Inc. for a transplant for Mr.
Scalamandre's wife was that "carriers now notice there was a case tried to conclusion, and the determination was made against the carrier."
That was just one more case that seems to add to "the majority rule in the United States that this treatment is not experimental in most jurisdictions," Mr.
Castellano said.
Ms.
Ader of Blue Cross-Blue Shield disagreed, saying: "The effect of judicial opinion, as defined by law, is that there's precedent only in jurisdictional issues. Such opinions have no value outside of that jurisdiction. The courts are not required to follow it elsewhere. It is not binding."
In one of the largest challenges to the denial of "investigational chemotherapy," Memorial Sloan-Kettering, in a complaint filed in State Supreme Court, maintains that Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield should be ordered to pay $12 million in compensatory and punitive damages for refusing to cover transplants for cancer patients.
Who will ultimately have the power to make health decisions is certainly going to be a "major issue for the women here,' said Patricia Spicer of Cancer Care in Woodbury, a clinical coordinator for breast-cancer services on Long Island. "This issue has already been coming up more often in our groups, because more doctors are recommending H.D.C./A.B.M.T. early on."


Corrections
An article on Feb. 20 headed "South Hackensack Journal" misidentified one of the three municipalities that separate the sections of the Township of South Hackensack.
It is Hasbrouck Heights, not Hackensack.


WHO'S AFRAID OF LANI GUINIER?
It saddens me to think that the only time this country engages in a national dialogue on race is following a riot or inflammatory Nation of Islam speeches.
Through its shameful mishandling of Guinier's nomination, the Clinton Administration squandered an opportunity for America to take a good, hard look at itself -- minus the Op-Ed-page name calling.
RICHARD A. CUMMINGS Ithaca, N.Y.


Frugal Tours
To the Editor: I read Susan Spano's "Venice at a Package Price" (Feb. 13) with relish.
My wife and I had a similarly satisfying experience when we took a "Majestic Scotland" package tour on United Airlines in January.
For $777 per person, we stayed two nights in Edinburgh, two nights in the Highlands (one at an utterly charming place converted from a 13th-century convent), and two nights in Glasgow, all four- or five-star hotels with daily Scottish breakfasts included, plus two dinners served fireside.


THE WORLD: Three Decades of North Korea's Nuclear Program; Promises, Promises (While Building the Bomb)
The Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control, a research group based in Washington that tracks the spread of nuclear weapons, compiled this chronology of North Korea's nuclear program.
It is based on published sources and conversations with American Government officials, and was written by Gary Miholin and Diana L. Edensword.
Items without dates took place over the entire year or the date was uncertain.


Art Advocates Troop to Albany to Seek a Piece of the Pie
AS thick as the fog rising from the melting snow, the lobbyists arrive here each March, bringing their fact sheets and well-honed pleas.
Heeding the maxim, "Those who don't ask, don't get," they swarm through the state capital at budget time.
Among the recent throngs were advocates of the arts from Westchester County, who took part in a day of campaigning sponsored by the Alliance of New York State Arts Councils, based in Spring Valley.
Vying for elevator space with American Legionnaires, 4-H clubbers and a host of others, they made the rounds of legislative offices, asking members of the Westchester delegation to the capital to approve more spending for the arts.


Who Would Regulate Pesticides
I am writing to clarify the Attorney General's position on regulation of pesticide use by local governments.
His position was mistakenly characterized in "L.I. Is Pressuring Albany to Check Perils of Pesticides"  [ Feb. 27 ]  as a proposal to replace state with local pesticide regulations.
The bill proposed by the Attorney General would merely allow localities to pass local laws and ordinances, which would supplement, but not replace, state law and the regulations promulgated by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
Under this bill local governments could pass laws imposing certain limitations on pesticide use, but the bill would not diminish the state's regulatory authority.
The U.S.
Supreme Court recently ruled in a Wisconsin case that Federal law allows states to empower their municipalities in this fashion, while Federal and state governments continue to retain their own regulatory authority.


Congress Is Urged to Preserve Low-Income Heat Subsidy for the Poor
The Clinton Administration's search for budget cuts to finance its welfare plans has led it to propose sharp cuts in the budget for a heating-subsidy program, and advocates for the poor say the cuts would force some to choose whether to heat or to eat.
The Administration wants to cut the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program to $730 million, from $1.437 billion, in the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1.
Advocates for the poor are urging Congressmen to reject the cuts, illustrating their arguments with accounts of families running out of fuel oil, gas or, in rural areas, wood.


BROOKLYN UPDATE
*
FLATBUSH: The incumbents in two important posts on Community Board 14 were returned to office last week after one challenger withdrew from the race and the other was overwhelmingly defeated.
Alvin Berk, chairman of the board for five years, was re-elected after his opponent, Laurel Scott, withdrew from contention during a tense board meeting on Monday.
The third vice-chairwoman, Mollie Scheff, was re-elected, 34 to 13, over Gail Smith.
The officers were elected by members of the board, which represents Flatbush and Midwood.


Sun City Builder Mounting a South Carolina Venture
THE Del Webb Corporation, builder of several large retirement communities in the West, has embarked on its first project in the East: a 5,100-acre, 8,000-detached-home development near this coastal Carolina community 12 miles west of Hilton Head Island.
The $110 million project is considered a major boost to this state's southeastern sector, known as Lowcountry, a region facing an uncertain future with the imminent closing of the Charleston Naval Base.
Government leaders say the project is as vital an economic stimulus for that area as the $300 million BMW Manufacturing Corporation plant is for the northwestern industrial quadrant of the state.


THE SEED CONSPIRACY
THIS IS THE SEASON OF THE garden seed, that time of pure promise when the entire contents of a quarter-acre patch of vegetables -- the yield of which will burden a small truck come August -- can still fit inside an envelope and be sent cross-country by Fed Ex.
The seeds themselves betray no sign of the prodigies they contain, but there, in a handful, they are: this weightless, buff disk packs a complete set of instructions for the making of a two-pound beefsteak tomato; that crinkled, blond tablet is etched with the blueprint for a 10-foot-tall sweet-corn tower.
But this is not the only kind of information encoded in a garden seed.
For the seeds I order are inscribed with cultural, political and economic information as well.
And if I am to believe some of the more polemical seedsmen whose catalogues-cum-tracts have found their way to my mailbox this season, the decision to plant one variety and not another is freighted with moral and environmental significance.
A political fight is not exactly what I came to vegetable gardening to pick, but I seem to have stumbled into one anyway.


Do Right Thing: Drop the Chop!
To the Sports Editor:
What a pleasure to read Tim Giago's well-written article ("Drop the Chop! Indian Nicknames Just Aren't Right," The Times, March 13), on an important topic.


Zone Better Than Poise As Orange Survives
It was a maverick's strategy, executed by a coach often criticized as predictable and dish-rag dull.
Jim Boeheim kissed off convention.
His defensive game plan was a slingshot to the face of David.
His goliaths from the Big East built a huge lead into the second half.
He looked like a genius, like Bobby Knight.


A Patent Dispute
To the Editor:
Lawrence M. Fisher's article "Will Users Be the Big Losers in Software Patent Battles?" (The Executive Computer, March 6) told only one side of the story of software-related patents.


F.Y.I.
Bankers' Hours
Q.
Many suburban banks are open until 6 P.M., if not later, and often on Saturdays.
Why are banks in New York City, the world's financial capital, locked up at 3 P.M. each day?


2-Year-Old Dies in Foster Mother's Care
A Brooklyn foster mother who put a 2-year-old girl into a tub filled with scalding water was arrested and charged with second-degree murder yesterday, the housing police said.
Norma Douglas, 32, of 162 Troy Avenue in Crown Heights, waited nearly two days before taking her niece to the hospital, said Lieut.
Thomas Sbordone, a spokesman for the housing police.
The girl, Ditaya Douglas, died on Friday at Cornell Medical Center's burn unit in Manhattan with second- and third-degree burns covering a third of her body.


Audrey Perlman, Steven Raphael
Audrey Marlene Perlman, an associate at Levy Phillips &amp; Konigsberg, and Steven Matthew Raphael, an associate at Moskowitz Passman &amp; Edelman, both Manhattan law firms, were married last evening in Manhasset, L.I.
Rabbi Robert Widom performed the ceremony at Temple Judea.
Mrs.
Raphael is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Perlman of Merrick, L.I.
She graduated from the State University at Buffalo and received a master's degree in psychology from New York University.
She and her husband received law degrees from Fordham University.
Her father and mother, Barbara Perlman, own the Perlman Paper Company, an office supply concern, and the Exact Printing and Litho Corporation, both in New York.


It's No Guarded Secret: Respert Shoots to Win
Michigan State won the school's only basketball national championship in 1979.
But nearly every season that has followed has offered an element their fans could bank on: superior guard play.
Magic Johnson fueled Michigan State's march to the title.
Then along came spunky Sam Vincent and Scott Skiles followed by nifty Steve Smith.


Data Bank/March 20, 1994
Data Bank/March 20, 1994
Business Inventories
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Monthly percent change
0.0
-0.2
0.6
Industrial Production Index
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
Monthly percent change
0.4
0.5
1.0
Producer Prices
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.2
-0.1
Housing Starts
Annual rate, in thousands
1,309
1,258
1,612
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.0
0.2
Weekly Jobless Claims
March 11
March 4
Feb. 25
In thousands
342
350
314
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,892
1,872
1,910
Coal Production
March 4
Feb. 25
Feb. 18
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
21,259
21,743
20,783


Immigrant Artists in the Bronx
"CHANGING Sights: Art by Immigrants Living in the Bronx," at the Longwood Arts Gallery, is an exhibition of paintings, photography, sculpture and works on paper and fabric by nine Bronx artists from eight countries, including Chile, Jamaica, France, Cuba and Russia.
Betti-Sue Hertz, director of the Longwood Arts Project, which includes studios as well as the gallery, pointed out that immigrants are dramatically altering New York's art world.
Looking at art from different cultures, she said, "breaks down our prejudices and makes us think about things differently."


DEAL WITH CHINA URGED BY BENTSEN
Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen says he would like to see a compromise worked out with China that can spare the Clinton Administration having to withdraw Beijing's beneficial trade status.
Mr.
Bentsen, speaking Friday night, seemed to be going out of his way to try to lower the Administration's volume on China after Secretary of State Warren Christopher's confrontation with Chinese authorities in Beijing last weekend.
Mr.
Bentsen was in Hawaii for a meeting of 17 finance ministers from Pacific Rim countries, many of whom took the opportunity to tell their American hosts that it was wrong-headed, arrogant and not in America's interest to use trade leverage to try to influence China on human rights.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $375,000
77 Seventh Avenue (14th St.)  (Vermeer)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, eat-in kitchen, 500-sq.-ft. terrace, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,103, 44% tax deductible, listed at $395,000, 16 weeks on market (Brokers: Debra Kameros Co.; Douglas Elliman)


The Secrets of a Small German Town
STONES FROM THE RIVER By Ursula Hegi. 507 pp. New York: Poseidon Press. $23.


SOCCER: Argentina Always on Their Mind; A Team Thousands of Miles Away Comes a Little Closer to Home
Al Nazor is one of millions of naturalized American citizens who put the United States first -- unless it is the World Cup.
"If Argentina plays the United States in the World Cup final," said Nazor, who was born in Argentina and came to the United States when he was 3 years old, "my heart will be 100 percent for my country -- and that's Argentina. But if the United States plays against anyone else, I'm for America all the way."


Ms. Feuer, Mr. Gedzelman
Cheryl Feuer, a daughter of Dr.
Martin and Linda Feuer of Ardsley, N.Y., is to be married today to Michael Gedzelman, a son of Bert and Malvena Gedzelman of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
Rabbi David Gedzelman, a brother of the bridegroom, is to officiate at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
The bride, 33, graduated from the University of Chicago and received master's degrees in health administration from Tulane University and in curriculum and teaching from Columbia University.
She owns a tutoring service called Tutoring for Success, in Oakton, Va.


Harding Deal Handed Something to Both Sides
As lawyers on opposing sides of the Nancy Kerrigan assault case, Norman W. Frink, the prosecutor, and Robert C. Weaver Jr., the attorney for Tonya Harding, had spoken almost daily for two months.
This past Monday, they began a frenetic 48 hours of plea bargaining that ended only three hours before Harding walked into a courtroom and admitted guilt to a charge of hindering the prosecution.
Frink characterized the negotiations as "freewheeling," and Weaver, who admitted to being drained in an interview Friday afternoon, said it was a period "of not very much sleep." The two attorneys met or spoke a dozen or so times between Monday and Wednesday, Weaver said, "and everybody had to give a little bit on this."


Long Island Rail Road Trains Derails in Queens


THE GOOD SON
Al Gore may not possess the "sexy and embraceable" features pollsters most endorse.
However, integrity and intelligence certainly are remarkable qualities to encounter in an elected official in the United States.
Even the "appearance" of virtue anywhere near Washington is a refreshing departure from virtually every elected official trying to balance the pollster acid tests of electability.


A Family Grieves for a Fallen Officer


AMERICA'S BEST BUILDINGS
Benjamin Franklin, in Poor Richard's Almanac, writes, "There are no ugly loves, nor handsome prisons." "America's Best Buildings" (text by David C. Anderson, photographs by Lizzie Himmel, Feb. 20) literally and visually disproves this aphorism and serves as a sad yet accurate commentary on public education's physical facilities, the Government's priorities and our country's moral climate.
MICHAEL J. TATALOVICH Whitefish Bay, Wis.


Russians Find Their Heroes In Mexican TV Soap Operas
In her gala opening performance at the Rossiya concert hall, Victoria Ruffo did not dance.
Or sing.
Or tell jokes.
For two hours, against a giant backdrop of billowing sequined white tulle, the Mexican star of Russia's favorite soap opera, "Simply Maria," sat in an armchair on stage.
With the help of an interpreter, Ms.
Ruffo chatted in Spanish with a bubbly Russian master of ceremonies and at the end, she answered a few questions from an audience of more than 2,000.


A Board of Her Own
Snowboarding is relentlessly male.
On the slopes it's mostly guys, usually in packs.
In the United States adult snowboard models are named and built for the guys.
Or at least that's how it was.
But now the gender barrier has been breached.
Shannon Dunn of Steamboat Springs, Colo., shown below, a top-ranked female rider, has a board named for her, and built for a skilled but light rider, from Sims Snowboards in California.
She expects to ride it in the U.S.
Open (of snowboarding) this weekend in Vermont: "I designed the board to fit a woman and I'm stoked to be riding it."


Pigs Can Fly. Can They Hit?
To the Sports Editor:
As regards Allan H. Selig's gratuitous treatise, I have but one comment to make to the ersatz baseball commissioner:
Sure, Bud, and pigs can fly. MEREDITH RICH  New York


Leigh Wallace, Dwayne Wilkins
Leigh Ann Wallace, a daughter of William E. Wallace of North Plainfield, N.J., and Barbara P. Wallace of Plainfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Dwayne Eric Wilkins, the son of Robert W. and Saundra G. Wilkins of Glendale, Queens.
The Rev.
Robert T. Grinner officiated at Grace Episcopal Church in Plainfield.
The bride, 31, is an advanced sales representative at Hoechst-Roussel Pharmaceuticals, a drug company, in Plainfield.
She graduated from Hampton University.
Her father retired as a division manager at Hoffmann-La Roche Pharmaceuticals Inc., in North Plainfield.
He is now a professional photographer.
Her mother is a social worker in the Department of Human Services of New Jersey.


The People's Court; Notes From the Small-Claims Front: Wringing Justice, With Peace, From the Maddening Fabric of Everyday Life
SOMETIMES Naomi Ebert would simply avoid her roommate, Joe Weiss, too angry and frustrated to be in the same room with him.
Sometimes, she would try to throw him off guard by offering a greeting or striking up some idle converstion as they crossed paths in the three-bedroom apartment they shared in Elmhurst, Queens. ("I would be nice to him just to confuse him," she explains.)


A Time to Indulge in Celebratory Feasting
THERE are heavy holiday times on the horizon.
Before the end of this week Jews will be celebrating Passover, a time when leavened foods are forbidden.
Christians will gear up for Holy Week, culminating in celebratory Easter feasts.
Holidays like these tend to put normal eating on hold.
And it is a good thing.
Because without seasonal religious holidays or even some nonreligious ones like Thanksgiving, many of the traditional dishes that have roots in various cultures would be lost in the rush of new dining trends.
Salmon tartare instead of gefilte fish?
Grilled fresh tuna instead of Easter lamb roast or baked ham?


If Money Buys Good Schools, We Can Fix the Schools. If.
LAST week, when Michigan voters approved a radical change in public school financing, many were probably less concerned about the future of education than with their pocketbooks.
The landmark plan, which is being watched closely by policy-makers in other states, will reduce property taxes by shifting the burden of school financing to sales and other taxes.
But educators will be watching another provision of the Michigan plan, which seeks to narrow the gap between rich and poor schools by guaranteeing each district a minimum of $4,200 a student -- $1,000 more than the least affluent districts get now.


Sharks Up Close In Curacao
Divers and snorkelers can have a close encounter with sharks -- close enough to feed them by hand -- at a new section of the Curacao Seaquarium called Animal Encounters.
Divers who pay a $50 fee and snorkelers who pay $30 can enter a portion of Animal Encounters called the Shark Encounter, a large pool where they can feed lemon, reef and nurse sharks through mesh fencing.
Information: Curacao Tourist Board, (212) 751-8266 or (800) 332-8266.


Ah, Spring! Time for the Skunk Cabbage.
IT'S here!
This is the first day of spring.
Officially the timing of the seasonal changeover will not be until 3:28 P.M.
But never mind.
Cabin-fever sufferers have watched for its coming for some time.
They have even seen a few signs.
For one.
The birds are singing.
A pair of nuthatches, high in the silver maple tree, was belting out a glorious chorus last week.
Nearby in the oak tree, the chickadees sounded out a sort of joyous reply.
Although these birds have been around all winter long, particularly at the feeders, what does it matter?
Their singing is welcome now.


After 3 Years, It's a Deal: Agency to Begin Pollution Watch
Three years ago, the city agreed to pay $850,000 to settle charges that it allowed too much sewage to travel through the Newtown Creek Sewage Treatment Plant.
But until now, because of delays and disputes, the money has not had a much of a chance to help Greenpoint and Williamsburg, areas that have long suffered from a collection of noxious waste sites.


Sara Franklyn and Stephen Crowe
Sara Beth Franklyn, a daughter of Herbert M. Franklyn of Clearwater, Fla., and the late Ruth Franklyn, was married last evening to Stephen James Crowe, a son of Maureen R. Crowe of London and the late J. Patrick Crowe.
Rabbi Al Sturmer performed the ceremony at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Crowe, 34, is the president of Communication Design Consultants Inc., a telecommunications consulting concern in New York.
She graduated from the State University College at Oswego, N.Y, and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
NOBODY NOWHERE: The Extraordinary Autobiography of an Autistic By Donna Williams.
Avon, $10.
The author describes the tortured inner world she lived in for years, unable to accept human contact and yet longing for it.
Detailing her fitful progress toward an independent life and also including advice for families of autistic people, the book offers "fascinating testimony to an intelligence undimmed by mental turmoil," Daniel Goleman said here last year.
OPERATION SHYLOCK: A Confession By Philip Roth.
Vintage International, $12.
In this novel, a writer who just happens to be named Philip Roth and who is recovering from a breakdown discovers that another man is impersonating him quite successfully in Israel.
His confrontation with his doppelganger forms the substance of the plot, which involves both men in Israeli politics and a debate over the future of the Jews.
Last year our reviewer, D. M. Thomas, said: "Despite the seriousness of its theme, the book carries the feeling of creative joy. One feels that Mr. Roth feels that he's let rip." Vintage has also reissued two of the author's earlier books, both with autobiographical elements.
MY LIFE AS A MAN ($11) concerns the obsessive and disastrous early marriage of a writer named Peter Tarnopol.
Mr.
Roth "can be not only funny but lyrical," Morris Dickstein said here in 1974.
GOODBYE, COLUMBUS: And Five Short Stories ($11), Mr.
Roth's first book, comprises the now famous love affair of Neil Klugman and Brenda Patimkin, as well as various meditations on American Jewish life.
In 1959 The New York Times's reviewer, William Peden, called the author "a keen recorder of an indecisive generation."


Wild Pitch By Selig
To the Sports Editor:
The article by Bud Selig ("Baseball's 'Best Interest' Phrasing Best Viewed Narrowly," The Times, March 6) lacked balance and was self-serving.


Motives of Quiet Congressman Who Is Making Much of Whitewater's Noise
In a city where bombast and pomposity are the rule, Representative Jim Leach of Iowa is quiet and modest.
In a Congress riven by partisanship, he has sided with Democrats over the years almost as often as he has lined up with his fellow Republicans.


Unheralded Maryland Jolts UMass
The season's high expectations came crashing down on the University of Massachusetts today.
Using relentless defensive pressure, scintillating shooting and another strong inside performance by Joe Smith, the unheralded Maryland Terrapins shocked the second-seeded Minutemen, 95-87, in the second major upset of the Midwest Regional.
On Friday, U.C.L.A., once ranked No. 1 in the nation, was upended by Tulsa, 112-102.


Pat Collins, William Sarnoff
Pat Collins, the entertainment reporter for the television station WOR, who is known for being such a tough movie critic that she was once banned from theaters as a young reporter in Boston, can make you laugh about everything from miserable dates to widowhood, both of which she knows something about.
She was widowed five years ago when her first husband, the composer Joseph G. Raposo, died.
At the time, she was so devastated she didn't think she'd be ready to date again, let alone remarry, until sometime in the 21st century.


CRIME
Never mind who else is in this race; ignore the odds and place your bets on Mark Daniel.
There isn't a false step in the author's third thunderously exciting racing mystery, THE BOLD THING (Little, Brown, $19.95), even when the horses are stumbling all over the track.
Before Micky Brennan was sent up for vehicular manslaughter and ostracized from the sporting world, he was a Thoroughbred trainer with a special affinity for broken-down horseflesh.
"I got this reputation as racing's refuge of sinners," says the demoralized hero of this curious, complex tale set in rural Ireland.
"I'd get sent rogues, ungenuine pigs, and they'd go for me." It's a thrill to watch Micky diagnose the problems -- from sore feet to brain tumors -- that plague these wild, intractable animals, and it's a joy to see these "rogues" restored to action.


Ellsworth Vines, Tennis Star of 1930's, Dies at 82
Ellsworth Vines, the lanky, big-serving Californian who won the national tennis championship twice and Wimbledon once in the 1930's and has been revered ever since as one of the game's greatest players, died Thursday at his home in La Quinta, Calif.
Vines, who abandoned tennis in 1940 for a second career as a professional golfer, was 82.
The cause of death was complications from kidney disease.


Loch Ness: Fiction Is Stranger Than Truth
They tried to kill off the Loch Ness Monster last week.
Or at least the popular image of Nessie, as a towering serpent rising up from the frigid, fresh-water loch in the Scottish Highlands.
The image of the monster as a plesiosaur (a long-necked, seafaring reptile supposedly extinct) comes from the famous "surgeon's photograph" taken in early 1934.
It was reportedly snapped by Col.
Robert Wilson, a respected London gynecologist, who was driving along the loch when a companion glanced down at the water and shouted: "My God, it's the monster!" But the Colonel himself was always a bit cagey about the sighting up until his death in 1969 and claimed only to have seen "something in the water."


Northeast's Snowfall Prolongs Ski Season
With a bumper crop of snow in the Northeast this year, some ski resorts are planning to stay open longer than usual.
Killington, Vt., has scheduled its Fun Slalom for June 1 and may stay open beyond that.
In the last two years Killington has had skiing through late May.
According to Ken Beaulieu, a spokesman, the average snowfall for a full season is 254 inches and by the first week in March, 235 inches had fallen.
Some 60 more inches are expected this month and next.
Business, however, has been down about 10 percent from last year because of cold weather.
"But reservations are up well into April," Mr.
Beaulieu said.


A Time to Indulge in Celebratory Feasting
THERE are heavy holiday times on the horizon.
Before the end of this week Jews will be celebrating Passover, a time when leavened foods are forbidden.
Christians will gear up for Holy Week, culminating in celebratory Easter feasts.
Holidays like these tend to put normal eating on hold.
And it is a good thing.
Because without seasonal religious holidays or even some nonreligious ones like Thanksgiving, many of the traditional dishes that have roots in various cultures would be lost in the rush of new dining trends.
Salmon tartare instead of gefilte fish?
Grilled fresh tuna instead of Easter lamb roast or baked ham?


Gunmen Linked to the Mafia Kill an Italian Priest in His Sacristy
Gunmen apparently linked to organized crime shot to death an anti-Mafia priest today as he donned his vestments in the sacristy of his church north of Naples.
Local officials immediately associated the slaying with the national election on March 27 and 28, in which campaigning has been overshadowed by accusations that the Mafia is backing the newly formed Forza Italia (Go, Italy) party led by Silvio Berlusconi, a media mogul.


N.Y.U. Done In at (or After?) the Buzzer
It will go into the record books as a 66-59 victory by Lebanon Valley College over New York University in the 1994 National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III men's basketball championship game.
But it will be remembered as a title seemingly won in regulation time, then lost in overtime.


Business Diary: March 13-18
THE ECONOMY Michigan Rewrites the Textbook on School Financing  Any list of today's fashionable political ideas has to include these: property taxes are too high, discrepancies in districts' school budgets are unfair and cigarettes are an easy target for higher taxes.
In Michigan last week, the three ideas converged with a vengeance.
Shattering the traditional method of financing public education, the state voted to shift most of the burden from property taxes to sales taxes.
It will also triple the cigarette tax, to 75 cents a pack, to help pay the bills.
Together, these taxes will raise about $2 billion.
A key goal of the plan is to smooth out the disparities among school districts.
The poorest now pay $3,200 per student each year, while the richest pay $10,400 (that's nothing compared with New York, though, where the high is close to $46,000).
Each district will now get at least $4,200, and wealthy districts will face spending limits.
Other states are probably watching carefully; 28 of them are in the midst of lawsuits involving the redistribution of school aid.


They're Dancing as Fast as They Can
IF YOU'RE IN A MOOD TO CONSIDER alternative theater, you couldn't do much better than to check out "Marathon Dancing," the vivid new site-specific performance piece now being presented by En Garde Arts at the Masonic Hall at 71 West 23d Street.
The Masonic Hall?
Yes, but read on.
"Marathon Dancing" is a musical and a melodrama as well as a very entertaining slice of American social and architectural history.
It's not your average theater experience.
The time is early 1932, the hopeless height of the Great Depression, when bread lines were commonplace and bindlestiffs camped out by the railroad tracks, waiting to hop the next freight west.
It's at the bleak end of Herbert Hoover's Administration and a few months before the appearance of patrician, fatherly Franklin Delano Roosevelt with his N.R.A., W.P.A., C.C.C. and various other alphabetized New Deal panaceas.
The place is the sleazy Dreamland Ballroom (I arbitrarily think of it as being somewhere in the Middle West, possibly Chicago) where a marathon dance contest is in progress.


Forcing a Board To Hold a Meeting
To the Editor:
As an attorney who represents more than 130 co-ops and condominiums, I read with interest the Q &amp; A item under the heading "Forcing a Board to Hold a Meeting" in the Feb. 27 Real Estate section.


Spring Struts Into Paris
Short skirts made an impressive appearance last week in Paris, as women, like the three at right, shed their winter coats in the mild weather.
The sidewalk cafes were filled, and yellow forsythia and daffodils were blooming on grassy knolls and gardens.
In a city where everyone seems to have an opinion about fashion, the return of short skirts was anything but timid.
Even the Chanel women were wearing their skirts at mid-thigh length, often with matching tweed handbags, and had their socks rolled over the tops of granny boots.


Ah, Spring! Time for the Skunk Cabbage.
IT'S here!
This is the first day of spring.
Officially the timing of the seasonal changeover will not be until 3:28 P.M.
But never mind.
Cabin-fever sufferers have watched for its coming for some time.
They have even seen a few signs.
For one.
The birds are singing.
A pair of nuthatches, high in the silver maple tree, was belting out a glorious chorus last week.
Nearby in the oak tree, the chickadees sounded out a sort of joyous reply.
Although these birds have been around all winter long, particularly at the feeders, what does it matter?
Their singing is welcome now.


In Miami's Little Haiti, Fears of Assassination
When two gunmen shot and killed Daniel Buron here last week, another wave of fear quickly spread through the neighborhood that is home to thousands of Haitian exiles and refugees.
For the fourth time in three years, a prominent opponent of Haiti's military dictatorship had been killed on the streets of Little Haiti, and for the fourth time, the police and prosecutors seemed to discount politics as a motive.


On Sunday; Death by Guns: Once a Horror, Now a Cliche
"WE go after business people, the potential victims sitting in their stores waiting for some psycho to walk in and blow them away," said the gun-licensing dealer, who finds business, well, booming.
Six years ago, the dealer, Bill Kay, was signing up about 20 people a week in the metropolitan area for his service.
Now it's 50 to 60 people a week deciding to seek gun licenses, three out of four of them New York City residents.
Suburban business picked up noticeably for his company, Pistol Licenses of Long Island, after the shock of the Long Island Rail Road shootings in December, when a man from the city was accused of riding out with the dozing commuters and committing murder and mayhem with a powerful, accurate handgun.


At Work; We're Doing Just Fine, Thank You
DESPITE the worst expectations of companies large and, especially, small, the Family and Medical Leave Act, which entitles employees to up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave a year for family medical emergencies, appears to have had little negative impact since it went into effect last August.
If anything, according to a recent survey by William M. Mercer Inc., the benefits consultant, and the University of California, Berkeley, small businesses have felt the law's impact less than large companies.
"In large employers, there are so many levels of bureaucracy and different policies," said Janice Stanger, an associate at Mercer who worked on the study with researchers at the Work and Family Task Force of the university's Institute of Industrial Relations.
"Small business is more flexible, more used to working around people's idiosyncrasies and changes in schedule. There has not been a disproportionate impact." The survey included questions on the impact of California's family and medical leave law, a measure similar to the Federal mandate that has been on the books since the beginning of 1992.


Things Are Strange Than We Can Imagine
BLACK HOLES AND TIME WARPS Einstein's Outrageous Legacy.
By Kip S. Thorne.
Illustrated. 619 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $30.
HYPERSPACE A Scientific Odyssey Through Parallel Universes, Time Warps, and the Tenth Dimension.
By Michio Kaku.
Illustrated. 359 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $25.


N.F.L. Owners Ready to Give Offenses Mouth-to-Mouth
A year ago, the National Football League's club owners entered their annual meetings with no labor agreement, no television contracts and no idea where expansion would take them.
Now they have labor peace (and, as a concomitant bonus, a salary cap), richer television contracts than they ever dreamed of and expansion franchises warming up in Charlotte, N.C., and Jacksonville, Fla., plus other cities panting to join the club.
So when this year's N.F.L. meetings begin today in Orlando, Fla., the emphasis will be on the game on the field rather than the game in the boardroom.
The priority will be on changes in the playing rules to enliven the game.


Conversations/Gerald Miller and Frank Schweickert; In the New Ball Game, These Two Would Have Struck Out
HAD California's new three-strikes-and-you're-out law been on the books two and a half years ago, Frank Schweickert and Gerald Miller would have gone to prison for the rest of their lives.
Between them, Mr.
Schweickert, 28 years old, and Mr.
Miller, 38, had been convicted of more than two dozen serious or violent felonies and had served 25 years in Vacaville, Folsom, Soledad, San Quentin and other notorious prisons up and down this vast state.
With an inmate population of 120,000, California incarcerates more people than most countries.


In Scolding China, Washington Loses Face; Cancel Privileges
To the Editor:
For five years, my friends and I in Silicon Valley have written the White House, Congressional leaders, heads of state and newspapers saying the Chinese regime has to play ball like everyone else if it likes the lucrative benefits of international trade.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
With West Coast Sharks
THE baymen of East Hampton have hired an entertainment lawyer.
"We've suddenly discovered we're what Hollywood calls a hot property," said Arnold Leo, secretary of the East Hampton Town Baymen's Association.
Since the plight of the baymen was publicized in a Billy Joel song, a Peter Matthiessen book and a Joe Pintauro play -- adapted from Mr.
Matthiessen's "Men's Lives" -- movie offers have poured in.
But some of the tactics used by producers have shocked the fishermen, Mr.
Leo said.


Maria Vaamonde, Carlos Beracasa
Maria Fernanda Vaamonde, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fernando Vaamonde of Caracas, Venezuela, was married on Thursday to Carlos Alejandro Beracasa, the son of Mrs.
Randolph A. Hearst of New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles, and of Alfredo Beracasa of Caracas.
The Rev.
Marcial Garcia performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at La Barraca, the home in Caracas of the bridegroom's father.
Mrs.
Beracasa, 22, graduated from the Rochester Institute of Technology.
Her father is an industrialist in Venezuela who is also involved in ranching and fruit-juice processing.


Empire Szechuan Fined Over Menus
An Upper West Side landlord won a $440 judgment last week against Empire Szechuan, the 97th Street flagship of the Chinese restaurant chain whose flood of takeout menus has infuriated neighbors for months.
Saul Lapidus, who owns a building on West 74th Street, took the restaurant to Small Claims Court, charging that the menus left by deliverymen were creating a health and safety hazard.
James Shau, a co-owner of the restaurant, responded that the menus were protected by First Amendment guarantees of free speech and that there was no proof they were left by Empire Szechuan employees.


P.L.O. Split on Resuming Formal Talks
Palestine Liberation Organization officials were split today on whether talks with Israeli and United States officials scheduled to begin here on Sunday would lead to a formal resumption of the peace negotiations that Arabs broke off after the Hebron massacre.
On Friday, Jordan, Syria and Lebanon said they would return to the talks, but the P.L.O. is still holding out over guarantees of protection for Palestinians living under Israeli occupation.


Trying to Build a Better Playground
Disturbed by the lack of good playgrounds in the Village, a group of parents are taking matters into their own hands.
The Lower Manhattan Neighbors' Organization, a group of some 200 families, has designed a park for a site on Mercer Street and is trying to raise money to pay for it.
A volunteer effort to build a public playground is unusual: in fact, Parks Department officials don't recall a precedent.


Solarz, Who Made Enemies, Pays the Price in a Lost Job
For Stephen J. Solarz, the American Embassy in India was to have been the consolation prize that redeemed him from the ignominy of overdraft checks, redistricting and electoral defeat, if not quite the crowning glory of a political career that had once made him a potential contender for secretary of state.
Instead, this week Mr.
Solarz withdrew from consideration for the ambassadorship at the urging of the White House.
He was a casualty not only of heightened ethical sensitivities in a capital awash in Whitewater but of his own piquant approach in nine terms in Congress.
There, he went from being a Watergate-baby reformer of the class of 1974 to a power who could command an audience with almost any foreign leader but was often accused of ignoring his Brooklyn constituents.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a headline on March 6 with excerpts from the diary of Virginia Johnson, prima ballerina of the Dance Theater of Harlem, misinterpreted a diary entry.
Ms.
Johnson has not danced the role of the Firebird.


MARCH 13-19: Over and Out; Harding's Guilty Plea Closes A Saga With No Winners
The Olympic figure-skating season ended symbolically last week just about the way it began.
With a sharp rap.
And the bookend events, a bash on one skater's knee and a judge's gavel to another's guilty plea, say a lot about how far the sport has come since the days when Peggy Fleming and Dorothy Hamill were America's sweethearts on ice.
Never before in memory has one world-class athlete admitted guilt for any aspect of a scheme to injure another.
But Tonya Harding's plea to hampering the prosecution of the assault on her rival, Nancy Kerrigan, also revealed a lot about the role top athletes play in society.
By their excellence in performance it is easy to assume that the rest of their lives are equally polished.
In figure skating's world of sequins, lace and soaring music, the leap seems all the more natural.


POSTINGS: Unanimous Vote on Yeshiva Property; A Riverdale Landmarking Approved
The New York City Council, by a unanimous 47-to-0 vote, has approved the full landmark status of the Anthony Campagna Estate in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
But in its vote on Wednesday affirming the landmark, the Council also adopted a resolution urging the Landmarks Preservation Commission and the City Planning Commission to "act expeditiously to review applications of the owner" and to work with the owner, the local community board and other community groups "so that additions which are made to the landmark comply not only with the letter but the spirit of applicable law."


Pamela Harris, Austin Schlick
Pamela Ann Harris and Austin Christian Schlick, lawyers in Washington, are to marry there today.
Judge Harry T. Edwards of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia is to officiate at the Four Seasons Hotel.
Ms.
Harris, 31, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Theodore A. Harris of Alexandria, Va., and the late Ellen D. Harris.
The bride graduated from Yale University, from which she and her husband received law degrees.
She is a lawyer with the Justice Department in the office of the legal counsel.
Until recently, she was a clerk to Associate Justice John Paul Stevens of the Supreme Court of the United States.


Giving Medical Innovation a Chance
To the Editor:
Medical innovations will not be effectively brought to market for public benefit under the Administration's proposed health care reform package.
With Dr.
Arthur Coster, I invented laser angioplasty, a safe, noninvasive way to treat occlusive coronary artery disease.
The procedure uses a pulsed laser to vaporize the plaque that blocks coronary arteries.


Stalk of the Town
When George Bush denounced broccoli, he was dismissing the taste of the incumbent generation.
Lacking the inherent daintiness of a pea or a slender stalk of asparagus, broccoli is rarely mentioned in early American cookbooks, and it wasn't until the mid-60's that the treelike stems arrived.
Broccoli, in fact, was the first member of the smelly, and therefore suspect, cruciferous clan (cabbage, mustard greens, cauliflower, turnips) to straddle class lines and become -- in those fancy French restaurants where it was draped in hollandaise -- an elegant vegetable.


You'll Never Walk Alone


Mistaken Identity
To the Editor:
Micharl Kimmelman may be too sophisticated a viewer to be fooled for a split second by Duane Hanson's sculptures.
But I'll never forget the time I first saw "Museum Guard" at the Oakland Museum 10 or 15 years ago.
It wasn't on a pedestal but was standing next to the admission desk.
Most people first thought it was a real person.
It was amusing to watch people step up to it and ask questions.
ALAN POLSKY  Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif.


For the Presidents, The Polls Are Irresistible
CARTER had his Caddell and Reagan his Wirthlin.
And for every President of the last 50 years, there have been polls to provide political intelligence.
Franklin D. Roosevelt indeed recognized the possibilities that arose with the beginning of modern public opinion polling in the late 1930's.
F.D.R. encouraged Hadley Cantril of Princeton University, a pioneer in the academic use of polling, to periodically gauge public sentiment about increasing aid to England, changing the Neutrality Law and adopting the policy that became Lend-Lease.
In 1940 and early 1941, the charts Professor Cantril provided showed a public initially reluctant, subsequently divided, and then progressively supportive of aiding England.


Corrections
A picture on March 6 showing rifles in a gun store with a caption about the new Brady gun-control law, was published in error and was described imprecisely.
The law establishes waiting periods and background checks for purchases of hand guns, but does not affect rifles.


Staging Weddings as Theatrical Events
FACT: Half the marriages in the United States end in divorce.
The pessimist sees in that statistic thousands and thousands of unhappy singles.
The optimist, on the other hand, envisions the large number of future weddings and the marketing opportunities that go hand in hand.
Such was the thinking of Susanna Reich, a dancer turned wedding designer and the owner of Flowers by Susanna in Ossining.


In Russia, Turning Oil Into Money Is Actually Hard
Long before the world cared about Soviet nuclear weapons, it cared about Russian oil.
In the 1870's, Russia's entry into the world oil trade broke Standard Oil's monopoly.
Later, though obsessed with nuclear weapons, the world still cared about Russian oil: In the 1960's, Soviet dumping of cheap oil was the goad that led to the formation of a different cartel, OPEC.
Today, the Russian oil and gas industry, already producing 80 percent of Russia's hard-currency export earnings, is the cash cow that could help yank a crippled, chaotic economy back to its feet, and energy is arguably the single most important factor holding together the post-Soviet Commonwealth of Independent States.
Even those states that have the potential for energy independence, like Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan, are tied into a sclerotic refinery and pipeline system controlled by Russia.
Other landlocked states, like Ukraine and Belarus, depend on Russian oil the way an intensive care patient might depend on oxygen.


Recession-Influenced Dining
WHEN Pollo Pazzo opens in Huntington Village in the spring and Route 66 follows a few months later in Merrick, they will mirror a now familiar pattern.
Like the soon-to-open Caswell's in Montauk and Calaluna in Southampton, they are casual restaurants that plan to serve earthy substantial food and, above all, stress value.
Pollo Pazzo, or crazy chicken, an eat-in carry-out combination, will feature flattened boneless chicken marinated in rosemary, garlic and olive oil and grilled on an open fire.
Route 66 is billing itself as a Texas steakhouse offering Southwestern-style beef and ribs.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Evening Hours column on March 6 misstated Sanford I. Weill's title.
He is the chairman of the Travelers Inc., not of Primerica, which took over Travelers earlier this year and assumed its name.


Relationship Marketing Is Nothing New
To the Editor:
Regarding "The New Marketing: Sell and Socialize" (Viewpoints, Feb. 20), long before the chic nonsense of describing a basic marketing approach as "relationship marketing," producers of many basic commodities devoted substantial efforts to broadening personal relationships with distributors, salesmen and the ultimate users of their products.
What Toyota and Nestle are now doing is simply more of the same old thing.
HENRY W. PARNASS  Saranac Lake, N.Y., Feb. 21  The writer is a retired chief executive of the Newton Falls Paper Company, now Stora Papyrus Newton Falls Inc.


DEALS &amp; DISCOUNTS
REDUCED RETREAT The Vail Athletic Club, a 38-room resort in the Colorado mountain town, has introduced a four-night package at $495 a person from March 27 to April 17; before March 27 the price is $749.
The package features four nights' accommodation, including tax and Continental breakfast; a three-course dinner for each person with tax and tip; two massages per person, and use of the health facilities.
The club has a 20-meter indoor lap pool, an indoor rock climbing wall, a sauna, indoor and outdoor Jacuzzi baths and fitness equipment.
Information: (800) 822-4754.


Alien Adolescents
Americans invented adolescence, and then, like Frankenstein's monster, it turned on them.
Mickey Rooney as Andy Hardy may have been the ur-teen.
Postwar affluence and sheer numbers brought the world Elvis and James Dean.
In the modern era, Sean Penn as Jeff Spicoli in "Fast Times at Ridgemont High" gave rise to further generations of dedicated dropouts, from the most excellent Bill and Ted to the pyrophilic Beavis and Butt-head.


IMPERIAL CONGRESS
Though I agree with most of the content of Joseph A. Califano's article, I must take exception to the recommendation that the President should be granted line-item veto power ("Imperial Congress," Jan. 23).
In Pennsylvania, where I reside, such power has been granted to the Governor, and basically has worked well.
However, the last time around, the Governor illustrated problems that can occur when an executive has this type of power.
Specifically, the Governor vetoed some items of necessity for the operation of the court system, and while the Legislature responded in a fashion to help out the local courts, the action proved that the use of line-item vetoes can be abused.


New York's Bodegas Become Islands Under Siege
One man has already died behind the counter of the West Harlem grocery where Omar Rosario works, murdered in a tiny business where customers pay in pennies and promises.
Before he goes to work he slips on his bulletproof vest, slides a black 9-millimeter pistol in his waistband, and gives himself to God.
It is early on a Wednesday night and the store's lights gleam like new money among the dead street lights at the corner of 139th Street and Edgecombe Avenue.
The door opens and a young man with a puny mustache walks in, one arm hidden deep inside his baggy, half-open coat.
Mr.
Rosario thinks he has a machine gun or sawed-off shotgun.


The Gotcha! Virus
At first, it seems vaguely illegal and certainly disreputable to conduct a contest for creating computer viruses.
But Mark Ludwig of American Eagle Publications in Tucson, Ariz., is inviting the public "to write a fully functional computer virus that entertains people with political satire."
And Ludwig doesn't mean something that just inserts a funny block of text on the screen.
He wants the operation of the virus to be satirical.
For instance, a virus might mock political correctness by alerting you whenever you typed an offensive term with a beep, a siren or, in the case of really bad words, system lockup.


Stop Whining, Just Hit the Ball
To the Sports Editor:
The vituperative exchange between plate umpire Mark Johnson and Rod Carew over comments made to California Angel batter Gary DiSarcina ("Umps Escorted After Carew Erupts," The Times, March 13), is paradigmatic of what troubles baseball today.


D. C. Mist and Dave Eichelberger
Dorothy Christine Mist, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Wakefield Mist of Honolulu, was married on Friday to Martin Davis Eichelberger Jr., the son of Marynell Eichelberger of Waco, Tex., and the late Mr.
Eichelberger.
The Rev.
Leon Sterling, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Mauna Lani Bay in Kohala, Hawaii.
Mrs.
Eichelberger, who is known as D. C., is a manager at Lynnen's, a store in Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from the University of Colorado.
Her father was the founder and a vice president of Hawaiian Agronimics International in Honolulu, an agricultural subsidiary of C. Brewer &amp; Company, the sugar conglomerate.


Technology; From the Wizard of Zenda, 24 Feet of Sailing Magic
WHEN the yachtsman and investor William I. Koch broke with tradition recently by announcing he would sponsor an all-woman crew for the 1994 America's Cup, it was just the latest sailing innovation with Mr.
Koch's name attached.
Mr.
Koch's technically innovative, $5 million America3 yacht, with its ballast-bulb keel and carbon-composite hull, won him renown when he and his crew successfully defended the America's Cup against Italy in 1992.


A Time to Indulge in Celebratory Feasting
THERE are heavy holiday times on the horizon.
Before the end of this week Jews will be celebrating Passover, a time when leavened foods are forbidden.
Christians will gear up for Holy Week, culminating in celebratory Easter feasts.
Holidays like these tend to put normal eating on hold.
And it is a good thing.
Because without seasonal religious holidays or even some nonreligious ones like Thanksgiving, many of the traditional dishes that have roots in various cultures would be lost in the rush of new dining trends.
Salmon tartare instead of gefilte fish?
Grilled fresh tuna instead of Easter lamb roast or baked ham?


Domestic Arms Race
LETHAL PASSAGE How the Travels of a Single Handgun Expose the Roots of America's Gun Crisis.
By Erik Larson. 272 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $21.


Moving On: Dream Dies for a Young Basketball Coach
As dreams go, Joe Castiglie's was a modest one.
He aimed to be the full-time men's basketball coach at his alma mater, the State University of New York at Stony Brook on eastern Long Island.
He wanted to build the Division III Patriots into something his players, and his school, could be proud of.
On June 9, 1990, after six outstanding seasons as the part-time head coach, and after a lengthy nationwide search to fill the new full-time position, Castiglie, then 32, realized his dream.


Patricia Hartman, C. C. Wailes
Patricia Louise Hartman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart B. Hartman of Marco Island, Fla., was married there yesterday to Christopher Carey Wailes, a son of Mrs.
John Beckett Wailes of Baltimore and the late Mr.
Wailes.
The Rev.
Michael P. Durning performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Hideway Beach Club.
Mrs.
Wailes, 27, is a litigation legal assistant with Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, the law firm in New York.
She graduated from Rollins College.
Her father retired as president of Seaview Petroleum in Blue Bell, Pa.


Graf's No. 1 Challenger Is a Player Named Steffi
Fortunately Steffi Graf has always been intrigued with the notion of herself as her greatest competitor, because this year there is nothing else to inspire her to greater heights save her own internal touchstone, the one that demands perfection.
These days nobody but Steffi defeats Steffi, and in her last 32 matches, not to mention her last four Grand Slam tournaments, that simply hasn't happened.


Inquiry Reported at Kings County Hospital
The Brooklyn District Attorney's office has opened an investigation into the reconstruction of Kings County Hospital Center, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Over 10 years the cost of reconstructing the city hospital, which serves much of central Brooklyn, has grown to an estimated $1 billion from an initial figure of $50 million.
Last month, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani ordered a moratorium on the project.


EXIT THE CRITIC
Frank Rich's misinterpretation of my 1984 Tony Award acceptance speech was so off the mark that I had to write and clarify the situation ("Exit the Critic," Feb. 13).
The last thing it was meant to be was "a swipe" (Rich's words) against a fellow artist for whom I have nothing but respect and admiration.
My intention was only to celebrate the fact that the "simple, old-fashioned musical was still alive and well at the Palace" (my words).


No Headline
"Not one bullet will I use to protect a piece of candy. But I will kill 10 before I let one pull a gun on me." OMAR ROSARIO, a bodega manager.  [ 39:1. ]


Jeffrey Goldstein and Carolyn Curtis
Carolyn Grace Curtis, a daughter of Nancy B. Strauss of Chapel Hill, N.C., and Richard R. Curtis of Lilburn, Ga., is to be married today to Jeffrey Brian Goldstein, a son of Leslie F. and Robert I. Goldstein of Bridgewater, N.J.
Rabbi Ronald Isaacs will officiate at Beth El Synagogue in Durham, N.C.
The bride, 24, is a student at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She is a stepdaughter of Albrecht B. Strauss, who teaches English literature at the Duke Institute for Learning in Retirement, a continuing education program for senior citizens at Duke University in Durham.


Devils Overcome A Problem
The Devils found themselves short two men with the score 3-3 in the middle of the second period.
With Cam Neely, Ray Bourque and Adam Oates on the Boston Garden ice for the Bruins, the Devils were in trouble.
But the Devils killed the two-man disadvantage for the 1 minute 45 seconds, and that inspired them to raise the level of their game en route to an 8-6 triumph.


Think Japan Inc. Is Lean and Mean? Step Into This Office
TAKEHARU INUZUKA hunched over his work space amid the sea of desks that make up the Toyota Motor Corporation's Europe and Africa planning division.
He was putting the finishing touches on a sales presentation to be made by another executive in a few days.
The speech, about Toyota's European results last year and its plans for the coming year, would last 30 minutes.
But preparing it had taken virtually all Mr.
Inuzuka's time for two months, including many late nights and one time when he stayed in the office until 6 A.M.
Much of the time was spent revising the text and the slides, often by hand instead of on a computer.
And there were frequent meetings with managers at different levels to review the presentation.


In the 70's and 80's, Food for the 90's
AMSTERDAM'S BAR AND ROTISSERIE * (212) 874-1377; 428 Amsterdam Avenue, near 81st Street; $$; all major credit cards
This popular spot serves simple, comforting American food, with rotisserie-cooked poultry, lamb and fish at moderate prices in a relaxed setting.
The rectangular two-tier space has a long bar in front and an elevated dining room in the back with whitewashed brick walls, a black tin ceiling and tightly clustered cafe tables.
Among current starters are the gravlax with onion, capers and a tangy dill mustard sauce; sesame-and-ginger noodles with coriander and snow peas, and an antipasto plate for two combining roasted peppers and mushrooms, marinated eggplant, fresh mozzarella and lentils.
Main courses might include roasted half chicken with french fries; roasted loin of pork with porcini mushroom sauce, garlic mashed potatoes and grilled radicchio, and roasted marinated leg of lamb with garlic and rosemary.
Children 10 years old and younger are served a free dinner all evening on Sunday and until 7 P.M.
Monday through Friday; a $3 donation toward a children's charity is requested. (Review: 3/3/89; revisited: 3/16/94)


Too Young to Vote, but Old Enough to Ask Questions


Habitats/Battery Park City; Just a Little Home for 2
IN the second bedroom, hanging on the wall next to framed color photographs of their honeymoon safari, is a bright watercolor of a picturesque cottage, with yellow hollyhocks and red dahlias towering over a white Gothic bench.
"That's my parents' house outside Oxford," said Philip Allen, who left London to come to America and -- among other thing -- married Lorraine Marino, who was originally from Queens.
They met when both were accountants for the Manufacturers Hanover Trust.


Streetscapes/The A.T. Stewart Department Store; A City Plan to Revitalize the 1846 'Marble Palace'
A CENTURY and a half ago, A. T. Stewart invented a new kind of store, building his "marble palace" on the east side of Broadway from Chambers to Reade Street, the first department store in New York and perhaps the nation.
Now William J. Diamond, New York City's Commissioner of General Services, is at work on the building, hoping to invent a new way to look after the city's real estate.
In the early 19th century even the largest stores were not markedly different from small shop and factory buildings.
Alexander Turney Stewart, an Irish immigrant, opened one of these in 1823 at 283 Broadway, on the west side of Broadway between Chambers and Reade Street, a small building indistinguishable from the other structures that lined this section of Broadway at the time.


Traveling Coach
Along with art historians, archeologists and naturalists, big-time college coaches are now in the guided tour business.
The Travel-On agency in Silver Spring, Md., is selling foreign tours led by coaches from schools like the University of Notre Dame and the University of Kentucky.


To Be Like Mike
To the Sports Editor:
A no less noble and prolific writer than Dave Anderson draws nothing but wind in "The Great Jordan Experiment" (The Times, Feb. 6).


Half Good Is Not Good When You're Fighting The No. 1 Lady Vols
Tennessee 78, Clemson 66
Tiffany Woosley scored 21 points yesterday as the top-ranked Tennessee women's team came back to beat Clemson, 78-66, in Knoxville, Tenn., in the second round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association Mideast Regional.


The Case of the Missing Test
Losing a single test booklet has cost Bronx Community College the right to administer high school equivalency tests for up to a year.
Under the stringent security rules that govern the General Educational Development test, better known as the G.E.D., a test site is closed automatically if proctors collect fewer test booklets after the test than they handed out beforehand.


A Time to Indulge in Celebratory Feasting
THERE are heavy holiday times on the horizon.
Before the end of this week Jews will be celebrating Passover, a time when leavened foods are forbidden.
Christians will gear up for Holy Week, culminating in celebratory Easter feasts.
Holidays like these tend to put normal eating on hold.
And it is a good thing.
Because without seasonal religious holidays or even some nonreligious ones like Thanksgiving, many of the traditional dishes that have roots in various cultures would be lost in the rush of new dining trends.
Salmon tartare instead of gefilte fish?
Grilled fresh tuna instead of Easter lamb roast or baked ham?


School District 12 to Retain Superintendent
In a move that the Schools Chancellor, local school board officials and parents of students see as a fresh start for one of New York City's most corruption-plagued school districts, the board of District 12 in the Bronx has voted to retain the district's reform-minded superintendent.
"It's a new beginning for the district," the District 12 chairwoman, Carmen Taveras, said yesterday of the 5-to-2 vote Thursday night to keep Robert Henry as superintendent through June 1995.


2d Michelangelo Work Is Due for Unveiling
IN 1989, after more than two decades of study and work, the restored Michelangelo ceiling of the Sistine Chapel at the Vatican was opened to the public.
It was a revelation, though not everyone thought what was revealed was heavenly.
Since then, Michelangelo's other great Sistine Chapel fresco, "The Last Judgment," on the west wall, has been masked in canvas, concealing a seven-story scaffold not unlike the one the artist used to create the work.
Now, at an Easter week Mass to be celebrated by Pope John Paul II, "The Last Judgment," too, will be reoffered to the public in the same brightly colored state as the ceiling.


Corrections
A roundup of musical parodies in American history last Sunday referred imprecisely to "The Star-Spangled Banner." An act of Congress gave the song official status as the national anthem in 1931, not in 1916, when President Wilson so designated it in an executive order.


Pardoned In Jersey, Taro Incognito
THIS interview with the county's newest celebrity resident took place on anonymous ground -- in a parking lot off a highway exit in Scarsdale.
He is used to the press, of course -- having been the subject of more than 100 newspaper and magazine stories, along with intense television coverage.
He posed patiently for a photographer, was almost fawning to a reporter and finally began yawning half way through the meeting.
But his handlers insisted that his privacy -- particularly the exact whereabouts of his new home -- must be carefully guarded to protect him from harassment and even death threats.
They say that after being in the intense glare of the limelight, he simply wants to lead a normal life.
And while they acknowledge that he lives in Westchester, they will not say in exactly which town or village.


Fitful, Halting School Days
"Schools Try to Make Up for the Lost Snow Days"  [ Feb. 20 ]  would have been hilarious if it weren't so sad.
In addition to the dozen or so national holidays and the early mid-June year-end, schools now close for winter break, spring break, "Easter Monday," "President's Week" and the Friday before Memorial Day.
One district lamented the loss of their "six-day Memorial weekend," while hoping for leniency on the 180-day rule.
Is it any wonder we cannot compete with the Japanese?
DARYL R. ALTMAN, M.D.
Lynbrook


Tree Debris Clogs Post-Storm South
The ice storms that swept the South last month left behind millions of dead trees that now block roads, clog landfills and pose ferocious fire hazards.
Trees snapped, popped and toppled under the weight of several inches of ice that glazed parts of 10 states during the second week of February, when the fiercest of a string of winter storms took place.
J.
Neal Lott, a physical scientist at the National Climatic Data Center, a Federal agency in Asheville, N.C., called it "the most widespread and worst ice storm in the Southeast in 20 or 30 years."


Manager's Profile
Robert C. Czepiel
Fund: Robertson Stephens Emerging Growth, $180 million in assets.
Manager since 1987 inception. (Sponsor: Robertson Stephens &amp; Company, San Francisco.)


Collider Dead, Physicists Seek To Save Studies
With their operating budgets reduced, research prospects dimmed and the biggest scientific project in history in wreckage, America's particle physicists are trying to save at least a few incentives for those in their field to continue careers in science.
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary and Dr.
Sidney D. Drell of the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center have begun a study to set new priorities for high-energy research, taking into account the absence of the machine on which they had been counting: the Superconducting Supercollider.


Ship Contract Enlivens Piers
The old Brooklyn Navy Yard, the once-solid symbol of America's naval dominance put out of action by the decline of the shipbuilding industry, has attracted small, land-based companies over the last decade.
But now a $9.4 million conversion contract is enlivening the yard's becalmed piers and docks.
Eastern Technical Enterprises, a company based in Norfolk, Va., with offices in the Navy Yard, won the contract to convert the Harkness, a naval oceanographic survey ship, into a nautical school for the Maine Maritime Academy.


Q and A
Wheelchair Travel in London
Q.
I will be in London this year with a wheelchair-bound companion.
How can we go from Heathrow Airport on the Underground to Waterloo Station, in central London, with the absolute minimum of stair climbing? -- John H. Berryman, Southold, L.I.


Despite Winter's Most Contrary Effort, Spring Plans to Burst Out at 3:28 P.M.
AFTER a winter of 16 storms and 50.3 inches of snow, spring's arrival today at 3:28 P.M. is cause for celebration in most quarters.
Already last week, Little League coaches had posted guard by home plates throughout the county, waiting for the last of the snow to clear the playing fields.
Naturalists reported a red haze on hillsides from Yonkers north to the Putnam County line, a sure sign that maple trees were about to bloom.
The Hudson River, too, swelled with runoff as the yearly thaw began, and tugboats inched along the shoreline, making way for a downstream surge of freshwater.


An 'Anne Frank' That Steals the Heart
IT isn't the fortifying words of Anne Frank that are heard in prologue to her namesake play at the George Street Playhouse.
Instead, the charge of a Holocaust denier rumbles through the theater.
"There is no official document in existence anywhere," the voice says about an intent to execute Jews "in large quantities."
Don't assume that Susan Kerner, the director of the unerring George Street production of "The Diary of Anne Frank," is making a self-conscious plea for relevance, or that she is belaboring a point.
After all, that first unnerving pronouncement bespeaking "the new anti-Semitism," as it has been called, seethes with implicit associations to recent hate crimes.


WHO'S AFRAID OF LANI GUINIER?
Lani Guinier's "modest proposal" to refine the concept of democracy by "taking turns" is both intriguing and thought-provoking ("Who's Afraid of Lani Guinier?" Feb. 27).
However, since her stated objective remains to enhance the power of "any politically cohesive minority" at the expense of the one-person-one-vote doctrine, I am much more comfortable with her as a political and legal theoretician than as the chief enforcement officer for civil rights in the United States.
THEODORE C. WIDDER 3D Madison, Wis.


Amy B. Cloth, Barry A. Zamore
Amy Beth Cloth, a daughter of Edwin H. and Myrna Cloth of Cherry Hill, N.J., was married last evening to Barry Alan Zamore, the son of Irwin A. and Elaine B. Zamore of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi F. J. Neulander officiated at the Regency Palace in Mount Laurel, N.J.
The bride, 23, graduated from the University of Maryland.
She is an assistant in the credit department at Baby Togs Inc., a maker of children's clothing in New York.
Her mother is the Township Clerk of Cherry Hill, and her father is a metallurgical engineer at Stone &amp; Webster, an engineering company, in Cherry Hill.


Why Some People Aren't Smiling on Oscar Night
"FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION." Those are the words that accompany trade advertising to promote the would-be Oscar nominee.
Such ads appear in a flurry while voting for nominations goes on, and they reveal amazing optimism.
Practically everyone who makes or acts in a film appears to feel eligible (or at least susceptible to this form of studio-sponsored flattery).
You would hardly be surprised, while this orgy of positive thinking is underway, to see an ad urging best actor consideration for Pauly Shore.
But when nomination day comes, there is joy in Mudville for only a select few.
For most actors, the academy's choices do not indicate any consideration at all.
Fine work is lost in the shuffle, which has prompted many a non-nominee to disparage the whole idea of the Oscar race.
It is helpful at such times to remember that the only actor who ever won three Oscars was Walter Brennan.


Clearing the Air in New York
Last week City Council Speaker Peter Vallone went a long way toward insuring fresher, cleaner air for New Yorkers -- by introducing legislation that puts sweeping new restrictions on smoking in public places.
A lot of New Yorkers will hope he goes even further.
The Smoke-Free Air Act requires employers of all sizes to restrict smoking to enclosed, specially ventilated rooms, with a limit of one room to each floor of a building.
Smoking would be restricted to separate rooms in pool halls, and separate sections of outdoor cafes.
It would also be banned in the seats at Shea and Yankee Stadiums.


Envisioning the Future Of Liberty State Park
For nearly two years the Liberty State Park Development Corporation, which is charged with maintaining and developing the park, has been fending off attacks by Friends of Liberty State Park, environmental groups and growing numbers of neighborhood groups.
At issue is a golf course slated to take up close to a third of the park.
The development corporation has engaged a designer to plan the use of 152 acres of parkland for a golf course, restaurant, parking space with peripheral space of 75 acres for playgrounds, picnic areas, jogging paths, parking space and gardens, accounting for about one-third of the park.
The cost of the golf course will be met by issuing however many millions of dollars seem necessary worth of tax-exempt New Jersey bonds.
The facilities on the 75 acres set aside for public enjoyment are to be funded, according to an advertisement run by the corporation, by income from the golf course.
No one disputes the need for more playgrounds or picnic areas.
The one playground built in the 10 years since the park opened is sufficient for possibly 20 children.
There are so few tables and benches that families hunker down along the drive leading into the park with grills and picnic baskets.
No one disputes the appeal of a golf course within easy ride of Hudson County or the attractiveness of the sport.
Speakers and letter writers have suggested other spots where a golf course would be a benefit.
Over a year ago the Friends of Liberty State Park presented an alternative park design to the corporation, but it has been largely ignored.
In spite of opposition, the corporation refuses to budge.
The final decision is with the State Department of Environmental Protection and Energy but, so far as the public is aware, the corporation is in charge.
Millions of dollars in tax-exempt bonds will be issued, with interest met and final payment made from the income of the course's green fees, restaurant, pro shop and parking lot.
From this income will also come payment on park improvements.
But wouldn't a far smaller bond issue pay for playground equipment, picnic tables and benches, clearing pathways and planting gardens?
Should the golf course default, taxpayers would end up paying for it.
The fight is not over yet.
A coalition to save Liberty State Park proposes a plan for the park based on New York's Central park and for the dismantling of the development corporation.
The coalition, an umbrella organization of citizen groups statewide, hopes to persuade state officials that a golf course in Liberty State Park is not a good idea.
LENORE GREIMAN Jersey City


The Art of Biography
To the Editor:
Sharon O'Brien, in her essay on herself and Willa Cather ("My Willa Cather: How Writing Her Story Shaped My Own," Feb. 20), expresses so eloquently how transforming that "power relationship between a biographer and her subject" can be.
While doing an independent study on biography with Edith Wharton as my subject, I was confronted with an unexpected and inexplicable disillusionment with my subject, once a favorite author.


Ms. Halperin, Mr. Fuchsberg
Deborah Ruth Halperin, a jewelry designer in New York, is to be married today to Gilbert Fuchsberg, a reporter at The Wall Street Journal.
Shawn Fields-Meyer, a rabbinical student at the University of Judaism in Los Angeles, is to perform the ceremony at the Harbor Club in New York.
Ms.
Halperin, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Wesleyan University.
She is a daughter of Martha Halperin and Dr.
Ira C. Halperin, both of New York, and a stepdaughter of Amy Halperin.
03-20-94Her father is the chief of hematology at St.
Vincent's Hospital in New York.
Her mother is an administrative assistant at Choice in Dying, a patients' rights group in New York.
Mr.
Fuchsberg, 30, graduated from Harvard University.
He is the son of Esta and Seymour Fuchsberg of Great Neck, L.I.
His father is the managing partner in Fuchsberg &amp; Fuchsberg, a law firm in New York.


Bronx Arts Ensemble Visits Russian Residence
TODAY'S musical opportunities run the gamut from folk songs to grand opera.
Beginning in the Bronx, the pianist Leon Bates joins members of the Bronx Arts Ensemble for a 2 P.M. concert at the Russian Mission to the United Nations Residency, at Mosholu Avenue at 255th Street.
In homage to his Russian hosts, Mr.
Bates will open the program with three Rachmaninoff Preludes, following them with works of Seymour Barab and Chick Corea and Dvorak's Piano Quintet in A. Tickets will be available at the door; driving directions are available by calling (718) 601-7399 or (718) 549-1899.


In Scolding China, Washington Loses Face
To the Editor:
In August 1944, John S. Service, a career diplomat then acting as political officer to the United States Army's observer group in Yanan, had a lengthy conversation with Mao Zedong.
The defeat of the Axis powers was in sight, and Mao was thinking of how to build a new China once the war ended.
He told Service he would be willing to go to Washington and discuss future Chinese-American relations with President Roosevelt.
He never received a reply.


More Modest Proposals
To the Editor:
"Universal Prose Care? A Modest Proposal for Literary Realignment," by F. Paul Wilson (Feb. 20), is delicious satire.
It ranks with Jonathan Swift's own "Modest Proposal" for solving Irish famine by eating Irish children.
I have sent the essay to the White House, from which I expect a neatly written note thanking me for my support of the Clinton health care philosophy.
W.
HOWARD CHASE  Greenwich, Conn.


London Flats
To the Editor: We want report on our problems with renting a flat in London after reading your article, "A Real Home While Away" (Dec. 5).
We contacted the Apartment Company via phone and fax, making arrangements for a flat for a week.
We were told to call a particular cab company when we arrived at Heathrow, which would meet us with keys and drive us to the Chelsea flat.
We did and after we were dropped off, we found the flat had no heat or electricity.
After talking with a neighbor, we called the utility company and were told that the owner of the flat had not paid the electric bill in months.
We attempted to contact the Apartment Company for three hours to no avail.


Telling Tales Out of TV Land
The barrage probably began in 1992 when Barry Williams, commonly known as Greg Brady, published his memoirs.
"Growing Up Brady: I Was a Teenage Greg" was a rich mine of trivia, filled with delicious details about Mr.
Williams's off-screen necking with Maureen McCormick, who played his stepsister Marcia; his unrequited crush on Florence Henderson, who played his stepmother, and the time he showed up to work high on pot. ("Now there was no doubt," he wrote. "Greg was going to be one stoned Brady.")
Mr.
Williams said in a recent interview that the book "was a turning point in my acceptance of the past," which is undoubtedly very true.
But for Harper Perennial, the publisher, "Growing Up Brady," which was written with Chris Kreski, was a cash cow that sold 250,000 copies and spent 15 weeks on the New York Times paperback nonfiction best-seller list.
And its experience emboldened other publishers, who, being publishers, decided it was time to jump as nimbly as they could onto what they hoped would be a long and happy bandwagon.


Objects and Objets
Exhibitions of artworks by Emma Amos and from the Musee des Arts Decoratifs, New York, March 11 and 12.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
U.N. AND INTERVENTION
Dr.
Juergen Dedring, an expert in the United Nations department of humanitarian affairs, will speak on "The Future of Humanitarian Intervention After Yugoslavia and Somalia" at a public meeting of the Westchester chapter of the United Nations Association today at 2 P.M. in the Mamaroneck Town Center, 740 West Boston Post Road.
Dr.
Dedring received his master of arts and a doctor of philosophy in government from Harvard following studies at Louisiana State University and in his native Germany.
His interests have been in history, political science, sociology and philosophy.


North Korea, on Long Leash, Runs Circles Around Its Foes
Say this about North Korea's leaders: They may be Stalinist fanatics, they may be terrorists, they may be building nuclear bombs, but they are not without subtlety.
They have mastered the art of dangling Washington on a string.
Few international crises have brewed as long as the North Korean nuclear weapons project.
Depending on how you count, it started 27 years ago.
It has looked threatening -- first vaguely, then very -- for just shy of a decade.
Yet at major milestones along the way, the West has always found reason for hope that Kim Il Sung, who is 81 and the world's longest surviving leader, was one step away from trading his nuclear ambitions for a way out of his country's economic wasteland.


An Admirable Opening, a Sweet Ending
NAVONA of Great Neck is not content to rest on its laurels.
Although it is the top-rated Island Italian restaurant in the Zagat Survey, with relatively little to improve on, Navona is trying harder.
In January it closed for almost two months, not because of problems but to become even better.
The restaurant has doubled the size of its dining room, but has added just a single table.
A result is an airy room with well-spaced tables and increased comfort for diners.
A skylight and a wall of mirrors heighten its spaciousness.


And They Call It an Oasis
On a Wednesday in March, inside Debbie's Star Theater at the Debbie Reynolds Hotel and Casino, Miss Reynolds, 71, was signing autographs and posing for photos after her rollicking, self-deprecating and somewhat smutty musical revue.
After working them for 90 minutes in five different outfits, Miss Reynolds spent an extra hour with her fans (who had paid $29.95 to see her perform).
It seemed a surprisingly generous gesture in a town in which tourists are usually treated like pachinko balls.


Giving Medical Innovation a Chance
To the Editor:
Michael Porter, Elizabeth Teisberg and Gregory Brown ("Innovation: Medicine's Best Cost-Cutter," Viewpoints, Feb. 27), recognize that innovation has brought real value to health care in America.
I would add that liability reform is also needed.
Everyone knows about defensive medicine; what is not so widely known is what the medical technology industry calls "defensive innovation" -- manufacturers' opting against making a new device because they can't trust the current liability laws.


It's Magic
At Microsoft headquarters in Redmond, Wash., the home of MS-DOS, Windows and Bill Gates, the hottest pastime is so low-tech it borders on heresy.
It's called Magic, and it's a card version of fantasy games like Dungeons and Dragons.
Unlike D. and D.'s epic daylong battles, though, Magic duels can go down in 15 minutes.


From a Mexican Grave Comes 'Cronos'
A SCRAWNY GRAVEYARD dog named Daisy just won't leave Guillermo del Toro alone.
The Mexican director has returned for a nostalgic ramble through the cemetery where he got his start in films by digging a grave, but Daisy is all around him.
Shooing her away is useless because she takes every threat as an invitation.
The strangeness of the scene pleases Mr. del Toro.
Grinning devilishly and trying to keep from tripping over Daisy, he points out the space inside Belen Cemetery, where, in 1982, he dug a grave for a scene in a corny Mexican thriller.
He was only 17 then and had to get permission from his high school to work with the film crew.
After that, he kept visiting the eerie cemetery in the center of Mexico's second largest city just to look at the crumbling granite skulls on the monuments and to read the woeful expressions of mortality and faith engraved on the 19th-century tombstones.


Not Only The Lonely
To the Editor:
Though greeting-card writing might not be right up there with "War and Peace," I need to point out a one-word error in "Moonlight and Mush" (Feb. 13), which has inadvertently cast aspersions on my writing ability.


UP AND COMING: Alison LaPlaca; What's a Woman Like You Doing in a Barn Like This?
AT FIRST, THE DECISION TO CAST Alison LaPlaca as Tom Arnold's wife in his new CBS sitcom, "Tom," seems a gaffe.
To combine her wry sophistication with his style of broad bumbling, her command of the level gaze and the lower register with his workmanlike delivery -- well, there are moments in which it seems that Myrna Loy has momentarily dropped in on "Green Acres." Can this marriage be saved?
In fact, Ms.
LaPlaca says the pairing of opposites on the show, seen Wednesday nights at 8:30, is classic.
"I think it might be explained by just saying 'Abbott and Costello,' " the actress said recently from her home in Los Angeles.
"That's about it. It's funny when you have the goof and the sophisticate."


Bat Box Blues
Spring is bat time.
Year-round bats are emerging from winter dormancy, coming out of caves and trees, and attics and eaves.
Migratory bats are migrating north.
Bat organizations are drumming up membership.
And bat lovers are putting up wooden bat boxes.
But do they work?
The bat house or bat box is the signature product of Merlin Tuttle's 12-year-old Bat Conservation International, of Austin, Tex., the progenitor of bat conservation organizations.
Other, regional groups, like Bats Unlimited in Pittsburgh, have been growing in number as bat populations dwindle.


Right in Your Own Backyard
To the Editor:
When Walter Goodman wrote in his essay "Can a Trial Be Too Hot for TV?"  [ March 6 ] : "If television has a problem in this rancorously multicultural era, it is not insensitivity but oversensitivity to those who feel victimized," he came close, but no cigar.
Had he written, "If The New York Times has a problem in this rancorously multicultural era, it is not insensitivity but oversensitivity to those who feel victimized," he would have been right on the money.


Another Woman At Helm of Insurer
Penny Hart  [ "Long Island Q&amp;A: Prospering in the Insurance Industry With a Credo of Success," Feb. 27 ]  is not the only woman president of an insurance company.
I am privileged to be in the legal department of State-Wide Insurance Company, another Long Island-based carrier with a woman president.
State-Wide was No. 2 in customer satisfaction of the full-coverage insurers and is headed by Ann Looney, a very capable woman whose father did not own an insurance company, nor did he buy her one.


MARCH 13-19: Vestiges of the Old South; A Fuss in Alabama: Guess Who's Coming to the Prom
For years, proms at Randolph County High School in Weedowee, Ala., were typical rites of passage for seniors and juniors -- dreamy evenings of corsages and boutonnieres in a gymnasium full of taffeta, chiffon and sequins.
That was, until racial tension spoiled the party.
The school's principal, Hulond Humphries, was suspended last week when he touched off a furor by canceling this year's prom after learning from students that at least a dozen interracial couples were planning to attend.
Though he rescinded his cancellation a day later, the damage to racial trust was done; he is said to have brought to the surface the secret fears of countless whites as integration has swept through the South.


Annual Ceremony Honors New York's 'Amiable Child'
To the Editor:
A letter on March 13 concerning the gravesite near Grant's Tomb in Riverside Park inscribed, "An Amiable Child, St. Clair Pollock," suggests that it is not very well known.
But for the past 30 years, the Riverside-Claremont Neighborhood Association, of which I am chairwoman, has honored the child's memory.


School Board Is Criticized On Recycling
Nearly five years after enactment of the mandatory recycling law, New York City's public-school system has no formal recycling program, and for three and a half years has been in violation of that law.
The Board of Education has yet to adopt regulations placing responsibility for meeting the law's requirements.
A wide range of city officials and environmentalists, from the City Councilman who wrote the 1989 recycling legislation to frustrated school administrators to Department of Sanitation specialists, have sharply criticized the Board of Education's failure.
They have also expressed regret at what they call a lost opportunity to use the schools as the training ground for future generations for whom recycling would be essential.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST NOVEL UNDERSTAND THIS By Jervey Tervalon. Morrow, $20.


MARCH 13-19: Omens Good and Bad; Bosnia Crosses Thresholds, Perhaps Leading to Peace
After three years of civil war, Bosnia inched a little closer to peace last week.
In one diplomatic breakthrough, Serbian leaders agreed on Thursday to ease the stranglehold on Sarajevo, vowing to let people, food and medicine cross siege lines, although commercial traffic will be restricted.


POSTINGS: For a West Side S.R.O.; Fire Escape Restoration
Sometimes restoration touches are found in the least likely places, like at Euclid Hall, a once-florid, recently squalid S.R.O. at the southwest corner of 86th Street and Broadway on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, where the ornate fire escapes are being redone.
The fire escapes were added sometime before 1920 on the north and south sides of the Beaux Arts-style building, which was originally built in 1903 with large apartments.
The original fire escapes were carefully designed to match the balcony railing, which mixed diagonal lattice work with panels of curved iron in the French style.


Miss Levine, Mr. Doering-Powell
Jacqueline Ann Levine, the daughter of Madeline Levine of Brooklyn and Marc evine of Miami, is to be married today to Mark Doering-Powell, a son of Iris Powell of Ramstein, Germany, and the late Hartmut Doring.
Rabbi Don Singer is to perform the ceremony at Il Cielo, a restaurant in Beverly Hills, Calif.
Miss Levine, 29, graduated from Hunter College and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
She is a social worker at Vista Del Mar, a social service agency in Los Angeles.


The Fourth R Is for Rice
In the annals of Japanese xenophobia, the last two weeks will go down as something of a milestone.
First Japanese began forming long lines for their beloved Japonicus, the domestically grown, phenomenally expensive rice suddenly in short supply because of a record-poor harvest.
When supplies ran out, people grudgingly began standing in line for hours for Thai, Chinese and American rice, allowed in under an emergency exception to the country's "food security laws."
But now the Government's new marching orders -- thou shalt eat foreign rice, at least this year -- has triggered all kinds of trouble, starting in the schools.


Jesse Owens's Glory
To the Editor:
"Kerrigan Is No Bambi" (Sports of The Times, March 8) refers to "Jesse Owens racing a horse to cash in on his Olympic gold medals."


Pausing Along the Cybertech Highway
AS Val Schaffner, author of "Lost in Cyberspace: Essays and Farfetched Tales," recalls it, his first invitation to pause along the information highway for cyberchat was frightening.
No sooner was he on-line with a network known as the Source than a query appeared on his screen.
"Chat?" someone out there wanted to know.
Then another "Chat?" came on, "and it was like all these people suddenly wanted to chat," Mr.
Schaffner recalled.
"And I froze. I just turned off the computer."


Jaclyn Honig, Andrew Schreiber
Jaclyn Honig, a daughter of Lewis and Della Honig of New York, is to be married today to Andrew Alan Schreiber, the son of Frank and June Schreiber, also of New York.
Rabbi Eugene Lipsey is to perform the ceremony at the Rainbow Room's Pavilion in New York.
The bride is the marketing manager at United Beauty Products in New York, a retail and wholesale concern of which her father is the president and her mother, the financial officer.
The bride graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.


Key Food Departs But Jobs May Stay
After 38 years of selling groceries to the Upper West Side, Key Food has announced that it will close its store at Broadway and 91st Street in May.
But in a kind of economic recycling, the drug store chain that plans to take its place, Duane Reade, has promised to hire as many of the supermarket's 80 employees as it can.
Richard Durso, the manager of Key Food, said the promise was part of the agreement to turn over the store's lease.


Deutsch Team Wins Bridge Final
The closest Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship final in the 66-year history of the bridge event was won Friday night by the team led by Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex.
After 64 deals at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals here, the team of Deutsch, Gaylor Kasle of Boca Raton, Fla., Chip Martel of Davis, Calif., Lew Stansby of Castro Valley, Calif., and Michael Rosenberg and Zia Mahmood, both of Manhattan, won by one international match point, the equivalent of winning a mile race by less than an inch.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Princeton; A Diverse Academic-Corporate Citadel
PRINCETON isn't an easy place to pinpoint.
There is Princeton, the university, of course.
There is also Princeton Borough, the tiny town where the heart of the university is situated.
And then there is Princeton Township, the sylvan suburb that rings Princeton Borough.
But there is also Princeton Junction, a neighborhood in adjacent West Windsor Township and site of the area's main train station.
And then there is what the local chamber of commerce calls the Greater Princeton Region, which has grown to embrace parts of 14 towns in three counties.


Restaurant Pact: Isolated Victory?
Although the union representing workers at the Silver Palace restaurant in Chinatown proclaimed victory last Sunday over the end of a bitter seven-month labor dispute, many in Chinatown say they doubt the settlement will have any impact on the working conditions in other restaurants there.
"It's a great political victory for the union in the sense they got very positive media coverage," said David Chen, executive director of Chinese-American Planning Council, a nonprofit social services agency in Chinatown.
"But I think it's an isolated victory rather than a growing trend for Chinatown."


J. A. Barry, 76, Dies; Journalist in France
Joseph A. Barry, an American writer, journalist and critic of French culture and history, died Tuesday in Paris.
He was 76.
The cause was cancer said his son, John Christopher Barry.


Income-Tax Cut: Hopes and Fears
Even when her campaign promise to cut taxes was so derided that it was costing her points in the opinion polls, Christine Todd Whitman stuck to her guns.
As Governor, she has begun to make good on that promise, cutting taxes by 5 percent during her first two months in office and, in her Tuesday budget message, asking to cut 10 percent more starting next January.


For Oil Industry, That Next 'Elephant' Proves Elusive
MOBIL executives thought they had a live one about two years ago.
The geology looked promising for a major oil find in Peru.
After long haggling over environmental concerns and hauling equipment into a remote area, the well was sunk.
"I mean this was classic -- this is the classic way of how to do it," recalled Lucio A. Noto, chairman of the Mobil Corporation.
Yet, "We came up with a dry well -- $35 million later."


Love Among The Damned
TRY By Dennis Cooper. 199 pp. New York: Grove Press. $20.


Burnitz Working on Swing and Temper
This time, Jeromy Burnitz had no hope of controlling his temper.
He has tried all spring not to get too emotional, not to kick himself, not to let his mistakes follow him onto the field.
And, for the most part, he has been successful.
It just didn't work Friday afternoon.


Augers Can Only Go So Far Down the Drain
ALTHOUGH usually easy to repair, a clogged drain in a kitchen sink, bathroom basin or bathtub can be frustrating.
Chemical drain cleaners sometimes work, but not always.
A danger with many is that if they do not work the cleanup can be complicated by dealing with poisonous materials.
Kitchen drains are often clogged by hardened grease.
Pouring a kettle of boiling water will sometimes melt the grease.
A stronger cure is to pour a cup of baking soda, followed by a cup of vinegar.
But first bail out water from the sink.


Agency Hopes for Fall in Number of Refugees
After seeing the number of refugees in the world climb from 2.8 million in 1976 to 19 million today, the United Nations refugee agency is hoping that this is the year the number finally starts going down.
"I once said 1992 would be the year of repatriation, but I was wrong," Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said at her headquarters here the other day.
"The numbers kept climbing. Now I prefer to say that we are in the decade of repatriation. But if we are lucky there will be a considerable fall this year."


Nancy K. Robinson; Author, 51
Nancy K. Robinson, an author of children's books and narrations for documentary films, died on Tuesday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 51.
The cause was cancer, said her father, Norris Konheim.


Sound Bytes; The Soul of an Inventor
IN the rarefied world of computer design, Steven J. Wallach is a legend.
The designer of the MV 8000, a computer described in Tracy Kidder's Pulitzer Prize-winning book "The Soul of a New Machine," Mr.
Wallach is still inventing computers 14 years later, each faster than the last.
Last week he traveled from the Convex Computer Corporation's headquarters in Dallas to Silicon Valley to announce the company's newest parallel supercomputer.
Based on processor chips from Hewlett-Packard, the new Exemplar S.P.P. (for scalable parallel processor) is Convex's first entry in the arena of massively parallel computing.
Mr.
Wallach is already at work on the next system, one he hopes will evolve into a teraflop supercomputer -- one that can process a trillion instructions each second.


Sondheim's Passionate 'Passion'
"LOVE WITHOUT REASON," SINGS the hero of the new Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine musical, "Love without mercy,/ Love without pride or shame,/ Love so consuming/ It doesn't have room/ For kindness/ Or manners or caution./ Or blame . . . "
" 'Passion' is about how the force of somebody's feelings for you can crack you open," says Stephen Sondheim, "and how it is the life force in a deadened world."


In the Region/Connecticut; UConn Moving Its Stamford Campus Downtown
STAMFORD'S quarter-century metamorphosis from factory town to diverse metropolis entered a new phase last week when arrangements were concluded to relocate the Stamford Branch of the University of Connecticut from its site north of the Merritt Parkway to the heart of downtown.
The school will move into the former Bloomingdale's outlet on Washington Boulevard, vacant since 1990 when poor sales, financial troubles at its parent company, Federated Department Stores, and the taint of a murder that took place in the parking garage forced the closing after 36 years.


Volunteers Spend a Day Helping the Hungry


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING Hide KOs Bentt for Title  Herbie Hide rocked Michael Bentt with a left hook in the third round and finished off the champion in the seventh last night in London to win the World Boxing Organization heavyweight title.
Bentt later collapsed and was rushed to a nearby hospital.
His condition was stable.
Hide, 22, the Nigerian-born British champion, is 26-0 with 25 knockouts. (AP)


It's Hip! It's Rayon! Dial Now!
"You're on top! On time! On Q!" said Chuck Fields, a host camp favorite, leaning off his stool into the camera.
"Those of you who want the polyester lime-green thing. Yo! Turn the channel. Now that person's gone, we can talk."
And quickly, he did: about a slight, light "disco-y" dress that he petted and pointed at as if he were Arsenio Hall selling a slip.
"Sheer is what's happening," he declared, "and layers. What is layering? Think cake. Layer cake, layer clothes --"


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 20, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
2
11
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
3
3
WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lucas Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in Wisconsin's cold woods.
4
6
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A servant hopes to win an heiress's heart in Victorian-era Minnesota.
5
9
WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The families of law officers are besieged by violence in Los Angeles and Montana.
6
2
THE THROAT, by Peter Straub. (Signet, $6.99.) The vicious attack on a woman in a small town leads to the reappraisal of past crimes.
7
4
THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran solve a mystery.
8*
4
SAVING GRACE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) The romantic problems of a 13th-century English widow.
9
5
JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star Wars" saga.
10
8
PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of murders in a small California town vexes a temporary district attorney.
11
8
RUBY, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in New Orleans.
12
1
LORD OF RAVEN'S PEAK, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) Romance and adventure among Vikings in 10th-century Britain.
13
12
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
14
3
THE TEN THOUSAND, by Harold Coyle. (Pocket, $6.50.) American troops have to fight German forces after a mission in Ukraine.
15
2
TEXAS SUNRISE, by Fern Michaels. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The dying mistress of a fashion empire mitigates her family's passions.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
10
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
541
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
3
57
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
4
10
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
5
42
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
6*
127
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
20
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
8*
2
CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture and murder.
9*
7
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day battle in Vietnam in 1965.
10
27
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
11*
1
THE KERRIGAN COURAGE, by Randi Reisfeld. (Ballantine, $4.99.) The life of Nancy Kerrigan, the Olympic silver medalist in figure skating.
12*
16
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy, as seen in the actions of an A.A.
Milne character.
13*
8
A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine, $8.99.) More examples of Government waste, and how to stop it.
14*
141
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
15*
16
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
157
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
2
2
MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $11.) Ways to teach children about spending and saving money.
3
164
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
22
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 5, at 3,050 bookstores and wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Sports of The Times; Once Again, Calhoun Has Little Edge
Blunt but true, the players come and go, but Mike Jarvis and Jim Calhoun have had time to work on their relationship.
They have known each other for over a quarter of a century, two tough guys from very different corners of Boston who last summer became friends over a series of what they said were cappuccinos.
Now Calhoun is going to the regionals this Friday in Miami after Connecticut's talent outlasted the grittiness of Jarvis's George Washington team yesterday, 75-63.
But this time, they insisted, they wouldn't let a game or a recruiting battle or a disagreement or a verbal joust get in the way of their newly salvaged friendship.


Tabloids Holler 'Rewrite!' at Each Other
Who needs movies about the tabloid business like "The Paper" when real life is even wilder and woolier?
Last week the archrivals of New York journalism -- The Daily News and The New York Post -- were at it again.
This time the issue was not the supposed high-handedness of one another's ownership nor even the papers' raids on one another's staffs, but the Whitewater scandal -- suggesting that the venue of the tab slugfest matters little so long as the fight goes on.
The Post for weeks has been cranking out stories challenging official assertions that the death of Vincent Foster, the White House official who was found, revolver in hand, in a Virginia park last July, was a case of simple suicide.
It has questioned the United States Park Police's investigative procedures and whether the physical evidence -- the body's position, the amount of blood, etc. -- was consistent with a suicide at the site.


Hotels Adding New Airline Links
Holiday Inn has begun offering frequent flier miles on American Airlines for stays at its hotels worldwide.
The arrangement, effective last month, provides 2.5 miles to American Airlines AAdvantage members for each dollar spent on a room at a standard corporate rate or higher, whether or not the guest used the airline to get to the hotel.


Tarasco's Competition Is Thinning Down
Two weeks remain for job seekers to make their final statements -- the rookies, the veteran minor leaguers who never have been successful in their job quests, the fallen major leaguers scrapping to regain their status, the injured players trying to prove they are healthy.
Tony Tarasco is a rookie who has been competing with two other rookies for a starting job with the Atlanta Braves.
It's the one in left field that became vacant when Ron Gant broke his leg, then was released.


Clashes in the West Bank


U.N. Envoys Fear New Cod Wars as Fish Dwindle
With rival fleets competing for dwindling numbers of cod, swordfish, tuna and other commercially prized species, diplomats here have begun openly discussing the possibility that governments might resort to military force to protect fish against foreign fishermen -- even if it means intercepting their ships in international waters.
At the United Nations, where work resumed this week on a global accord to save endangered stocks, many fear the prospect of a return to the so-called cod wars of the 1970's, an era that saw 16 major fishing disputes, including clashes between British trawlers and Icelandic gunboats.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  House
1.
Balanced Budget Amendment: Vote on a less stringent version of the balanced budget constitutional amendment.
Rejected 318 to 111, March 17.
2.
Balanced Budget Amendment: Vote on a constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget.
Failed, with 271 in favor and 153 opposed (12 votes short of the two-thirds majority required), March 17.
1
2
CONNECTICUT
1. Kennelly (D)
Nay
Nay
2. Gejdenson (D)
Yea
Nay
3. DeLauro (D)
Yea
Nay
4. Shays (R)
Nay
Yea
5. Franks (R)
Nay
Yea
6. Johnson (R)
Nay
Yea
NEW JERSEY
1. Andrews (D)
Yea
Yea
2. Hughes (D)
Nay
Nay
3. Saxton (R)
Nay
Yea
4. Smith (R)
Nay
Yea
5. Roukema (R)
Nay
Yea
6. Pallone (D)
Yea
Yea
7. Franks (R)
Nay
Yea
8. Klein (D)
Nay
Nay
9. Torricelli (D)
Yea
Yea
10. Payne (D)
A
A
11. Gallo (R)
A
A
12. Zimmer (R)
Nay
Yea
13. Menendez (D)
Nay
Nay
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D)
Yea
Nay
2. Lazio (R)
Nay
Yea
3. King (R)
Nay
Yea
4. Levy (R)
Nay
Yea
5. Ackerman (D)
Yea
Nay
6. Flake (D)
Nay
Nay
7. Manton (D)
A
A
8. Nadler (D)
Nay
Nay
9. Schumer (D)
Yea
Nay
10. Towns (D)
Nay
Nay
11. Owens (D)
Nay
Nay
12. Velazquez (D)
Nay
Nay
13. Molinari (R)
Nay
Yea
14. Maloney (D)
Yea
Nay
15. Rangel (D)
Nay
Nay
16. Serrano (D)
Nay
Nay
17. Engel (D)
Yea
Nay
18. Lowey (D)
Nay
Nay
19. Fish (R)
Nay
Yea
20. Gilman (R)
Nay
Nay
21. McNulty (D)
Yea
Yea
22. Solomon (R)
Nay
Yea
23. Boehlert (R)
Nay
Yea
24. McHugh (R)
Nay
Yea
25. Walsh (R)
Nay
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Nay
Nay
27. Paxon (R)
Nay
Yea
28. Slaughter (D)
Nay
Nay
29. LaFalce (D)
Nay
Nay
30. Quinn (R)
Nay
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Nay
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Rebuilt Berlin
To the Editor: Craig R. Whitney's report on "Renewing Spiritual Symbols" (Feb. 20) is a tale of two very different symbols in Berlin.
One, the Kaiser's Cathedral, beautifully restored inside and out, is well-attended on Sundays and visited by nostalgic sightseers.
Its restoration was financed by the West German Government and Protestant church.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DESIGNING A GARDEN
Larry Aldrich's Museum of Contemporary Art in Ridgefield is due for a change, heralded by an exhibition of designs for a new sculpture garden opening Friday and remaining through April 13.
Five designs for the garden were obtained in a brainstorming session held on March 11, when 26 architects, artists, museum curators, landscape experts and art editors formed five teams and came up with site plans, perspective drawings and quick sketches.


Aimee Thierman, Robert Frankel
Aimee Beth Thierman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Thierman of Stamford, Conn., was married last evening to Robert Edward Frankel, a son of William Frankel of Wynnewood, Pa., and the late Lynne Frankel.
Rabbi Alan D. Fuchs officiated at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Frankel, an uncle and aunt of the bridegroom, in Jupiter, Fla.
The bride, 24, graduated from Tulane University and is a second-year student at Widener University School of Law in Wilmington, Del.
Her father is the director of the commuter division of Trans World Airlines in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Her mother, Geri Thierman, is a consultant at New Departures in Travel, a travel agency in Old Greenwich, Conn.


C.I.A. Man Slain in Caucasus. Case Closed. Or Is It?
The official version of how a C.I.A. officer was shot and killed in this former Soviet republic last summer is as follows:
The officer, Fred Woodruff, was returning to the capital from a Sunday outing when a man whose car had run out of gas tried to flag down Mr.
Woodruff's vehicle on a two-lane highway 20 miles north of here.
When the vehicle, which was being driven by the Georgian President's chief of security, did not stop, the man fired off a round from his assault rifle.
Mr.
Woodruff, who was riding in the back seat, was hit in the forehead.


More Modest Proposals
To the Editor:
I read with great interest F. Paul Wilson's "Modest Proposal," but he has omitted the most important link in the prose superhighway.
Thus I would like to offer an amendment to his proposal.


Giuliani Eases Stance on Plans For Homeless
After making campaign promises to scale back and fundamentally reshape New York City's $500-million-a-year system to shelter the homeless, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has backed away from the most controversial and far-reaching elements of his plan.
Mr.
Giuliani had said that he would impose a 90-day limit on many shelter stays, where none exist currently, and that his administration would immediately mount a court challenge to the unconditional right of the city's homeless to shelter.
That right, singular to New York, means the city cannot limit how long anyone stays in a shelter or require shelter residents to do chores or participate in social-service programs.


The Rites of Spring Break


Augers Can Only Go So Far Down the Drain
ALTHOUGH usually easy to repair, a clogged drain in a kitchen sink, bathroom basin or bathtub can be frustrating.
Chemical drain cleaners sometimes work, but not always.
A danger with many is that if they do not work the cleanup can be complicated by dealing with poisonous materials.
Kitchen drains are often clogged by hardened grease.
Pouring a kettle of boiling water will sometimes melt the grease.
A stronger cure is to pour a cup of baking soda, followed by a cup of vinegar.
But first bail out water from the sink.


McBurney Y Finds Some Breathing Room
It was so crowded at the McBurney YMCA on West 23d Street that when it rained, teen-agers at the summer camp on the roof had no place to go.
The crowd at English classes regularly spilled into corridors.
But last week the Y's teen-age center and immigrant services were setting into new quarters, the former Xavier Parochial School on 17th Street near Seventh Avenue.
The five-story building was left largely vacant when dwindling enrollment led the elementary school to merge with nearby St.
Bernard's two years ago.


Morning, Noon And Night: A Waiter's Life
It is 3 P.M., essentially down time for Wong W. Ling, 24, a waiter in a Chinatown restaurant.
The lunch crowd has cleared out and it's two more hours before the dinner rush.
But there is no rest for Mr.
Wong.
After a 10-minute break during which he wolfs down a bowl of rice and finishes a Marlboro, he springs to his feet and begins to set the tables.
He unfolds the stacks of silver-colored tablecloths with quick, deft flicks of the wrist and wipes the steam off the plates with an unvarying, high-speed robotic motion.
Thirty-three plates in less than half a minute.


Corrections
A chart on March 6 in the Travel Advisory column, about the cost of getting from the airport to town, misstated the fare for a taxi ride from Heathrow Airport to central London.
It is $45 to $50, not $21.


In 1994-Model Politics, Loyalty Is Often Optional Equipment
GLADSTONE said that the first requisite of a prime minister is to be a good butcher.
Like British leaders, American Presidents must know when they have reached the limits of loyalty, and be prepared to cut off troublesome friends and advisers, or persuade them to fall on the knife so obligingly held out.


A Few Scary Pictures Can Go a Long Way
ON MARCH 3 THE CBS NEWS magazine "Eye to Eye With Connie Chung" cast a critical look at the Behavior Research Institute of Providence, R.I., which, in its 22 years of existence, has been both attacked and applauded for its use of "aversive treatment" for young people severely afflicted with autism.
The report (which had been scheduled earlier but was bumped by Ms. Chung's Tonya Harding coup) was not made available in advance for review, with the usual explanation that editing was going on right up to showtime.
It invites attention after the fact for what it reveals about the way television professionals can punch up a story and propel it in a desired direction.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Portland
Portland, Ore., is a clean, carefully designed city, the kind of place where pedestrians wait for the walk sign, police officers ride bicycles and bird watching is a serious sport.
It seems an unlikely backdrop for scandal.
But as the Tonya Harding affair has unfolded (upstaging another beleaguered Oregonian, Senator Bob Packwood), this City of Roses has been wilting from overexposure.
Runners accustomed to peaceful noontime workouts along the Willamette River have had to jog around camera crews.
Historic hotels and popular restaurants have swelled with reporters hungry for gossip.
The comedian Jay Leno, perhaps in gratitude for all the punch lines Portland has handed him recently, even donated $100 toward a new playground for a city elementary school.


The Perils of Bureaucracy When Helping the Elderly
To the Editor:
The "Eldercare" article was an informative treatment of an important issue.
But what is troubling is the portrayal of older people as helpless recipients of care.
Many elderly can and do plan for themselves and, as resources become more widely known, their numbers will grow.


Big, Bigger, Biggest: Swell Of Enrollment Strains P.S. 19
When Catherine Zarbis attended P.S. 19 in Corona in the 1950's, many classrooms stood vacant, and for a time the entire fifth floor was closed.
Today, she is back as an assistant principal, trying to cope with what has become one of New York's most overcrowded schools.
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines announced earlier this month that enrollment in the city's public school system had topped 1 million for the first time in 15 years, and pressed for more funds for school construction to deal with the painful crush of students.


At Police Funerals, Sorrowful Rituals and Potent Symbolism Mix
Seeking the mayoralty early in 1989, David N. Dinkins skipped the funerals of a police officer and a Federal drug-enforcement agent and delivered a previously scheduled speech to inmates on Rikers Island instead.
Mr.
Dinkins's decision nearly cost him the election that year until another funeral -- that of a young black man killed because he ventured into a white neighborhood -- nudged New York City's fragile racial harmony even higher on the public agenda than law and order.
But it was a decision that Rudolph W. Giuliani, Mr.
Dinkins's Republican mayoral rival, never let the public forget.
"That tells you something about his priorities," Mr.
Giuliani said time and again.
Mr.
Dinkins defended the decision, insisting that his long-planned Rikers speech may have persuaded some inmates to change their priorities.
But he also changed his.
Not long after his narrow victory, he postponed a Caribbean vacation to attend the funerals of two police detectives.


2,200 Children and Counting: A Profile in School Crowding


Ah, Spring! Time for the Skunk Cabbage.
IT'S here!
This is the first day of spring.
Officially the timing of the seasonal changeover will not be until 3:28 P.M.
But never mind.
Cabin-fever sufferers have watched for its coming for some time.
They have even seen a few signs.
For one.
The birds are singing.
A pair of nuthatches, high in the silver maple tree, was belting out a glorious chorus last week.
Nearby in the oak tree, the chickadees sounded out a sort of joyous reply.
Although these birds have been around all winter long, particularly at the feeders, what does it matter?
Their singing is welcome now.


Eco-Yearnings
I'M SCANNING THE FASHION MAGAZINES, waiting for Michiko to cut my hair, and I gradually become aware of an eco-phobic theme threading through the beauty ads.
A shampoo promises to "discourage environmental damage." A lotion calls itself "environmental skin care." One message begins ominously, "Until the world is a safer place for your hair."
It occurs to me that in order to succeed, the people who make and market cosmetics must be poets for our time.
After all, what is more intimate than ointments we rub onto our skin, gels we squeeze into our bath?
If we're going to let a lotion into our bathroom, it must speak to our deepest longings and fears.
Its advertising, packaging, its very consistency, must follow the path of the Zeitgeist.


Pitch Is No Paltry Matter
To the Editor:
It is worrisome to read Will Crutchfield's slighting of matters of pitch.
He is right that current Verdi singing at the Met is below par, especially compared to that of an earlier era.
These days it is easy to hear lead singers careless of pitch; so it is all the more disturbing to read music critics who minimize the fault.
Pitch is to singing as grammar is to a writer; without it, you don't have your trade.
Or, you should not have.


The Prose That Refreshes
It seemed that Coca-Cola's new product was a drink.
But that would have been silly.
Who needs another soft drink?
What Sergio Zyman, Coke's chief marketing officer, actually said in New York when he announced Fruitopia (italics and ellipses from Coca-Cola transcript) made more sense.
"What is our new product announcement? Let me answer that question by saying that it's not so much a product . . . as it is an attitude . . . an attitude about what people want from their beverages."


Spires and Canyons of Utah
IT was a new experience for me in the high desert of Utah.
As I pulled my foot out of the riverbed, I heard a sucking, smacking noise.
I looked down at the quivering sand, and pressed my foot into it again.
So this was quicksand.
Overrated, I thought, stepping back onto solid ground with little effort.
A threat to cattle or Jeeps, perhaps, but not to hikers.
I was walking up Courthouse Wash, a creek whose eons of flash floods have carved immense monoliths out of the sandstone landscape of Arches National Park.
It was still early morning, and I had the wash, and seemingly the park, to myself.


Compost, Contests and Can-Do at P.S. 84
In 1992 the Environmental Action Coalition, in search of a laboratory for its Federal research grant on recycling in public schools, decided on Public School 84 on West 92d Street in Manhattan.
"It seemed like a real New York school," said Steve Richardson, an official with the coalition, a nonprofit environmental education group.


In a Fire Island Beach House on the Fourth of July
A SHOW-BUSINESS term for a show with a great set design and not much else talks about audiences' leaving the theater "humming the set." Well, consider that the humming has turned into a chorus of hallelujahs for the set design.
Terrance McNally's "Lips Together, Teeth Apart" at the Center Stage in Rockville Centre is having trouble.
The play is in a beach house on Fire Island on the Fourth of July weekend.
The set designer, Gary Hygom, has created the ocean side of a contemporary house with sliding-glass doors, terrace and pool that have an unobstructed view of the water.
The audience represents the ocean, which is constantly being studied and peered over.


Bosnia and Croats Begin Freeing Prisoners
Military officials of the Bosnian Government and the Bosnian Croat forces began the release of about 1,300 war prisoners today, just hours after their political leaders signed an agreement to unite their territory in a federation with links to Croatia.
Under the supervision of the International Committee of the Red Cross about 860 Bosnian Government and Croatian prisoners were released, a spokesman for the organization said here.


Opening a Window Despite a Disability
Soon after Jason Kingsley was born with Down syndrome in 1974, a doctor recommended that his mother institutionalize him and tell her friends that he had died in childbirth.
Jason, the doctor predicted, would "never read or write or have a single meaningful thought or idea," his mother, Emily, recalls.
Today, as he prepares for his high school graduation in June, Mr.
Kingsley has proved the experts wrong.
Engaging and self-assured, Mr.
Kingsley, 19, has a girlfriend, a variety of interests that would seem familiar to anyone else his age, and a budding acting career that has already included appearances on several television programs.


What If Unemployed Actors Worked in Banks?
MUNICIPAL BONDAGE By Henry Alford. 231 pp. New York:  Random House. $18.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Joseph S. Coatsworth; Health Care After the Clinton Proposals
JOSEPH S. COATSWORTH is vice president for governmental relations at the Connecticut Hospital Association, a position that puts him in the midst of the debate over state-level health care reform, which is expected to be one of the major topics before the General Assembly this year.
Mr.
Coatsworth, a native of Connecticut, graduated from the University of Wisconsin at Madison with a degree in history and English.
He is scheduled to complete his work toward an M.B.A. at the University of Hartford this year.
He worked for Hartford National Bank and served five terms in the General Assembly before joining the association in 1979.


How Do Tobacco Executives Live With Themselves?
PEOPLE WHO WONDER how tobacco company executives can live with themselves conclude that they must be in denial.
That would explain how they deal with their responsibility for a product that kills more than 420,000 Americans a year -- surpassing the combined deaths from homicide, suicide, AIDS, automobile accidents, alcohol and drug abuse.
But to be in denial implies that one may not be held accountable, in psychological terms, for one's actions.
Tobacco people squarely face the accusation of accountability, and reject it.
They reject the overwhelming epidemiological evidence in the Surgeon General's Report of 1989, connecting smoking with lung and throat cancers, emphysema and heart disease, insisting that direct causation has not been proved.
They dismiss the Federal Drug Administration's suggestion that cigarettes could be banned as an addictive drug, calling smoking merely a habit that has already been broken by tens of millions.
They ridicule people who say they are pushing a drug, noting that their product is legal, that the same Government that posts health warnings on cigarette packs subsidizes tobacco farmers and that what they are really promoting is freedom of choice.


Organists Abound On Recital Schedule
THE king of instruments reigns at three area concerts this week, starting this afternoon at 4:30, when Alexandre Guilmant's Symphony No. 1 for orchestra and organ gets a rare hearing at First United Church of Christ in Milford.
The soloist is Timothy Smith, with John Abendour conducting the Meetinghouse Orchestra, a professional ensemble of 30 players drawn primarily from the New Haven Symphony and Orchestra New England.


This Yank Prefers To Show, Not Tell
The lessons about life that would affect Bernie Williams forever began in Vegalta, Puerto Rico, when he was old enough to listen, understand and then act.
That was when his parents preached about conducting himself like a gentleman.
Always with decorum, always with respect and always letting his actions supersede his words.


RADIO FREE EUROPE SEEKS TO PRIVATIZE
Radio Free Europe, the American-financed broadcaster to formerly Communist countries whose budget has been slashed since the end of the cold war, says it expects to reach agreement soon with the financier George Soros to privatize its research and archives operations and move them from Munich to Prague.
A 100-member staff would become part of a new Research Institute that would continue to provide services to Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, which broadcasts to Russia and other parts of the former Soviet Union, and help train journalists in a branch of the Hungarian-born Mr.
Soros's Central European University.


Board Wants to Alter Medical Center Status
THE County Board of Legislators last week hired a Washington-based consultant to review plans to change theform of operation at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla.
Lawmakers want to create a public benefit corporation, which will allow the county-owned hospital to function as an independent entity with a minimum of government interference.
Once completed, the lawmakers' plan will be placed before the voters as a referendum in November.
Anne B. Camper, the lawyer hired to review the lawmakers' plans, said: "What we are looking for is to enable the hospital to continue its mission in a shifting health-care industry. Throughout the country, we are seeing public hospitals changing from solely government-run to more independent entities." The Board of Legislators voted to pay Ms.
Camper, a corporate counsel for the National Association of Public Hospitals, up to $250,000 to draw up the proposal.


Gordon G. Wallace; Sociologist, 75
Dr.
Gordon G. Wallace, a sociologist and expert on women's reproductive health, died on Thursday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
She was 75.
The cause was ovarian cancer, said Patricia Sears, a spokeswoman for Population Action International, a research group in Washington.


Queens Board Meetings
DISTRICT 1 Astoria, Long Island City; third Tuesday of the month; next April 19, 7 P.M., Variety Boys and Girls Club, 21-12 Thirtieth Road; (718) 786-3335.
Chairman: Vinicio Donato District Manager: George Delis


Smith's Knee Acts Up Again
Charles Smith sat out yesterday's Knicks game with a sore left knee.
He is listed as day-to-day, but there is concern anytime Smith has knee pain.
He underwent arthroscopic left knee surgery on Dec. 7 and missed 31 games before returning on Jan. 20.
Smith also underwent arthroscopic surgery on both knees last summer.
"He's really sore," Coach Pat Riley said.
"He has a little bit of an arthritic problem with his knee -- bone against bone. What he needs is rest."


Barbara Blank And Max DeShaw
Barbara Anna Blank, the daughter of Drs.
Stuart and Bette Blank of Madison, N.J., is to be married today to Max Gerald DeShaw, a son of Katharine Rheinberger of Minneapolis and John DeShaw of Carlton, Minn.
Rabbi Harvey Goldman is to perform the ceremony at the Madison Hotel in Morristown, N.J.
The bride, 24, graduated cum laude from the University of Michigan.
She is a third-year medical student at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, where the bridegroom is a third-year fellow in infectious diseases.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
106.15
105.06
116.00
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6947
1.6831
1.6365
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3693
1.3628
1.2471
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4910
1.5001
1.4890
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$386.90
$398.50
$331.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


In Real Estate, New Faces, Old Names
EVEN if you can't place the face, the name may be familiar: Durst.
Galbreath.
Koeppel.
Malkin.
Rose.
Rudin.
Silverstein.
Wilpon.
Zeckendorf.
A takeover generation is coming to the fore among New York's leading real estate families.
Men in their 20's, 30's and 40's are taking a more visible role in the leadership of second- , third- and fourth-generation businesses.
So too -- in a departure from their parents' era -- are a number of women, among them Robin Abada, 26, leasing representative at the Muss Development Company; Sarah K. Cohn, 32, general counsel of Koeppel Tener Riguardi; Beth Rudin DeWoody, 41, vice president of Rudin Management Company; Lizanne Galbreath, 36, vice chairwoman of Galbreath Riverbank, and Amy Rose, 27, assistant vice president of Rose Associates.


What's Whitewater Next to the Bush Family and the S.&amp; L.'s?; A National Resource
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal dismisses Hillary Rodham Clinton in "The First Ladyship" (column, March 11) as having "power through the wedding ring."


Mark Sassower and Jill Goldman
Jill Michelle Goldman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan Goldman of Boca Raton, Fla., is to be married today to Mark Emanuel Oppenheimer Sassower, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Sassower of New York.
Rabbi Sol Roth is to perform the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Miss Goldman and Mr.
Sassower, both 27, are graduates of Syracuse University.
Until recently, she was a public relations associate in New York for Franklin Electronic Publishers, which makes hand-held data devices.
Her father is the president of Largo International, a packaging and printing company in Boca Raton.


A Chair's Reserved For the P.L.O.
Shockingly derailed by the Hebron massacre, the Middle East peace talks seem to be on track again, although Israel may have to walk a few extra yards before the Palestine Liberation Organization goes along.
The key was a long-delayed Security Council resolution, voted on Friday, condemning the Feb. 25 killing of 29 Muslim worshipers by a Jewish settler.
With that, the United States announced that Syria, Jordan and Lebanon had agreed to restart their separate talks with Israel in April and that the Israelis and the P.L.O. would try to pick up their own thread once more.
An Israeli delegation will go to P.L.O. headquarters in Tunis today to discuss post-massacre security arrangements.


If Good Guys Finish Last, Try Villainy
FROM THE DAY THE SERPENT slithered through the Garden of Eden to the night the Velociraptors jumped the fences at Jurassic Park, from Dr.
Caligari to the Wicked Witch of the West, as far back as Milton's Lucifer and as recently as Kubrick's Dr.
Strangelove, villains have gripped the popular imagination with a force no mere hero can hope to match.
Who even remembers what compass point Glinda the Good Witch came from?
What child ever trick or treated as C3PO when Darth Vader masks could be had?
For every Eliot Ness or James Bond, there are three Godfathers -- or Goliaths, or Godzillas.
It's a sad fact of fiction, or maybe of life, but villainy is profoundly fascinating: it sweeps us up and seduces us with its power.
Playing the bad guy can offer an actor an irresistible lure.
A role as the heavy in a film can revive a flagging career (though that can backfire) or change a specialized image (though some actors, like Alan Alda, can't shake a nice-guy tag no matter what they do).


In America; The Circus That Is Whitewater
Let the hearings begin, and try not to be distracted by the sideshow.
There are flim-flammers and exhibitionists and freak shows aplenty under the big top called Whitewater, a hyper-charged convergence of movers and shakers from the Ozarks with the power elite of the Beltway.


Home and Garden Tours in the South
Towns in Virginia and North Carolina will celebrate the arrival of spring with tours of historic homes and gardens.
Historic Garden Week is celebrated in about 40 communities throughout Virginia.
On the state's eastern shore, tours will be offered at sites around the towns of Eastville and Onancock on April 30, with the following places open to the public:


The 911: Slick, Quick and 30 Years of Age
The 1995 Porsche 911 Carrera represents the most sweeping body of changes ever carried out on a car that, more than any other, has defined the sports car and GT concept for the past 30 years. -- Porsche company literature
Right off, I should say that I have never been a fan of Porsche.
And I know that is heresy.
The German company has been the essence of sport for lo these many years.


Serena Wilkie and Porter Gifford
Serena Fortune Wilkie, the daughter of Dr.
George H. Wilkie of New York and the late Suzannah R. Wilkie, was married yesterday to Arnold Porter Gifford, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
K.
Dun Gifford of Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James Episcopal Church in New York.
The bride, 29, graduated from Brown University and is a candidate for a master's degree at the Bank Street College of Education.
She teaches fifth and sixth grades at the Nightingale-Bamford School in New York.
Her father is a psychoanalyst in New York.
Her mother was the director of admissions at St.
Bernard's School in New York.


Outlasting The Incas And Spaniards
THE CRAFTS OF THE MAPUCHE people reflect the rich mix of traditions inherited from their pre-Columbian ancestors or borrowed from their former enemies -- the Incas and the Spaniards.
But the shimmering silver jewelry, bold capes and exotic musical instruments of these Latin American natives, who comprise the largest and one of the oldest indigenous groups of Chile, are virtually unknown in the United States.
At the time of the Spanish conquest in the 16th century, the Mapuche (pronounced ma-POO-chuh) dominated Chile, and their language was spoken throughout the land.
By then, they had successfully resisted the Incas for a half century.
And they remained independent, defying the Spaniards, until the late 19th century.
Once subdued, they were banished to government-controlled reservations.
Today, about a half million of them farm crowded plots, mostly in the southern part of central Chile.


WHERE MOTHERS MATTER
I thoroughly enjoyed and identified with Gabrielle Glaser's story (Hers: "Where Mothers Matter," Feb. 20).
How refreshing to finally read an article in which motherhood is praised the way it should be, and how this young mother is truly enjoying and thriving in one of life's most rewarding and important experiences.


Sports of The Times; Could These Rangers Be Self-Destructing?
AS the Rangers approached the Stanley Cup playoffs in other years, positive X-rays were their negatives.
X-rays of Brian Leetch's ankle fractured on sidewalk ice last year, on Toronto ice four years ago.
X-rays in earlier years of Ulf Nilsson's fractured ankle, of Dale Rolfe's fractured ankle and of Jean Ratelle's fractured ankle.
But two years ago the Rangers were frosted by Adam Graves's suspension for slashing Mario Lemieux of the Pittsburgh Penguins in the playoffs.


THE GOOD SON
As I read the the cover story on Al Gore, phrases like "boy scout," "good scout" and "smart, loyal -- and stiff" jumped out at me from the pages ("The Good Son," by Richard L. Berke, Feb. 20).
When I finished the piece, I looked again at the cover photo of Gore.
I did not see a boy in uniform adorned with merit badges there.
Vice President Gore, President-in-waiting or not, is quite smart, loyal and just.
His life experiences have shown him to be a truly good man.


INSIDE
For Pretoria, The War Within
The report that South African security units supported terrorism was no surprise in a system that was structured to preserve white rule.
Page 10.


Lawsuit Challenges Rules on Lead
Still angry over the shower of sand, dust and lead-paint chips that rained down during the sandblasting of the Williamsburg Bridge in the summer of 1992, and dissatisfied with new city guidelines it prompted, a coalition of residents of Williamsburg, politicians and civil rights organizations has filed suit against the city.
The lawsuit, drafted by Matthew J. Chachere of the Center for Constitutional Rights and filed earlier this month, challenges the stricter guidelines the city adopted in December for routine maintenance and repairs on the city's bridges.


The Three of Them
THE LONGINGS OF WOMEN By Marge Piercy. 455 pp. New York: Fawcett Columbine. $22.


Want to Play? Take a Number and Wait Your Turn
Many urban parents fret about getting their children into a chosen day-care center or school.
In Greenwich Village, there's yet another competition -- the waiting list for coveted keys to a playground gate.
For decades, despite a residents-only sign, the privately owned playground at the Washington Square Village apartment complex was open to anyone.
But current restrictions barring most outsiders have produced hard feelings on both sides of the literal fence, where a security officer stands guard at peak times to enforce the rules.


On the Mall At 96th St., A Turf War
A small, city-owned stone building that originally served as a comfort station in the middle mall on Broadway at 96th Street is the unlikely scene of a fierce turf war between neighborhood groups.
For years the building stood abandoned and largely ignored, but in 1984, a coalition of community organizations secured a permit from the Department of Parks and Recreation to renovate it.
With its nearly bare, 400-square-foot interior, it became a center for community meetings and forums.


Is the Time Finally Ripe for 'Time and Again'?
OF ALL THE CONTEMPORARY novels to have piqued Hollywood's interest, perhaps none has tantalized -- or exasperated -- actors, directors and producers as much as Jack Finney's hauntingly romantic tale of time travel, "Time and Again."
Over the years, the novel -- blending science fiction, passionate love, mystery and detailed history of Old New York -- has captivated and entranced some of the biggest names in the film business.
Its spellbinding story tells of a young man enlisted in a secret Government experiment who is transported from the mid-20th century to New York in 1882.
There he falls in love with a beautiful woman and ultimately finds himself forced to choose between living in the present and living in the past.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  NORTH KOREA SANCTIONS CLOSER  The United States has decided to ask the United Nations to lay the groundwork for economic sanctions against North Korea, having failed to persuade the country to accept monitoring of its nuclear facilities.  1  THE PERILS OF NATASHA  Foreign soap operas have captured the imagination of many Russians.
While the trend is deplored by intellectuals, many fans find the drama a welcome distraction from the bleakness of their lives.  1


Ah, Spring! Time for the Skunk Cabbage.
IT'S here!
This is the first day of spring.
Officially the timing of the seasonal changeover will not be until 3:28 P.M.
But never mind.
Cabin-fever sufferers have watched for its coming for some time.
They have even seen a few signs.
For one.
The birds are singing.
A pair of nuthatches, high in the silver maple tree, was belting out a glorious chorus last week.
Nearby in the oak tree, the chickadees sounded out a sort of joyous reply.
Although these birds have been around all winter long, particularly at the feeders, what does it matter?
Their singing is welcome now.


What If the Soup du Jour Was Just Wet Noodles?
HERE in the United States, land of the croissantwich and the sourdough baguette, country of the creme de la creme and a place that does not experience foreign words as betes noires the way the French do, the French Ministry of Culture's recent attempt to legislate against English seems kind of silly, defensive, nastily nationalistic and therefore, perhaps, requiring a spirit of revenge.
Coming up this spring is a vote in the French National Assembly on a draft law that would ban Americanisms from business and Government communications, broadcasts and advertising messages, as long as a suitable French equivalent exists.
The proposed legislation officially bans all foreign words, not just English.
But the real meaning of the draft law is clear.
No French bureaucrats are having nightmares because of the unwelcome intrusions of Norwegian or Japanese.


No Sentiment Please, I'm British
THE WATERS OF THIRST By Adam Mars-Jones. 184 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.


Senators Want Atomic Plants Protected Against Car Bombs
Four influential Senators have asked the chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to dispense with a sophisticated and time-consuming mathematical analysis and quickly enact regulations to protect nuclear power plants from terrorists' truck or car bombs.
"The U.S. Capitol and the White House have barriers that would block car bombers," Senator Max Baucus, the Montana Democrat who is chairman of the Committee on Environment and Public Works, said in a statement on Wednesday.
"Our nuclear power plants should be at least as well protected as our politicians."


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Masataka Mori has taught karate to generations of students.
The meaning of it all?
Perfection of character.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4
What's kosher, what's not?
Making such rabbinical distinctions has become a fiercely competitive business.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 12
Writers reading in the West Village; "A Magic Carpet Ride" in Flatbush.  MOVIE CLOCK 13
What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.  GOOD EATING 14
Around the Upper West Side: post-modern retro (E. J.'s Luncheonette) to elegant town house (Restaurant 222).
SOAPBOX 15
"A fear of the creative": why New York is missing the boat on waterfront development.
Plus letters.


A Hospital That Helps Children Fight 'Tremendous Obstacles'
"I REMEMBER the doctors telling my parents a long-term convalescence would cure my rheumatic fever," said Ira Brody, an engineer from South Orange.
"They felt total bed rest would avoid any further damage to my heart."
"I was a 13-year-old charity patient from Newark," he said, "when I entered Children's Country Home," which is now the Chilren's Specialized Hospital.
"I was placed in a ward. The nurses had to push the beds through a long corrider so all of us could watch a movie. Visitors were only welcome twice a week.


The Perils of Bureaucracy When Helping the Elderly
To the Editor:
I read "Beyond Denial: An 'Eldercare' Primer" (Feb. 27) with deep satisfaction.
I filed for Medicaid for my mother in April 1993.
After gathering the necessary documentation and submitting same, I was informed, six months later, that my mother's file had been lost.


Dr. Oppenheimer, Mr. Tauber
Dr.
Ellen Oppenheimer, a pediatric endocrinologist in East Meadow, L.I., and Kenneth Robert Tauber, the senior finance manager in the book publishing division of the Walt Disney Company in New York, were married on March 6 in Englewood, N.J.
Rabbi Simcha Weinberg officiated at Congregation Ahavath Torah.
The bride, 34, is keeping her name.
She is the associate director of the division of pediatric endocrinology and metabolism at the Nassau County Medical Center.
She graduated from Cornell University and received her medical degree from Albert Einstein College of Medicine.


Air Passengers Warned On Dangerous Areas
The International Airline Passengers Association has issued a list of areas of the world that it considers the most dangerous for air travel.
They are China, South Korea and India; all countries in Central Africa; all republics of the former Soviet Union; South America, specifically flights through the Andes, and trips to or within Colombia.


Market Message: Business Up, Bonds Down
THE economy is growing nicely, and higher interest rates present little threat to that growth.
That, in any case, seems to be the opinion of the financial markets.
Six weeks after the Federal Reserve's Friday frolic, in which both stock and bond markets plunged on news of a small increase in one short-term interest rate, the bond market continues to quake, and interest-sensitive stocks are also weak.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Treasury statement, Feb., billions
$15.6
-$46.0
Tuesday
Merchandise trade, Jan., billions
-$7.4
-$9.0
Wednesday
Durable-goods orders, Feb., pct. change
3.7
-0.1
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
342
340
Friday
Existing-home sales, Feb., mils., ann. rate
4.22
4.25
This Week;s Numbers
Tuesday
Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meets
2-year Treasury note auction
Wednesday
5-year Treasury note auction
Friday
Minutes of previous F.O.M.C. meeting released


CBS Reaches a Settlement on Videotaped Search
CBS has agreed to compensate a Brooklyn woman and her son who charged that the network violated their rights when a camera crew videotaped Government agents searching their apartment in a criminal investigation, lawyers familiar with the lawsuit say.
The amount of the payment and other terms of the agreement were not disclosed because it was reached in an out-of-court settlement in which the parties agreed not to disclose the details, the lawyers said.


Giving Medical Innovation a Chance
To the Editor:
It is wrong to lump the Cooper and Chafee plans into the same category as the Clinton and single-payer health care plans.
Price controls and monopoly purchasing cooperatives will indeed stifle innovation and drain needed private-sector investment capital away from the health care industry.
That is why the Cooper and Chafee plans reject these provisions.
Instead, the Cooper and Chafee plans create market incentives based on competition by insuring active, appropriately motivated and pluralistic purchasers and suppliers.
While such a system will change the incentives for innovation from cost-increasing technologies to cost-reducing technologies, innovations that improve quality while lowering cost -- the kind our system truly needs -- will be rewarded handsomely.
ALAIN C. ENTHOVEN and SARA J. SINGER  Palo Alto, Calif., March 1  Dr.
Enthoven is a management professor and Ms.
Singer is a health policy analyst at the Stanford University Graduate School of Business.


World Bank Gains By African Austerities
To the Editor:
Re "Africa and the World Bank: Plans Pay Off" (news article, March 13): I am deeply dismayed that what you characterize as the World Bank's "most comprehensive study ever of African economies" is nothing more than the usual patronizing putdown of sub-Saharan countries.
Are we still to cling to the view that unless non-Westerners follow the dictates of Western countries through the World Bank they don't make the grade?


More Modest Proposals
To the Editor:
As a health care and prose care provider, I would like to respond to F. Paul Wilson's essay.


Corrections
The Good Eating column on March 6 misstated the date when Jezebel, a restaurant at 630 Ninth Avenue, at 45th Street, would begin serving lunch.
The restaurant had planned to open for lunch beginning on March 10, but it now says only that lunch service will begin within two months.


Grange Vote: Move It
The proposed move and restoration of the Hamilton Grange won a critical endorsement on Thursday when Community Board 9 voted 18 to 11 in favor.
The vote capped months of bitter debate among preservationists and residents of the area.
The National Park Service will now seek $10.6 million in Federal funds to move the building from its current site -- 287 Convent Avenue at West 141st Street -- a block away to St.
Nicholas Park, and fully restore it.
United States Representative Charles B. Rangel supports the project and is a senior member of the Ways and Means Committee.


Music To See And Eat By
Jordan Mozer was not about to creep into New York from Chicago on little cat feet.
He wanted his Manhattan debut as a designer to be nothing short of an event, something flashy and splashy that screamed to be noticed.
And it is.


Michele Rosner, William Saunders
Michele Helene Rosner, a daughter of Dr.
Frieda Rosner of Princeton, N.J., and the late Dr.
Benjamin Rosner, was married last evening to William Maxwell Saunders 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Saunders of Tenafly, N.J.
Judge Seymour Margulies of State Superior Court in Jersey City officiated at the Hackensack Golf Club in Oradell, N.J.
Mrs.
Saunders, 31, is a management trainer, in New York, for the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank Ltd.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received a master's degree in clinical social work from New York University.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in Princeton.
The bride's father was the dean of education at Temple University in Philadelphia.


All of the Above; Following the Crowd on Health Care, and Getting Lost
THE great health care struggle of 1994 may be remembered for many things -- it may even be remembered for producing a law -- but it is already a milestone in one respect: Never before have the techniques of the political campaign been applied so intensively to the making of public policy.
So far, many analysts say, this has not been one of democracy's triumphs.
The use and abuse of polling is a case in point.


Health Coverage Declining
FUELED by cuts in coverage among small businesses, the number of workers without health insurance on Long Island is steadily growing.
So are business owners' worries.
Last year 11.5 percent of the 1.3 million workers in Nassau and Suffolk Counties had no health insurance, according to the State Health Department division of planning, policy and resource development.
That is up from 11.2 percent in 1992 and 8.9 percent in 1990.


Cheryl Rushton, David Neuburger
Cheryl Leigh Rushton, a daughter of Col. and Mrs.
Pierce Albert Rushton Jr. of West Point, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Adam Neuburger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alex Neuburger of Hartsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard P. Camp, the Cadet Chaplain at the United States Military Academy at West Point, and Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the interfaith ceremony at the Vassar College Chapel in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Mrs.
Neuburger, 28, is a marketing officer at the Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Company in Hartford.
She and her husband graduated from Vassar.
Her father is the director of admissions at West Point.
Her mother, Charlene R. Rushton, is the marketing manager of West Point Tours Inc. in Highland Falls, N.Y.


Even a Robot Needs a Hug


MARCH 13-19: Election Worries; In South Africa, A White 'Third Force' Of Violence Is Confirmed
Nelson Mandela has long argued that a "third force" of high-ranking security officers was stoking the factional violence between his African National Congress and the Zulu nationalists of the Inkatha Freedom Party, as a way of prolonging white rule.
Last week Mr.
Mandela got his smoking gun -- in fact, a smoking armory.
On Friday a judicial commission published evidence that senior police officials, in league with Inkatha and the police in the Zulu homeland, orchestrated a campaign of gun-running, hit squads and terrorist-style attacks on commuter trains.


Pilots on the Bosnia Food Run Hope for Bad Weather
Stormy skies over Bosnia make for ideal weather for Capt.
Dave Kasberg and scores of other American, German and French airmen who fly the night missions to drop food to thousands of Bosnians trapped by fighting in the Balkans.
"Worse is better," Captain Kasberg told a passenger on a recent night as he piloted a blacked-out C-130 cargo plane over low-lying clouds toward a drop zone near Tarcin, a village in central Bosnia.
"When it's cloudy, they can't see us from the ground."


Augers Can Only Go So Far Down the Drain
ALTHOUGH usually easy to repair, a clogged drain in a kitchen sink, bathroom basin or bathtub can be frustrating.
Chemical drain cleaners sometimes work, but not always.
A danger with many is that if they do not work the cleanup can be complicated by dealing with poisonous materials.
Kitchen drains are often clogged by hardened grease.
Pouring a kettle of boiling water will sometimes melt the grease.
A stronger cure is to pour a cup of baking soda, followed by a cup of vinegar.
But first bail out water from the sink.


Battling Payoffs In Co-ops
THE news this month from the Manhattan District Attorney's office suggesting that certain managers of co-op and condominium buildings have been routinely extracting payoffs from contractors and vendors raises serious monitoring issues for boards of directors.
Kickbacks had been suspected for years before the current investigations named specific instances, said Charles Rappaport, president of the Federation of New York Housing Cooperatives, a membership organization of some 750 buildings.
The kickbacks, which can add thousands of dollars to maintenance bills, were even viewed by more cynical residents as an inevitable part of New York City life, like traffic jams and street crime.


Missy Zeltner, David Enberg
Meryl Sue Zeltner, a human resources manager at BBDO, the advertising agency in New York, is to be married today to David Arthur Enberg, a senior account manager at Disney Publishing in New York.
Rabbi Lester Bronstein will perform the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Ms.
Zeltner, 34, is known as Missy.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Zeltner of Margate, N.J.
She graduated from American University.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT STORIES MACAULEY'S THUMB  By Lex Williford.  University of Iowa, $22.95.


Italy's Ex-Communists Now Have a Shot at Power
During the cold war, Italy's Communist Party sat on the opposition bench while the other big parties, the Christian Democrats and the Socialists, hogged the action.
But with Communism defeated in Eastern Europe and the rules of Italy's political game fundamentally altered, those roles may soon be reversed.


Fretting Over Prospect of Losses, Democrats Plot Fall Campaigns
Facing up to the near-certainty of major losses at every level in this year's midterm elections, Democrats are increasingly looking to passage of a health care bill this fall as their best hope for limiting the damage.
But even as they set to work to overhaul health care, President Clinton's top policy priority, Democratic candidates for the House, the Senate and governorships are more and more concerned about a spillover from the President's political troubles, particularly the Whitewater investigation.


WHERE MOTHERS MATTER
Gabrielle Glaser hits the nail on the head when she writes about the sink-or-swim attitude our society has about new mothers with careers.
Somehow we new mothers are expected to maintain the vitality of our ambitions a mere six weeks after giving birth and to continue at our old pace, only this time with another full-time job that lasts throughout the night.
Newborn mothers have needs almost as great as their newborn babes and it is time to respect these.
STEPHANIE TRENCHARD Oakland, Calif


YELTSIN AIDE SAYS FOES STIR TENSION
Confronted with a new spate of rumors about President Boris N. Yeltsin's health, his chief of staff went on television tonight to rebuke the political opposition, saying it was fomenting tensions during Mr.
Yeltsin's working holiday on the Black Sea.
"The opposition's leaders try to push society to a breakdown, spreading rumors stating that the President's health has allegedly worsened or that a coup is being prepared," Sergei Filatov, Mr.
Yeltsin's chief of staff, said in an interview on the main nightly news program.


Journal; Reality Bites Again
After several years of trying to avoid Generation X, which has been much too sweatily trying to upstage my own boomer generation in the popular press, I finally succumbed last weekend by going to see "Reality Bites." This is the movie that has been both praised as the last word on X-ers and damned as Hollywood's slickest effort yet to exploit them -- which makes it this year's answer to "The Graduate," the 1967 classic that either summed up my generation or caricatured it for big bucks.
"Reality Bites," like "The Graduate," is a funny movie.
But isn't it telling the same story?
Once again a bright but alienated recent college graduate mopes about, unable or unwilling to find a job or a reason to exist.
A pretty, somewhat more directed young woman must choose between the alienated hero and a square go-getter.
A scowling father reprimands his child: "I'll tell you the problem with your generation -- you don't have any work ethic." And everyone smokes a lot even when they haven't just finished having sex.


Falling Ill Far From Home
WHILE S. Don Tassone of Garden City, L.I., was vacationing with his wife, Gloria, at their condominium in St.
Croix in the United States Virgin Islands in late January, Mr.
Tassone, who is 76 years old, fell seriously ill.
A physician at the St.
Croix Hospital, still in temporary quarters because of Hurricane Hugo in 1989, said that an intestinal perforation and infection required that Mr.
Tassone have two immediate abdominal operations.
The Tassones called their doctor on Long Island, who talked to the St.
Croix physician, recommended antibiotics for the infection and said that the Tassones should get home as fast as possible.
At this time of year, the Tassones' predicament is not rare.
But their story highlights new systems that are developing to serve growing communities of expatriates or long-term overseas visitors, as well as Caribbean citizens who cannot get sophisticated medical help on their home islands and need to get to San Juan, P.R., Miami or Texas for specialized treatment.


Hurok Was A Huckster, And More
IN "TONIGHT WE SING," THE 1953 HOLLYWOOD film about the life of Sol Hurok, created under his supervision, there is probably not a single honest frame.
As Harlow Robinson argues in his new biography of Hurok, "The Last Impresario," the manager of this century's most important music and dance stars was simply constructing another marketing tool.
In this film, as in his two autobiographies, Hurok seemed embarrassed by his lower-class Russian Jewish background (he was born Solomon Izrailevich Gurkov) and omitted mention of the machinations that kept him on top of the music business.
These machinations, Mr.
Robinson suggests, included petty blackmail of the Russian bass Fyodor Chaliapin, who toured with a mistress and whose fees seemed too high to Hurok; byzantine manipulations of foreign ballet companies (including hints of sabotage), and ruthlessly autocratic treatment of family and staff.
Mr.
Hurok's daily operations included any number of "crude circus tactics."


Hold On to Your Hats!
The latest in Martian millinery on parade at the Young Friends of the New York Public Library's party in the Celeste Bartos Forum, March 10.


In L.A., Political Activism Beats Out Political Art
WITH SO MUCH ART NOW making political statements, it was probably inevitable that someone would carry the endeavor to its logical conclusion: take the money used to support art that addresses social injustice and give it to the poor.
Go straight to the point, as it were.
It happened in January.
One of the country's most influential supporters of contemporary art, the Lannan Foundation in Los Angeles, decided to stop spending $2 million to $3 million annually to buy works of contemporary art and donate the money to the rural poor instead.


Susan A. Ayres, Philip A. Jones
Susan Anne Ayres and Philip Andrieus Jones, both associates with Chicago law firms, were married yesterday in Winnetka, Ill.
The Rev.
Mark Simpson, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Sacred Heart Church.
The bride, 27, works at Schultz &amp; Winick.
She graduated from Colgate University and received a law degree from Boston University, as did the bridegroom.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Franklin E. Ayres of Winnetka.


Lost Streak but No Lost Glory for Knicks
It looked like the Knicks' defense turned on a switch, turning the lights out on the Boston Celtics' offense.
New York started the fourth quarter yesterday with a spectacular 16-0 run.
The Celtics did not score for the first 6 minutes 48 seconds of the quarter.
Everywhere a Celtic went, there was a Knick waiting.
And with each failed possession by Boston, the New York crowd got louder.
The Celtics got more tense.
And the Knicks became more confident.


Seeking a Nomination Without a Party's Help
For months Richard M. Rosenbaum, a former chairman of the New York State Republican Party, has thumbed his nose at party leaders by declaring he will get on the gubernatorial primary ballot by gathering signatures on nominating petitions, rather than seeking support at the state Republican convention in May.
Now he has moved a step closer to doing that by hiring Karl J. Ottosen, the political consultant who helped engineer last year's surprisingly effective petition drive to put term limits on the ballot in New York City.
After surviving legal challenges, the initiative was approved overwhelmingly by voters.


BEST SELLERS: March 20, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
2
2
9
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
3
6
3
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
4
3
84
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
5
4
20
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
6
9
4
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths investigate a series of catastrophes.
7
5
49
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
8
7
6
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an accident, creates familial tension.
9
13
2
ROGUE WARRIOR II: Red Cell, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) An attempt to stop nuclear materials from reaching North Korea.
10
8
8
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a sylvan Vermont town.
11
29
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
12
16
4
MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) Archy McNally's search for the thief of a family's heirlooms uncovers a string of surprises.
13
11
4
RAMA REVEALED, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $22.95.) The concluding volume in a series about the voyage of a starship.
14*
1
SECOND NATURE, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $22.95.) A woman adopts a "wolf man" and, by teaching him, learns a lot about good and evil.
15
10
4
SAREK, by A.C.
Crispin. (Pocket, $22.) The stormy life of Spock's father, an illustrious ambassador for the "Star Trek" Federation.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
45
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
13
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
10
3
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
4
3
10
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
5
9
2
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
4
24
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
7*
7
16
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
8
1
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she was 11 years old) to 1993.
9
15
3
MY LIVES, by Roseanne Arnold. (Ballantine, $23.) The television personality discusses her professional life and private affairs.
10*
5
5
A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.
11
8
28
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
12
6
30
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
13
1
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
14
13
4
ANN-MARGRET: My Story, by Ann-Margret with Todd Gold. (Putnam, $23.95.) The autobiography of the Swedish-born, Illinois-bred actress and entertainer.
15
14
83
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
9
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
2
2
43
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
3
21
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
4
4
34
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 5, at 3,050 bookstores and wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) ANCESTRAL TRUTHS, by Sara Maitland. (John Macrae/Holt, $22.50.) Ms.
Maitland's splendid novel is formally a book-length family reunion at which everyone is peculiar, each in a different way; her prime focus is on a woman trying to remember whether she killed her male traveling companion (she certainly wanted him dead).
ANIMAL HAPPINESS, by Vicki Hearne. (HarperCollins, $20.) The author of "Adam's Task" investigates, in these essays, what pleases animals; she finds, in many cases, that though creature comforts are important, what really tickles the beasts is the sense of a job well done.
DARKTOWN STRUTTERS, by Wesley Brown. (Cane Hill, paper, $11.95.) A vivid, disturbing historical novel that makes freewheeling use of the facts to focus on the personal identities of blacks and whites in 19th-century America.
KNIGHT'S CROSS: A Life of Field Marshal Erwin Rommel, by David Fraser. (HarperCollins, $30.) A thoughtful, most readable life of a remarkable soldier, by a senior British general.
THE KNIGHTS OF MALTA, by H.J.A.
Sire. (Yale University, $45.) A splendidly illustrated history of a colorful, aristocratic religious order, founded in 1113, that has survived numerous historical disasters and always discovered good works to do; at present its members care for the sick and run the smallest sovereign state in the world.
LISTENING, by Hannah Merker. (HarperCollins, $20.) A prolonged lyrical meditation, wise and instructive, on the importance of sound in the lives of the creatures of this planet, by a writer, editor and former librarian who lost most of her hearing when she was 39 years old.
THE MAKING OF MEMORY: From Molecules to Mind, by Steven Rose. (Anchor/Doubleday, paper, $12.95.) A neurobiologist seeks to unite chemistry and consciousness, supporting his argument with experimental results.
MILLROY THE MAGICIAN, by Paul Theroux. (Random House, $24.) Mr.
Theroux's 20th work of fiction is a dark satire of our national obsession with trim bodies and religious television, embodied in a single eccentric prestidigitator.
SURGERY: An Illustrated History, by Ira M. Rutkow. (Mosby-Year Book/Norman Publishing, $99.) A large, attractive volume by a surgeon, chronicling the art of wounding to heal from prehistory to the present, with 368 handsome (and non-sick-making) illustrations.
TEN TALES TALL &amp; TRUE, by Alasdair Gray. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) Stories of zany boldness, by a weirdly talented multimedia artist, that dramatize symbioses of oppression between willing victims and victimizers.
TRAIN GO SORRY: Inside a Deaf World, by Leah Hager Cohen. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) Ms.
Cohen's personal journey through a school for the deaf (she hears normally, but grew up there because her father is its superintendent) is also an introduction to an exceptional society that is still deciding how it should live.


Mind Games
I decided not to play any mind games with myself," Nancy Kerrigan told reporters after winning the Olympic silver medal for figure skating, "to question myself, because I knew I was capable of this."
She probably took that locution from the cover of U.S.
News the week before.
"Mind Games" was the news magazine's cover title, alongside a picture of the skater; the subhead was "Nancy Kerrigan's mental struggle. . . . How champions steel themselves to win."


Bonnie Raitt Takes a Journey Into a Heart of Darkness
THE MELANCHOLY contemplativeness that suffuses much of Bonnie Raitt's rich new album "Longing in Their Hearts" may take some of her more recent converts by surprise.
If you're among those millions of listeners who became familiar with Ms.
Raitt's artful synthesis of rock, blues and folk primarily from her two most recent releases, the commercial breakthrough of "Nick of Time" (1989) and the quintuple-platinum "Luck of the Draw" (1991), you may not be prepared for the depth of emotion that the new album draws upon.
In some ways, this collection might have been called "Raitt's Revenge": After establishing a new peak of popularity, Ms.
Raitt, 44, has returned with the sort of soulful, brooding album that used to consign her to mere cult status.
To be sure, "Longing in Their Hearts" (Capitol C1 0777 81427 1 7; CD and cassette) isn't by any means a dour endurance test.
The album commences with the snappy "Love Sneakin' Up on You," a bit of whipcrack blues-rock so vivid you can practically see Ms.
Raitt's eyes glint wickedly as she unfurls sinuous slide-guitar riffs and sings in a low, lusty growl.
It is followed by the title song, co-written by Ms.
Raitt and her husband, the actor Michael O'Keefe.
The pair -- whose first recorded collaboration, "One Part Be My Lover," was a high point of "Luck of the Draw"-- has come up with another wry winner, the gently doleful tale of a short-order cook with a troubled marriage and a longing in his heart for a better, more romantic life.


Good Morning Moscow
Maybe what Moscow needs is Steve Post, the WNYC disk jockey, to help out.
The Russian capital has only one weak classical radio station left.
All Soviet channels carried some classical music, but broadcast entrepreneurs now see more profit in rock.
Well, classical music on radio is declining in New York City too.
In fact the city is considering selling WNYC.
The solution?
WNYC just raised $1.4 million from listeners.
Get ready, Moscow, for another American treat -- the fund drive.


'There Is Magic Happening'
To the Editor:
In Michael Kimmelman's essay "Is Duane Hanson the Phidias of Our Time?"  [ Feb. 27 ] , Mr.
Hanson is given an art-historical context.
One context that was not mentioned was the countercultural part of the art world that Mr.
Hanson and the photorealists inhabited in the 1970's.


Revised and Renamed, S.A.T. Brings Same Old Anxiety
If it was a nervous time for the juniors and seniors at Danbury High School this morning to try their luck with the newly revised and renamed Scholastic Assessment Test, it was doubly so for Jenn Lohmeyer and Kerry Brown.
Ms.
Lohmeyer, a junior from Newtown, Conn., and Ms.
Brown, a junior from New Fairfield, were standing in the "problem corner" because they had both forgot to bring the required photo ID.


Too Much of a Good Thing Even to Hellllloooo About
This just in: Even the forecasters on television, who usually get a thrill when the jet stream is jumping and high-pressure systems are at war with each other, have had enough.
"I get very excited about snowstorms," said Lloyd Lindsay Young of WWOR-TV.
"I can't sleep, the adrenaline rush, I'm up every couple of hours, checking on how much has come down. But even I'm sick of it."


Bench Provides Purdue With Its Second Wind
In the end, it was not the sensational junior forward Glenn Robinson who saved the day for Purdue -- although Robinson got his points (33) and his rebounds (11).
It wasn't even the other four starters, who have preached about not being a one-man team, who carried the Boilermakers through the second round of the Southeast Regional of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament today.
Help came from an unlikely source.


Nancy Rothenberg and Marc Mukasey
Nancy Eve Rothenberg, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin B. Rothenberg of Atlanta, was married last evening to Marc Saroff Mukasey, the son of Judge and Mrs.
Michael B. Mukasey of New York.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein performed the ceremony at the Pratt Mansions in New York.
The bride, 25, and the bridegroom, 26, are both lawyers who received their law degrees from Yeshiva University.
She is an assistant district attorney in the Bronx.
He is an enforcement lawyer at the Securities and Exchange Commission in New York.


Overlooking the Harbor in Greenwich
THE Atlantis restaurant, in Greenwich Harbor Inn, has undergone a considerable change since the space harbored the rather tarnished, tacky Showboat.
Fresh decor (pale green walls, splashes of greenery and white trellises separating smoking and nonsmoking sections, wooden captain's chairs, well-napped tables) and new ownership (the same people who own Amadeus in Stamford) all augur well, helped along by window-wall views of Greenwich Harbor.


Down at the Statehouse, Legislators Have More Fun
THE barons of the Senate and the pooh-bahs of the House of Representatives are consumed this year with such ponderous matters as the nation's health-care system, the post-cold war military budget, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the rules on interstate banking.
Levity is in short supply.
The mood is often different in the statehouses -- in Albany and Sacramento, in Montpelier and Tallahassee and Helena and in most of the other capitals, where now and again laughter lightens the load.


Jeh C. Johnson and Susan M. DiMarco
Dr.
Susan Maureen DiMarco, a dentist in Wappingers Falls, N.Y., and Jeh Charles Johnson, a partner in Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, the law firm in New York, were married Friday at Corpus Christi Church in New York.
The Rev.
Armand Padula, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
The bride, 36, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Vassar College and received her dental degree from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Maureen DiMarco of Rhinebeck, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Stephen D. DiMarco, who was also a dentist in Wappingers Falls.
Her mother is the coordinator of clinical services at Astor Early Childhood Program in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.


No Headline


Words To Live By
To the Editor:
Re: "Who Are You?" (Feb. 13).
It used to be that the one word that connoted all desirable things for a man was "gentleman," and for a woman, "lady."


Seeing Beyond the American Trees
To the Editor:
"Institutional Investments That Grow With Trees" (Feb. 20) dealt exclusively with United States timberlands, which because of concern over the spotted owl and similar matters have become significantly overvalued in some regions.
However, 85 percent of the world's timber production comes from outside the United States, and two-thirds of that percentage comes from tropical forests.
Such forests are rapidly disappearing because of conversion to agriculture.
For numerous biological reasons, tropical forests do not regenerate as readily as woodlands in temperate zones do.
A tropical forest that has been clear-cut is lost for all economic purposes.


Peace in Bosnia Still Remains Possible
To the Editor:
Cooperation among the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the United Nations and Russia could lay the groundwork for peace in Bosnia, but the situation remains precarious.
Genocide continues, mostly as Serbian ethnic cleansing of Muslims and slaughter of civilians.
The United States and the international community should recognize their primary commitment is to end the genocide and war, and then work with the combatants toward a political solution that preserves, as much as is still possible, the multiethnic character of Sarajevo and Bosnia.


Lauren B. Claire, Jonathan Halpern
Lauren Brett Claire, a media supervisor at BBDO Worldwide, the advertising agency in New York, is to be married today to Jonathan David Halpern, a sales manager at Halbro Control Industries in Farmingdale, L.I.
Rabbi Morris Barzilai is to officiate at the Woodbury Country Club in Woodbury, L.I.
The bride, 27, graduated from the University of Maryland.
She is a daughter of Marilyn A. Claire of Great Neck, L.I., and of Allen B. Claire of Fort Lee, N.J.
The bride's father is the executive vice president of Gary S. Bell Associates, a biotechnology recruiting company in Glen Rock, N.J.
Her mother is the vice president of Fleet Shipping Lines, an international shipping company in Rumson, N.J.


The Next Giant in Mutual Funds?
Charles Schwab is at it again.
In the last 18 months, Mr.
Schwab, the discount broker who brought low prices to Wall Street, has set on a new target: mutual funds.
His weapon of choice is One Source -- a financial Wal-Mart that enables investors to trade funds as easily as stocks.


The Executive Computer; Helping Big Corporations Out of Computer Limbo
MOVING from the old computing model of mainframes and minicomputers to the world of client-server computing is like building a bridge.
Without powerful tools, you can't get there from here.
Most corporations reside in a kind of computing limbo, with their core sales data, payroll, inventory and all other vital information perhaps on an I.B.M. mainframe running DB2, or minicomputers running Oracle.
They would like to get to an environment where their programs could run on networks of personal computers and servers, which are a much cheaper and friendlier source of computing power.
But making the move requires a set of programming skills and tools seldom to be found on either the mainframe side or the PC side.


A Rare Peek At Lascaux Cave
An opportunity to visit the interior of the Lascaux cave in southwestern France will be offered in June by Art and Anthropological Tours of Oakland, Calif.
For reasons of conservation, the cave and its prehistoric black and ocher paintings have been closed to the public for more than 20 years.


Corrections
The Arts and Leisure guide today includes an outdated listing for the Cafe Carlyle.
After the section was printed, Steve Allen cancelled his program because of illness.
Barbara Cook will replace him, performing Tuesday through Saturday.


The Executive Life; Throwing Stresses To the Oregon Wind
AS much of the Pacific Northwest basked in record warmth earlier this month, some eager windsurfers got a head start on spring and headed for the Columbia River Gorge.
Among them were more than a handful of corporate aficionados of the sport, drawn for reasons as diverse as pure exercise, pure pleasure and pure escape.
"Your muscles are exhausted at the end of the day," said Patricia J. O'Connor, 38, vice president for human resources at Mentor Graphics, a Wilsonville, Ore., company that makes computer-aided design tools for engineers.
"But it's a wonderful way to balance the stress of a high-pressure job. A day on the water is like a mini-vacation, and I come back refreshed and ready to tackle what lies ahead."


Rabbinical Distinctions
IT'S lunchtime at the Regency on Park Avenue, and in the sprawling hotel kitchen the green beans are airborne and the waiters are on the run.
In one corner, the executive chef is patiently assembling apple tarts.
And the rabbi has come to call.
The rabbi is Yisroel Finman, a dark-eyed, soft-spoken former commune dweller who heads his own kosher supervision company, and he is inspecting the hotel's kitchen to insure that a wedding reception scheduled there in a few weeks will meet the strict dietary laws held sacred by many Jews.


Q. &amp; A.
Seeking Room for Exercise Q. My co-op has a large room in the basement area that is used only once or twice a year for meetings.
A couple of tenants including myself have expressed interest in turning a portion of this room into a workout area.
Equipment would be donated by the tenants and all have agreed to sign a waiver holding the co-op blameless in case of injury.
Our sponsor, who is on the board, says he contacted the insurance company, which says it is not a good idea.
There is nothing written in the bylaws regarding this.
What can I do as an owner to pursue this? . . .
Jane Steiner, Brooklyn


A Saving Grace


Subject of a Bronze Bust Cannot Recognize Himself
To the Editor:
I can understand why, in your March 6 article about the Roger Smith Hotel, "Bed and Bronzes," you failed to indentify the bronze head in the photograph, because it resembles no one I know, famous or otherwise.


Carpet Store to Open On the Chelsea Fringes
Central Carpet, a chain of Oriental rug stores, is establishing a beachhead in a landmark bank building on 14th Street, just to the west of the home-furnishings district taking shape in Chelsea.
The company will display 10,000 antique Persian and Chinese rugs, dhurries, kilims and broadloom carpets in the redesigned, 15,000-square-foot space.
The 1896 New York Savings Bank building, at the corner of 14th Street and Eighth Avenue, has stood vacant since Goldome moved out in 1987.


What's Whitewater Next to the Bush Family and the S.&amp; L.'s?
To the Editor:
Pictures of Senator Alfonse M. D'A-mato of New York sanctimoniously and vigorously buried in Whitewater papers amaze me (e.g., news article March 11).
Is this the same Senator the Senate Ethics Committee chastised for conducting the business of his office in an improper manner?
Is this the Senator whose brother was convicted of mail fraud for using the Senator's stationery to lobby for defense contracts?
Is this the same Senator who earned the nickname "Senator Shakedown" for aggressive lobbying for campaign funds?


U.S. WILL URGE U.N. TO PLAN SANCTIONS FOR NORTH KOREA
The Clinton Administration decided today to ask the United Nations to lay the groundwork for economic sanctions against North Korea as diplomatic efforts to persuade Pyongyang to end its nuclear program neared collapse, Administration officials said.
Cabinet-level officials met at the White House today to map out a strategy to compel North Korea to allow international monitors to complete their inspections of Pyongyang's nuclear sites.


A Myth And a Proposal
To the Editor:
I read with interest William Grimes's article "Filming Turns Out to Be Just the Beginning"  [ Feb. 13 ] .
The attraction of independent films is the opportunity to watch or create something that might be rough around the edges but high in entertainment or content, preferably both.
Made by people who shortcut the studio system by doing it on the cheap, independent films promise to explore or reflect the cutting edge of public thought.
That's the myth.


With a Rash of New Clubs, It's Survival of the Fitness
For several months now, Chelsea residents have been deluged with fliers, signs and direct-mail promotions selling the body beautiful and healthful.
This winter alone, three new fitness clubs have opened in the neighborhood.
In fact, with a total of 14 health clubs in Chelsea and its Flatiron fringes, the area now has the largest concentration in the city, club owners say.
The Chelsea gym wars could put to shame the Upper West Side skirmish of two years ago, when two giant clubs around Lincoln Center, Equinox and World Gym, vied to recruit trainers and members with appealing prices and much publicity.
Several small clubs in the area reported losing business, and one closed.


Carol Rosen, David Kagan
Carol Ann Rosen, a daughter of Edwin and Mary Rosen of Brookline, Mass., was married there last evening to David Lawrence Kagan, the son of Dr.
Sumner Kagan of Newton, Mass., and Wilma Kagan of Pompano Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Emily Lipof officiated at Temple Ohabei Shalom.
Mrs.
Kagan, 29, is the director of publicity at Natural Health Magazine in Brookline.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is a sales representative for textile manufacturers, in Needham, Mass.
Her mother is a librarian at Temple Ohabei Shalom.


More Modest Proposals
To the Editor:
F.
Paul Wilson gave us only a glimpse of the potential benefits to be realized by the legislation that will be introduced in support of universal prose care.


Spiro Agnew and I
Monday.
My birthday is coming up and not having had a midlife crisis at 40, I'm planning to have one now.
I will be over 40!
I can't focus.
I have no energy.
I think about Spiro Agnew more than other people do.
Whatever happened to Spiro Agnew?
Has he opened a restaurant, the way retired baseball players do?
Spiro Agnew's Ribs.
Or a used-car dealership?
I can see his face so clearly, his hair combed straight back.
It is the face of my youth.
Tuesday.
Did you know that an anagram of Spiro Agnew is "Grow a penis?" Did you know that the lead singer of the Red Hot Chili Peppers was convicted of sexual battery because he waved his penis at a fan after a concert?
I heard this on MTV.
I think it would be dangerous to wave it at a fan.
I was always told to keep my fingers away from fans.
And I always have.


A Mix of Geometry and Thick Pigment
THE art of Alfred Jensen arrests the attention, yet esthetically it does nothing, goes nowhere.
At least, that is the impression given by the 21 paintings now at the Newark Museum, and it seems intentional.
Jensen, who produced the earliest of these canvases in 1972, when he settled in Glen Ridge, and the latest in 1981, the year of his death at the age of 78, recalls Ad Reinhardt in his disavowal of Abstract Expressionism during the early 1950's.
But whereas Reinhardt drained his canvases of anything that hinted at emotion (while at the same time honing his curmudgeonry), Jensen continued to paint gesturally, using pigment that was often thick and oily.


Brooks Puts Her Heart On the Line for Seton
At the free-throw line, Seton Hall's senior guard, Jodi Brooks, took a deep breath and let out a huge sigh before she released her shot.
Her team had a 65-63 lead over Texas.
This was her moment.
This was the Pirates' chance.
The shot was all net, and for the first time in the game, Brooks looked around Walsh Gym and smiled.
And everyone followed the leader.


HUNTING FOR LOVE
John Tierney appears unfamiliar with Coogan's Law: Marry one and get one married (The Big City: "Hunting for Love," Feb. 20).
Although as yet uncodified, this law is undoubtedly part of moral law, because all right-thinking women instinctively try to marry off every single in sight.
No matter that my husband chooses to call this practice "spreading the misery," I proudly testify to its efficacy.
JEANMARIE COOGAN Philadelphia


Spires and Canyons of Utah
IT was a new experience for me in the high desert of Utah.
As I pulled my foot out of the riverbed, I heard a sucking, smacking noise.
I looked down at the quivering sand, and pressed my foot into it again.
So this was quicksand.
Overrated, I thought, stepping back onto solid ground with little effort.
A threat to cattle or Jeeps, perhaps, but not to hikers.
I was walking up Courthouse Wash, a creek whose eons of flash floods have carved immense monoliths out of the sandstone landscape of Arches National Park.
It was still early morning, and I had the wash, and seemingly the park, to myself.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Frugal Traveler column on Feb. 27, about skiing in the Laurentians, and a listing of hotels, reversed the relationship of Canadian and United States currency.
The Canadian dollar is 74 cents in United States money.


Celebrating Grieg Modestly but Grandly
FOR THOSE WHO ENJOY the music of Edvard Grieg, celebrations of the 150th anniversary of his birth last year -- even the lavish spread set out by his hometown of Bergen, Norway -- may have seemed disappointing.
We tend to anticipate monumental statements, superhuman efforts on such occasions, and Grieg's output had relatively little to offer in that regard.
He was unquestionably a great composer, quite apart from his role in Norway's nationalist folk-music movement.
Yet he was most characteristically a composer of small, lyric works: music for piano or for solo singer with piano accompaniment, intended if not for actual home use, then to recall domestic intimacy in larger public spaces.


Trajectory Of a Slugger
At charity golf tournaments, Mickey Mantle sits on a bench at a par-3 hole and gets up to hit a tee shot with every group passing through.
But he gets up painfully, on throbbing knees that required four operations during his career with the New York Yankees.
Life's been like that for the Hall of Famer for years, but now his knees are the least of his pain.


A Model T Fuels a Masterpiece
LISTENERS DON'T USUALLY ponder the circumstances attending the composition of a piece of music.
They simply assume that inspiration struck, and the composer sat down and wrote it out.
Yet composers, like novelists and painters, are sometimes driven by financial need to create works to order; whether the result turns out to be a potboiler or a masterpiece depends not on its motivation but on the composer's gifts and application.
One great masterpiece of this century, Alban Berg's Violin Concerto, might never have been written had Berg not been late with his car payments, and had a persistent young violinist named Louis Krasner not shown up, cash in hand, to persuade him to accept a commission.
The haunting, deeply spiritual work Berg wrote will be performed beginning on Wednesday evening by Viktoria Mullova and the New York Philharmonic, led by Kurt Masur, in Avery Fisher Hall.


Poor Gain, Rich Gain a Lot
The Dickensian breach between Manhattan's richest and poorest areas widened in the last decade.
Both groups gained in average family income.
Still, the differentials between the top 10 percent of the census tracts in Manhattan and the bottom 10 percent grew.
The reason?
The richer census tracts grew much richer.


The Custom of the Country
Les femmes s'habillent bien dans les pays ou elles se deshabillent souvent.
Women dress well in countries where they undress often. -- French saying


A New Day: League Has Mercy on the Rangers' Kovalev
Aleksei Kovalev of the Rangers avoided his fourth suspension of the season yesterday when a National Hockey League executive reviewed a videotape and rescinded a game-misconduct penalty against him.
The executive, Senior Vice President Brian Burke, watched scenes of a collision during Friday night's game between the Rangers and Chicago at Madison Square Garden, a 7-3 victory for the Blackhawks.
Kovalev's check caused a knee injury to Chicago's Chris Chelios.


Miss Ambrosino, Mr. Brown
Victoria Kron Ambrosino, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence P. Ambrosino Jr. of Englewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Alexander Paul Brown 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brown 3d of Baltimore.
The Rev.
Ralph R. Warren Jr. officiated at the Episcopal Church of Bethesda by the Sea in Palm Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Brown, 30, is the advertising and promotions manager of Regent International Hotels in Hong Kong.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father retired as the president of A. C. Chevrolet, a car dealership in Jersey City, N.J., and is on the board of Hudson City Savings Bank in Paramus, N.J.


At Home in Arkansas, Many Feel Under Fire and Not Understood
Just as Arkansas basked in the reflected glory of Bill Clinton's election as President 16 months ago, it is stewing and reeling to the same degree today because of the unfolding story of Whitewater and the travails of some of Mr.
Clinton's home-grown appointees.
On the human level of lives shattered or turned upside down, and on the larger level of the state's image and reputation, events in Washington are turning this capital city into an aggrieved, edgy reflection of the giddy place that savored the spotlight during Mr.
Clinton's campaign and after his election.


Lisa Jill Tropp, T. E. Fitzgerald
Lisa Jill Tropp, a daughter of Mrs.
Alan R. Tropp of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Tropp, is to be married today to Timothy Eric Fitzgerald, a son of Gerald and Eileen Fitzgerald of Cooperstown, N.Y.
Rabbi Albert L. Sturmer and the Rev.
Kenneth Marks, a Roman Catholic priest, are to officiate at the Beach Point Club in Mamaroneck.
The bride, 32, teaches third grade at the Allen-Stevenson School in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College and received a master's degree in computers in education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her mother, Yvonne D. Tropp, is a vice president of the United States Trust Company of New York.
Her father was the president of Robbins Brothers Inc., a carpet importing company in New York.


A Haven for Statistics With Sad Young Faces
THE housing cop is feeling attached to the little boy in her arms, abandoned last night in the hallway of a project.
He is small for a 3-year-old, polite and cuddly.
His hair has been elaborately braided.
Someone must have cared about him.
At the least, he was once someone's favorite toy.
Now, in a corner of the pediatric emergency room of Metropolitan Hospital, the cop asks, "Are we buddies, little buddy?" They are nose to nose as little buddy tugs her blonde hair.
It seems too fanciful to call him a casualty in the war against children, certainly manipulative to wonder why people in this city seem to raise more outrage over the treatment of animals than of children.
Let's just call little buddy a statistic with a face.
And these are just notes from a front line.


Rebuilt Berlin
To the Editor: Your articles on rebuilt Berlin were interesting and I hope will be only the first of many on this subject.
However, I feel that Paula Butturini's discussion of the Maritim Grand Hotel in "A Changing Scene for City Hotels" (Feb. 20) missed the point about this interesting structure.
The Grand Hotel, as it was called when it was built, seemed to me to have been designed especially to evoke the famous Greta Garbo film of the same name, set in Berlin.
The Grand Hotel in which Garbo, the fading ballerina, stayed also had balconies surrounding a large circular central court; from the elevation, suave John Barrymore could look down to appraise the jewelry of his possible victims, or the doomed Jean Hersholt could vicariously share the happiness of the laughing and elegant crowd below.


It's Spring; And for Optimists, Anyway, It Feels Just So Fine
A mobile sign turned up in the West Village recently, near the lots along the Hudson River where the city stores its snow.
"Spring Soon Promise," it observed laconically, coining a new version of "The Check Is in the Mail."
Spring Here Now.
It arrives today, technically, at 3:28 P.M.
And though New Yorkers say they are not buying it, there are telltale signs throughout the region that a few optimists do believe winter will end before July.


Envisioning the Future Of Liberty State Park
A recent letter to the New Jersey editor about Liberty State Park said that opponents of a golf course have a "do-nothing plan except leave it an unused wasteland for another 30 years." Actually, the Central Park concept for Liberty State Park's central area has been well publicized for over a year and has strong support from the vast majority of area residents as well as a variety of statewide recreational and environmental organizations.


Commercial Property/Midtown CompUSA; Superstore Anchor For Part of 5th Ave.
WHEN CompUSA, the Dallas-based $1 billion-plus chain of computer-equipment superstores, decided to take on Manhattan, it opted for midtown, taking most of the blockfront at 420 Fifth Avenue, between West 37th and 38th Streets.
"We wanted a prime midtown location," said Noelle Green-Hunt, senior director of investor relations and communications at CompUSA.
"We have a lot of corporate business. We wanted to have extensive store frontage like Toys 'R' Us so we can have big displays and give people a real flavor of what we're capable of doing. And we wanted off-street loading ability at a lower level. A lot of places did not offer that."


Hear That Lonesome Whistle Blow
ZEPHYR Tracking a Dream Across America.
By Henry Kisor.
Illustrated. 338 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $24.


SURFACING
MUSIC  Monastery goes mainstream: An album of Gregorian chants, which was a huge hit in Spain over the winter, has been released in the United States as "Chant." The monks of Santo Domingo de Silos recorded the album in their 11th-century Benedictine monastery.
LOVE  The ultimate wedding backdrop: A favorite place to take formal wedding photographs is on the sweeping rise of marble stairs in the Wintergarden at the World Financial Center.
CHILDREN  Talking sneakers: "Talkables," as they are known, follow sexual stereotypes.
Hit a button and the boy's version says "vrrrooommmm," like a racing car; the girl's version says "I love you." About $17 at K-Mart.


Terror Network Was Born in Defense of Apartheid
A few months after he became President in 1989, F. W. de Klerk summoned hundreds of top officers of the police force and army to an auditorium to announce that their partisan war was over.
They had been soldiers of a white political order, Mr. de Klerk said.
They had been sent into battle against the African National Congress and its sympathizers.


Augers Can Only Go So Far Down the Drain
ALTHOUGH usually easy to repair, a clogged drain in a kitchen sink, bathroom basin or bathtub can be frustrating.
Chemical drain cleaners sometimes work, but not always.
A danger with many is that if they do not work the cleanup can be complicated by dealing with poisonous materials.
Kitchen drains are often clogged by hardened grease.
Pouring a kettle of boiling water will sometimes melt the grease.
A stronger cure is to pour a cup of baking soda, followed by a cup of vinegar.
But first bail out water from the sink.


On Montserrat, a Farm Without Dirt
SPRING comes to New York today at 3:28 P.M.
It arrives an hour earlier down in Montserrat, a little island in the West Indies that has weathered volcanoes, hurricanes and floods since it first appeared out of the Caribbean Sea millions of years ago.
I was down there two weeks ago, escaping New York's snow and ice and being bathed by the balmy breezes (it's only about 1,200 miles from the Equator) that blow through the tropical trees laden with bananas, breadfruits, mangos, papayas, limes and grapefruits.
Walking along the road to town I'd pass men and women bent over in the fields digging potatoes or carrots and a starchy root called dasheen.
But most of the workers were old.


Goodbye in a Sea of Blue: Slain Officer Laid to Rest
From as far as Boston, 10,000 police officers came to Astoria, Queens, yesterday to pay their respects to Sean McDonald, a 26-year-old officer fatally shot as he interrupted the armed robbery of a Bronx tailor shop.
There were bagpipes and drums, an armada of low-flying helicopters, black strips over thousands of badges and a general effort to make sense of the senseless.
The sun shone brightly, but a brisk wind whipped wisps of snow off building roofs.
Police officers, at least 10 deep, lined sidewalks and streets for two blocks.
Most were silent, standing at attention even when they didn't have to.


Merrick Co-op Tenants Fight School-Tax Rise
THE owners of the Barclay Town Houses, a two-building cooperative in North Merrick, are battling the school board and the state over a 43 percent increase in their school-tax rate.
The residents say the rate for all other North Merrick homeowners rose 2.9 percent this year.


Massacre at Hebron Exposes Anti-American Mood in Israel
In some Israeli circles, a new dirty word has popped up in the last few weeks: Brooklyn.
Brooklyn produced Benjamin C. Goldstein, who as Baruch Goldstein of the Qiryat Arba settlement massacred at least 29 Palestinians in Hebron three weeks ago.
And Brooklyn, of course, is part of the United States.
That has been enough to touch a certain anti-American streak that lies just below the surface for many Israelis.


Neither Here Nor There
ANYONE who's been around children much has probably been persuaded to purchase one of those little pill-like capsules that, once immersed in water, magically expand into dinos or dragons or other extravagant beasties.
Every time I witness this transformation (and I'm a sucker for pleasures so reasonably priced), it occurs to me it's a perfect analogy for someone's going on vacation.
Dried out and nearly lifeless from a long working year, encapsulated by routine, repressed by convention, we need only a large helping of sparkling air and bright water, a moment's freedom, to achieve a magical expansion, changing from cramped, wan and harried into relaxed, tanned and composed.
But not immediately -- that's the rub.
The toy takes only a few minutes to expand, but it can often take even the most eager of travelers several days to get in the swim of things.
Bad habits persist; the cloud of worry we bring from home forms a scrim between us and the scenery, the culture, the experience we've traveled so far and spent so much to find.


Correction
The At Work column last Sunday about a newsletter for former I.B.M. employees referred incorectly to The Saturday Evening Post.
The magazine is published six times each year; it has not ceased publication.


Junnosuke Ofusa, Long the Manager For Times in Tokyo
Junnosuke Ofusa, the Japanese journalist who managed the Tokyo bureau of The New York Times for nearly six decades, died today in Tokyo.
He was 86 years old.
Mr. Ofusa suffered a heart attack, said his son, Nobuo Ofusa.


EL SALVADOR BARS VOTING IN 3 TOWNS
In an 11th-hour response to strong international pressures, Salvadoran electoral officials announced today that voting would be allowed in four northern towns that had been barred from taking part in elections on Sunday.
The small towns, all in the northern province of Chalatenango, lie in areas of traditional support for the country's former guerrillas of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front.


Editors' Note
An article last Sunday about the real estate management concern of Douglas Elliman-Gibbons &amp; Ives discussed kickbacks and other questionable practices discovered by the Milstein family after it acquired the company in 1989.
The article recounted the way the new owners tried to end the abuses and called them to the attention of prosecutors.
The headline, referring to the company, said, "How the Rolls-Royce of Building Managers Suddenly Lost Its Luster."


Moratorium Time?
To the Editor:
As much as it pains me to second Will Crutchfield's assessment of current standards in Verdi singing  [ "Big, Easy Voices Give Real Power to Verdi's 'Forza,' " Feb. 13 ] , the damning evident encroaches from all sides.
No amount of wishful thinking will transform Sharon Sweet into a Zinka Milanov or Carol Vaness into a Rosa Ponselle.
Documents like the Naples videotape illustrate only too vividly the disparity between the riches of the 1950's and our own arid generation.
I am not some bitter opera troll lost in memories of the past.
I am a 31-year-old aficionado who was weaned on recordings of superb talents like that of Renata Tebaldi in "Forza."


Wall Street; Medical Inflation Is Slowing, But Hold the Champagne
MEDICAL costs are rising less rapidly than they used to, a fact being cited by opponents of President Clinton's proposed health reforms as evidence that less comprehensive changes are needed.
Last week, the Government reported that the consumer price index for medical costs had risen 4.9 percent in the last 12 months, the lowest annual change since the 12 months ended October 1973, when Watergate, not Whitewater, was the scandal du jour.
But even that rate was well above the overall inflation rate, of just 2.3 percent.
Not since May 1981 has there been one 12-month period when medical inflation failed to outstrip the overall inflation rate.
In the almost 13 years since then, consumer prices have leaped by 63 percent.
But the health care price index has soared 155 percent.


Sarah Case, Leonard Wright
Sarah Case, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Reginald K. Case of Peekskill, N.Y., was married on Friday to Leonard T. Wright, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard T. Wright of Clifton Park, N.Y.
Donald McGrath, a marriage officer in Philipstown, N.Y., performed the ceremony at Xaviar's Restaurant in Garrison, N.Y.
Mrs.
Wright, 25, graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is an artist.
Her mother, Bonnie Case, owns Case &amp; Company, a women's fashion and sweater manufacturer in New York.


It's Singh Leading by 1
Vijay Singh was born in Fiji and lives in London, but he is beginning to feel very much at home right here in this central Florida city.
Playing on a course where he finished tied for second last year, Singh shot a round of 68 today for a 54-hole total of 205 and a one-stroke lead over Tom Watson, Nick Price and Andrew Magee in the Nestle Invitational.
Singh, the winner of last year's Buick Classic at Westchester Country Club and the PGA Tour's 1993 rookie of the year, birdied four of five holes on a back nine run that put him atop a leader board that is loaded with big names.


WHO'S AFRAID OF LANI GUINIER?
While I thoroughly enjoyed the excerpt of Lani Guinier's forthcoming book, and fully agreed with its understatement that she had been grievously (and unjustifiably) treated by the Administration, members of the Senate Judiciary Committee and outside critics, I feel that she studiously skirts around the real reason for her downfall -- white racism.


JOYCELYN ELDERS TOUGHS IT OUT
There is no doubt that Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders is highly educated ("Joycelyn Elders Toughs It Out," Jan. 30).
In Claudia Dreifus's interview, Dr.
Elders came across as articulate, straightforward, and down to earth on everything she spoke about.
Everything, that is, but the question of her son's arrest on charges of cocaine dealing.
The string of sentences she spewed out on that subject was indecipherable.
Was she agreeing with Dreifus's insinuation that the arrest was possibly conspiratorial, and therefore unmerited?
Or was she tentatively suggesting that her son was guilty and she didn't know quite how to deal with it?


Corrections
An article on page 42 of The Times Magazine today about Stephen Sondheim's composition of the song "I Wish I Could Forget You" omitted copyright information.
The song is Copyright $; 1994 by Rilting Music Inc.
All rights administered by WB Music Corp.
All rights reserved.
Used by permission.


Coolness Under Fire: UConn and Florida Roll On
It might be as important as talent.
It could be as valuable as luck.
As a rapidly shrinking number of basketball teams journeys through the month of March, with quests they hope will extend to April, they are finding that composure may be the most precious commodity of all.
That was the factor that pushed Connecticut and Florida into a semifinal meeting in the East Regional next Friday night in Miami Arena, and that ended the seasons of George Washington and Pennsylvania yesterday in second-round games at Nassau Coliseum.


Fayge Pollan, Howard Feder
Fayge Miriam Pollan, the daughter of Rose Samet of Brooklyn and Chaim Pollan of Spring Valley, N.Y., was married on Tuesday to Howard Avram Feder, a son of Saul E. and Mindy C. Feder of Willowbrook, S.I.
Rabbi Jay Marcus officiated at the Marina Del Rey Grand Ballroom in the Bronx.
The bride, 22, graduated from Queens College, as did the bridegroom, and she is studying for a master's degree in physical therapy at Touro College.
Her father is an owner of XYZ Two-Way Radio Service Inc., a car service in Brooklyn.
Her mother is an elementary school teacher at Public School 160in Jamaica, Queens.


Jose Limon's Dancers Are Not Just Marking Time
WHEN JOSE LIMON died in 1972, his troupe chose to live on.
The Limon Dance Company thereby became the first American modern-dance ensemble to survive its founder's death.
Since then, other modern groups -- including those of Joyce Trisler, Alvin Ailey, Martha Graham and Alwin Nikolais -- have faced the future after the deaths of their leaders.
Nevertheless, because the Limon company set a precedent, its policies continue to be scrutinized.
Ruth Currier, the Limon dancer who took over as director after his death, both preserved his works and began to use outside choreographers.
When, during the 1977-78 season, she felt she could no longer continue in the post, she was succeeded by another Limon dancer, Carla Maxwell, who remains artistic director.


JUST TAKE AWAY THEIR GUNS
THE PRESIDENT WANTS STILL tougher gun control legislation and thinks it will work.
The public supports more gun control laws but suspects they won't work.
The public is right.
Legal restraints on the lawful purchase of guns will have little effect on the illegal use of guns.
There are some 200 million guns in private ownership, about one-third of them handguns.
Only about 2 percent of the latter are employed to commit crimes.
It would take a Draconian, and politically impossible, confiscation of legally purchased guns to make much of a difference in the number used by criminals.
Moreover, only about one-sixth of the handguns used by serious criminals are purchased from a gun shop or pawnshop.
Most of these handguns are stolen, borrowed or obtained through private purchases that wouldn't be affected by gun laws.


Why Whitewater Matters
From President Clinton on down, important Democrats would have us believe that the Whitewater mess is a confection spun by Republicans with little else to talk about and media types with little else to do.
But there are reasonable people, including many who wish Mr.
Clinton well, who believe that Whitewater has raised serious questions that deserve serious inquiry.
On Thursday, the Senate voted unanimously to hold public hearings, "structured and sequenced" so as not to interfere with the Whitewater special prosecutor, Robert Fiske.
House leaders, who have been stonewalling any hearings, should follow suit.


More Modest Proposals
To the Editor:
F.
Paul Wilson's proposed universal-prose-care solution for what currently ails the writing-publishing-bookselling triad of American letters sounds quite good enough as far as it goes.
Especially that part about writers' being guaranteed publication.


All That Parents Can Do Isn't Enough
CHILDREN FIRST What Our Society Must Do -- and Is Not Doing -- for Our Children Today.
By Penelope Leach. 303 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


Wall Street; An Embarrassment on the Amex
THE American Stock Exchange requires listed companies to provide financial information to their shareholders.
But for nine months, an insider at one Amex company sold his shares while the company kept its bad news secret.
That news, much of which came out last week, includes a default on loans, a two-year lag in filing tax returns, and a lawsuit that could put the company out of business.


'Freedom Is About Authority': Excerpts From Giuliani Speech on Crime
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was among the speakers on Wednesday at a forum about crime in the cities, sponsored by The New York Post.
The Mayor discussed how crime and law enforcement had changed in New York over several decades, and how society had changed.
Here is an excerpt, as transcribed by The New York Times.
We constantly present the false impression that government can solve problems that government in America was designed not to solve.
Families are significantly less important in the development of children today than they were 30 or 40 years ago.
Religion has less influence than it did 30 or 40 years ago.
Communities don't mean what they meant 30 or 40 years ago.


Family Values: Just Do It
To the Editor:
In response to "Coming Soon: Get a Life 101" (At Work, Feb. 27), we suggest that the next time you want to gain insight into work-family issues, cancel the seminar, call it "family day," go home and take your kids to the park.
CHARLES and CHRIS HADDON  Silver Spring, Md., March 2


The Most Spirited -- and Intrepid -- in the Land
IN the gymnasium of Longwood High School female bodies were being launched into the air like Grucci fireworks.
Once airborne, they exploded into action, twisting and flipping in synchronized patterns.
Then, one by one, they plummeted back to earth and into the waiting arms of other females.
Seconds later there were back flips and split jumps that looked like floor splits, only they were three feet off the floor.
With music blasting, the bodies danced, snapping their necks from side to side and contorting their torsos into what seemed a primal prance.
Every body moved in unison.
They became one female form as a fist shot to the sky, another to the side.
Then the body started to yell.
In a staccato voice, every word precise and clipped as the movement that accompanied it, a shout came out.
"Go. Green. Go. White. Go. Lions. Fight. Fight!"


Benefits
Haitian Art Auction  TODAY -- The 13th annual sale of Haitian art will be held at the Convent of the Sacred Heart, 1 East 92d Street, from noon to 5 P.M., with an auction of some works at 3:30 P.M.
The event will benefit Eye Care, a program for the rural poor in Haiti.
Refreshments will be served.
Tickets, $30, at the door. 'Ridiculous' Celebration  TONIGHT -- The Ridiculous Theatrical Company, now in its 26th season, will hold a benefit at Flamingo East, 219 Second Avenue near 13th Street.
The evening, starting with dinner at 6 o'clock and followed by desserts and champagne, will conclude with an auction at 9.
Included for bidding will be dinner with Petula Clark, tickets to "Blood Brothers" and a guided backstage tour of "Kiss of the Spiderwoman" and a meeting with its star, Chita Rivera.
Tickets, $150 for dinner and auction, or $75 for dessert and auction, at the door.
Oscar Party  MONDAY -- On Oscar night, Variety, the Children's Charity will give a party at the Cineplex Odeon National Theater on Broadway at 44th Street to watch the annual Academy Awards presentation on the big screen.
The evening, for the benefit of handicapped and needy children in the metropolitan area, will start at 8 with cocktails and a buffet, followed by the presentation show at 9.
Tickets, $25, at the door.
Information: (212) 247-5588.
For Citymeals-on-Wheels  MONDAY -- The Professionals' Alliance for Citymeals-on-Wheels, made up of the organization's younger group of volunteers, is holding a party from 6 to 10 P.M. at the Judson Grill, 152 West 52d Street.
There will be cocktails, hors d'oeuvres and a raffle.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 687-1234, or at the door.
Comedy for a Cause  TUESDAY -- The New York section of the National Council of Jewish Women will hold a benefit at the comedy club Stand-Up New York, at 236 West 78th Street.
A dinner buffet will be served from 7 to 8:30 P.M., followed by comedy acts until 9:30.
Dietary laws will be observed.
The evening will raise funds for soup kitchens and the Pediatric AIDS Caring Team, a group of volunteers that spends time each week cuddling babies with AIDS.
Tickets, $45, from (212) 535-5900, extension 39, or $55 at the door.
Helping Community Impact  THURSDAY -- A cocktail buffet to help the social services of Community Impact will begin at 6:30 P.M. at the law offices of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, 450 Lexington Avenue at 45th Street.
Based at Columbia University, the group offers a variety of programs to 12,000 low-income and homeless children and their families in Harlem and Morningside Heights.
Henry King, chairman of Columbia and the managing partner of Davis Polk, will be the host.
Art and a Cape Cod weekend and other excursions will be auctioned.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 854-2617.
Making Wishes Come True  THURSDAY -- The New York Women's Council of the Make-a-Wish Foundation, which tries to fulfill the wishes of terminally ill children, will hold a benefit at the New York Armory Antiques Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street.
From 6 to 9 P.M., there will be a buffet, wine, music and an auction of sundry items and events while guests browse among the displays of more than 100 international dealers.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 605-0334.
Auction for Health Crisis  MARCH 28 -- An auction featuring art and antiquities from the first to the 20th century, as well as photography, will be held at Sotheby's to benefit the Gay Men's Health Crisis.
A reception at 6 P.M. will precede the 8 o'clock auction.
The items may be viewed March 26 and 27 from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and on the day of the auction from 10 A.M. to 1 P.M.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 337-1913.


What's Whitewater Next to the Bush Family and the S.&amp; L.'s?; Will We Ever Recover?
To the Editor:
"The President desperately needs first-rate legal advice," you state in "White House Ethics Meltdown" (editorial, March 4).
Whom are you kidding?
Bill and Hillary Clinton both graduated from one of this country's most prestigious law schools, Yale University.


Sitting Pretty
To the Editor:
Re: "Decisions, Decisions" (Feb. 20), in which Glenn Bernbaum, owner of Mortimer's, decribes his seating plan for the restaurant.


White Outrage, Black Suspicion
It has been common knowledge since the days of the Kerner Commission that in many respects we are two societies -- one black and one white.
One of those respects is the vastly different way in which our two societies react to events on the cultural edge between them, like the debate over the proper response to the vicious remarks of Khalid Abdul Muhammad, the Nation of Islam spokesman, at Kean College and elsewhere.
Simply put, black people and white people of good conscience -- even those with equal levels of education and wealth -- see events very differently.
This was true during the trial of the youths accused of the assault and rape of a jogger in Central Park in 1989, during the recent controversy over the preservation of the African Burial Ground in lower Manhattan, and in the aftermath of the 1991 Crown Heights riots.
And it is starkly true in the current debate over the Nation of Islam's failure to respond adequately to Mr.
Muhammad's speech.


Method and Madness; DO MOLES MATTER
The cold war is dead but the spy business still lives.
Last month, a C.I.A. officer, Aldrich Ames, was arrested on charges of being a longtime Moscow mole.
And from dark and secret waters there suddenly surfaced a previously unknown class of Navy submarines that for decades has apparently retrieved cold war booty from the abysses of the ocean floor.
These echoes from the past prompt a question: Since the Soviet Union's foremost enemy was its own economic system, what difference did 45 years of intelligence operations really make to the outcome of the cold war?
In hot wars, it certainly helps to have spies to signal the enemy's intentions, like those who warned Stalin of Hitler's invasion plans; too bad that Stalin didn't believe them.
But when the shooting stops, spy agencies seem to spend a lot of time just chasing each other rather than things that matter.
The C.I.A. vigorously tries to penetrate the K.G.B. and G.R.U. -- several of the Russians whom Ames allegedly betrayed were counterintelligence officers, as was he.
Moscow's prime target is the C.I.A. and National Security Agency.
It's hard for outsiders to assess the importance of these cloak-and-dagger duels because the insiders so seldom tell the truth about them.
But even the figures of speech in which they are usually described -- Russian matryoshka dolls, wildernesses of mirrors -- hint of much ado about not much.
My father worked in British counterintelligence, where one of his jobs was to monitor East European emigre communities in Britain.
I assume he thwarted spy rings operating against Her Majesty's Government and tried to turn them against their own.
He only once told me any operational detail of his activities.
He came across a Czech or Hungarian spy ring that was reporting to an unusual master -- the American Embassy in London.
This was unfortunate, since the United States and Britain had agreed they would not run such operations on each other's soil.
As my father told the story, he called in the C.I.A. station chief and laid out the evidence before him.
"Gee, Michael," the man replied, "is my face red."
Spies are embarrassments when caught.
Even with those who survive detection, fidelity cannot always be assumed, since changing masters tends to be addictive.
Satellites, at first blush, have none of these frailties.
They never switch allegiances or fall into sex-baited honey traps.
Resembling the Hubble Space Telescope, except that they point not up to distant galaxies but down to dirty laundry, these delicate instruments provide streams of good-as-eyewitness information.
But satellites have their own limitations.
Their costs, mercifully hidden in black budgets, are probably huge.
They have doubtless suffered their share of setbacks, like the Hubble telescope.
They can photograph the ground from their lofty orbits as well as low-flying planes can, but unlike planes, they follow predictable orbits.
Devious minds seek to trick them, whether with decoys or by timing activities so no satellites are overhead.
The Soviet preparation to move an army into Afghanistan was apparently undetected by satellites.
So, for many years, was the Krasnoyarsk missile-detecting radar, a large and illegal edifice being constructed nakedly on a site prohibited by treaty.
Maybe more productive means of cold war espionage than either spies or satellites will prove to have been methods like signals intelligence, a less glamorous art about which little is on public record, and the Navy's salvage submarines.
This fleet's existence was first reported last month by William J. Broad in The New York Times, although a few of its activities were already known.
The submarines, in principle, can monitor anything that drops into the sea or runs across the ocean floor.
Unlike many spies, their targets were items of direct strategic importance.
Unlike satellites, they can reach down and examine their targets of interest.
Converted for use after retirement from other duties, the submarines' special equipment includes thrusters to keep them poised above their target and giant spools carrying miles of cable.
The cables plummet to the ocean floor, presumably carrying devices like lights, cameras, manipulators and collectors.
Unlike surface ships, the submarines can operate undetected over sensitive sites.
One submarine, the Halibut, visited the Soviet Golf-2 class nuclear-armed submarine that sank in 1968 near Hawaii and that was salvaged six years later by the Glomar Explorer.
The Halibut apparently did so good a job that the Navy and Defense Intelligence Agency doubted the need being asserted by the C.I.A. to build the Glomar Explorer for a further visit.
"Optimum recovery of intelligence information from this accident was achieved," the former Navy official who planned the Halibut mission wrote to Congress.
The harvest of the Halibut and its cousins is a matter of the purest speculation.
The Navy has admitted to nothing.
But in the case of the Golf-2 submarine the phrase "optimum recovery of intelligence information" suggests booty of some strategic weight.
Nuclear warheads are one such item.
The Soviet Union is thought to have lost about 40 at sea, according to William M. Arkin of Greenpeace.
Dr.
Theodore B. Taylor, a former nuclear weapons designer at Los Alamos, pointed out that "bombs can be very different from one another" in a recent discussion of what might have been recovered from the Golf-2 submarine.
"There's a good chance Soviet weaponry held big surprises for us."
Another prize, the guidance units of the warhead's missiles, would yield data about the missiles' accuracy.
Sunken submarines might also yield code rooms and cryptographic gear.
Besides submarines, the ocean floor holds test missiles that fell short of their target and communications links like undersea cables.
Ivy Bells, an eavesdropping project revealed to the Soviet Union by a National Security Agency employee, Ronald W. Pelton, is reported to have involved a large eavesdropping pod, placed round a Soviet cable carrying military communications in the Sea of Okhotsk.
The Navy's submarines, whether of the Halibut or some other type, retrieved tapes from the pod, now a prime exhibit in the Moscow museum founded by the K.G.B.
The submarines' take from the ocean floor surely enhanced national security.
Whether they or any other means of intelligence collection made a decisive difference in the cold war seems less certain.
The C.I.A., according to Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a former vice chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, reckoned that the Soviet G.N.P. was roughly three times as large as it turned out to be.
The agency thus missed the most critical secret of all -- that the Soviet economy could not support the Soviet empire.
Beside this mountainous destructive force, a regiment of moles burrowing away in Moscow or Washington added up merely to molehills.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
WOODHAVEN  From School and Prison, Quilts That Have Stories
Quilts created by women, children and whole families from a variety of backgrounds -- from American Indians to Japanese immigrants -- are on exhibit at the Forest Park Clubhouse.


Board Looks at Urban Areas
THIS city is preparing the way for construction of a traffic artery designed 20 years ago to facilitate access to the downtown business district, linking the hub to the Bronx River Parkway at the County Center.
Known as the Grove Street extension, it would ease rush-hour delays on Main Street in the morning and Hamilton Avenue in the evening and complete the city's last major road segment of its postwar revitalization plan.


FOCUS ON DOCTORS AND EXECUTIONS
Controversy over the participation of doctors in executions has led four leading medical and human rights groups to recommend changes in state and Federal laws to insure that they do not require physicians to violate professional ethics.
After reviewing each state's laws and regulations on executions, the groups reported that executions often required doctors to violate professional ethics.


Mutual Funds; Betting the Bull Market Is Finished
THE sky is falling!
The sky is falling!
But Chicken Little and other mutual fund investors won't be hurt at all if they invest in two new bear market funds, say managers of the Robertson Stephens Contrarian and Lindner Bulwark funds.
The funds use antipodal approaches to a financial markets meltdown: Robertson Stephens aims to profit; Lindner seeks to preserve capital.


Tipping the Scales At School
This month the school system announced that enrollment had topped a million for the first time in 15 years.
Here is a breakdown by district.
Citywide public school enrollment
High school enrollment
'89-'90
937,248
Manhattan
62,714
'90-'91
939,638
Bronx
59,939
'91-'92
973,263
Brooklyn
103,196
'92-'93
995,465
Queens
72,781
'93-'94
1,016,728
Staten Island
16,308


The Greenwich Years of Jim Henson and the Muppets
THE Muppet show now playing the Hurlbutt Gallery in Greenwich is a mess, but a mess that fits the tradition established by the late Jim Henson.
Indeed, if Kermit the Frog can be regarded as his alter ego, the Muppets' creator presides over the whole thing from a Plexiglas case near the entrance to the show.
His skin, made from an apple-green coat furnished by the artist's mother, looks somewhat the worse for wear, but it has been carefully -- one might almost say lovingly -- darned.
This is not Henson's seminal "Everyfrog" but the mature Kermit -- the cool head that was forever struggling to keep the lid on potentially explosive situations in the real "Muppet Show," which raged nightly on television from 1976 to 1981.
Across the gallery, in a pile of hand puppets, is a Kermit replica with which visitors may try for the puckered mouth expressing the mix of resignation and tolerance that was the star's trademark.


Surreal Comedy at Sea, With Porpoise Support
"JOHN DORY" is a surreal comedy about an estranged couple (Mary and Thomas), a man named John Dory and a contigent of porpoises.
Mary and Thomas are adrift on a sinking boat.
Maybe a ship will save them.
"There's a ship right there," Mary says.
But then, maybe there isn't.
More likely, "you swim toward it, it moves away," as John Dory says.


The Master Teacher
PAIR off with a partner and announce which body part you intend to assault.
An opponent blocks your punch or kick and retaliates with an attack to your face or solar plexus.
Afterward, you bow politely and thank each other.
The intricate etiquette that prevents karate from degenerating into mayhem is vigorously enforced by Masataka Mori.
He has practiced karate for 44 years, achieving the exalted rank of an eighth dan, or eighth-degree black belt, one of only nine such masters recognized worldwide by the Japan Karate Association.
His black belt is so frayed it resembles the white belt of a beginner.
And while his students win tournaments, he espouses perfection of character first.


LINE BY LINE BY SONDHEIM
IN "MERRILY WE ROLL ALONG," Stephen Sondheim posed the question: "Which comes first generally -- the words or the music?" And answered: "Generally the contract." When we asked him the same question he was less cynical: "Words first, always the words."
Many aficionados of the Broadway musical consider Sondheim the best living songwriter -- complex, urbane and witty.
He has had plenty of practice, having composed maybe 400 songs, most of them for his 15 stage productions, but also for movies -- songs for Madonna in "Dick Tracy" -- and for television ("Evening Primrose").
And now he's headed for Broadway again with a new show, "Passion," his third collaboration with the writer and director James Lapine.


Let the Sun Shine on Old Secrets
President Clinton has a chance not only to make history but to assure its more honest rendering by historians.
A draft executive order that would declassify tens of millions of secret documents, prepared by the National Security Council, is now being circulated to key Federal agencies for comment.
If the order survives the expected fusillade by guardians of the secret files, Mr.
Clinton can with the stroke of a pen honor his repeated promises for more open government.
Under the proposed policy, the presumption will be in favor of openness in deciding whether a document should be classified in the first place, reversing the priority established by a 1981 executive order from President Reagan.
Most documents would be automatically declassified after 25 years, which seems a reasonable limit, ending the ludicrous restrictions that still seal files at the National Archives dating from World War I.


Beijing Says It Could Live Well Even if U.S. Trade Was Cut Off
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said this weekend that the importance of China's trade with the United States had been overstated, and that China was prepared to return to the cold war status of no trade relations with Washington if the dispute over China's human rights record could not be resolved.
"For 23 years before President Nixon opened the door of relations between China and the United States," he said in an interview, "there was no trade whatsoever between China and the United States.


People
*
Matthew Miller was named to the new position of national executive director for the Association of Independent Commercial Producers, Long Island City, L.I.
He was previously a director in the member services department of the Association of National Advertisers, New York. *
Mike Knaisch was named to the new position of executive vice president and director of business development for Richardson, Myers &amp; Donofrio Inc., Baltimore.
He was previously a senior vice president and account director at W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Baltimore.


Giuliani to Give Policy on Homeless to Council by May 1
The Giuliani administration will present a policy on homelessness by May 1 that is likely to include elements of the Mayor's campaign pledges to limit shelter stays and challenge the unconditional right to shelter, Deputy Mayor Ninfa Segarra said yesterday.
Ms.
Segarra, Deputy Mayor for education and homeless services, said she wanted to clarify the administration's intentions in light of an article yesterday in The New York Times that said Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had backed away from the most controversial and far-reaching elements of his plan.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11 CHILL WIND FROM CHINA
China said that the importance of its trade with the United States has been exaggerated and that it is prepared to return to a cold war status if the dispute over human rights cannot be resolved.
A1


Japan Stands Firm On Nuclear Arms
To the Editor:
Speculation that Japan may build nuclear weapons in view of its recent plutonium build-up greatly surprised me.
Postwar Japan, as the only nuclear victim in the history of war, has maintained a fervent anti-nuclear commitment.
Both the Government and the people dearly cherish the non-nuclear three principles that hold Japan will not possess, develop or allow others to import nuclear weapons.
Moreover, Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution prohibits the use of military force, precluding any chance of lawfully sustaining military nuclear capability.


Press
TRUE, Robert (Watchdog Bob) Jankovics has not been a reporter very long.
And, true, his radio persona is modeled on Dom DeLuise's hyperventilated watchdog reporter in the movie "The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas."
But none of that dampens Watchdog Bob's earnestness about the legal battle he is fighting -- an effort that appears likely to end with him in prison testing the limits of the First Amendment.
Mr.
Jankovics is one of those personalities who come along in journalism every now and again, who seem bent on trying to put their names on court decisions involving collisions of prosecutors and the press.


INSIDE
Clinton Offers Money For Medical Centers
President Clinton heeded complaints from major medical schools and teaching hospitals and agreed to increase the money they would receive under his proposal for revising the nation's health care system.
Page B7.
Arafat to Persevere on Talks
Yasir Arafat said that months of negotiations with Israel cannot be swept away and that he expects agreement soon on troop withdrawal.
Page A8.
Giuliani's Homeless Plan
The Giuliani administration said it would present a homeless plan by May 1 that may limit shelter stays or challenge court mandates.
Page B3.
A Universe of Questions
Something is exerting a powerful pull on the Milky Way, a discovery that may force a revision in some basic notions about the universe.
Page A13.
A2 Arts


Clinton Is Offering A Comprimise to Medical Centers
Heeding complaints from several major medical schools and teaching hospitals that their precarious financial futures would become even worse under the proposed health care overhaul, President Clinton agreed last week to support revisions that would provide more money for them.
In a meeting on Monday in Boston, Mr.
Clinton also pleased representatives from academic health centers by promising a slower pace of change.


Review Is Narrowed On Vodka Account
Carillon Importers Ltd., Teaneck N.J., has further narrowed the review on its Stolichnaya vodka account to three agencies, from eight.
The account, with billings estimated at $10 million, had been handled by Calet, Hirsch &amp; Ferrell, now called Ferrell Calvillo in New York, for more than a decade.
The finalists vying for the account are Gigante Vaz &amp; Partners in New York; Margeotes, Fertitta, Donaher &amp; Weiss in New York and Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass.
The five agencies eliminated were Ayer Inc., the Ad Store, Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster, Campbell Mithun Esty, all of New York, and Pallisades Communications, Fort Lee, N.J., which entered the review two weeks ago after Waring &amp; LaRosa of New York was eliminated.
A decision is expected this week.


Unions Complain of Delays Involving Trade Pact
Although the first formal complaints by labor unions involving the North American Free Trade Agreement were filed more than a month ago, the administrative system that is supposed to handle them is still being organized.
Labor and environmental ministers from Canada, Mexico and the United States are scheduled to meet this week in Washington and Vancouver, British Columbia, to decide how and where the offices should be set up and who should run them.


Books of The Times; One Who Escaped the Ranks of the Endangered
Parallel Time  Growing Up in Black and White  By Brent Staples  274 pages.
Pantheon Books. $23.
Debates about black males in our nation have increased in proportion to black men's rising social misery, indexed in withering numbers that barely detail the impact on their lives of informal drug economies, escalating unemployment and stunning rates of homicide.
The plight of most black males has become so bad that some social commentators have come to refer forebodingly to black males as an "endangered species." Trapped between statistics and stereotypes, however, the gritty textures and uncomfortable truths of black male life are too often smoothed over to fit easily into pat explanations of either their prosperity or failure.


Hirsch Decides to Join Farm
Corey Hirsch, the reluctant goaltender, has decided to report to the farm team in Binghamton, the Rangers announced today.
Hirsch, a 21-year-old rookie with four games of National Hockey League experience last season but a silver medal from the recently completed Winter Olympics Games, refused a demotion last Wednesday.
He was suspended on Friday by Neil Smith, the team's president and general manager.


Review/Theater; A Classic of Storytelling As a Force for Good
At the beginning of "The Arabian Nights," Mary Zimmerman's adaptation of the classic tales at the Manhattan Theater Club, you may find alarm bells going off in your mind at the sight of the uniformly comely, clean-cut young cast reciting fairy-tale phrases in unison with seraphic smiles.
They evoke uncomfortable images of the sorts of people who approach one in airports, proffering roses and religious tracts.
Resist the temptation to bolt.
Although much of the cast retains a certain collegiate perkiness that can be mildly annoying, Ms.
Zimmerman has orchestrated her ensemble into a seamless narrative of recital, song and carefully stylized movements in which stories endlessly beget other stories, like the boxes within boxes in a Chinese puzzle toy.


An Opera in Many Acts: The Met's New 'Otello'
Even under ideal conditions, opera poroductions are complicated affairs: pulling together a cast that is both compatible and marketable, assembling a production team that agrees on everything from set and costume design to stage traffic, working through both technical and artistic rehearsals, and then putting it all on stage before an audience, requires a series of diplomatic, logistical and financial miracles.
Tonight the Metropolitan Opera is raising the curtain on a new production of Verdi's "Otello," the company's seventh staging of the work since its Met premiere on Jan. 11, 1982.
The production, which reportedly cost between $1.5 million and $2 million, was planned in 1990 as part of the Met's celebration of Placido Domingo's 25th-anniversary season.


N.C.A.A. TOURNAMENT: Damn Yankees! B.C. Stuns North Carolina as Kentucky Falls, Too Southeast; Wildcats Wilt Under Pressure
Duke and Kentucky battled in a thrilling tournament game a couple of years ago where Christian Laettner crushed the Wildcats in overtime with a last-second turnaround jumper.
Seeded No. 2 and No. 3 here in the Southeast Region's lower bracket, both teams appeared headed for another showdown in the next round in Knoxville, Tenn.
Well, Duke did its part.


Review/Theater; Noah and Esther: Dysfunctional Family In Inclement Weather
To the classic list of brain teasers -- Which came first, the chicken or the egg?
Does a tree falling in the forest make a noise if there's no one there to hear it? -- a lesser, but equally puzzling question may now be added: Why would the National Actors Theater willingly choose to revive "The Flowering Peach"?
Time has not been gentle to Clifford Odets's 1954 play, his last, which turns the story of Noah and the Flood into a Jewish family sitcom.
Noah tipples, calls Esther, his wife, "girlie" and says things like "What am I, a loaf of bread? Don't butter me," whenever someone tries to flatter him.
Esther kvetches, weeps and kvetches some more.
Sibling rivalries continue to divide their grown sons: Shem, the wheeler-dealer; Ham, the rake, and Japheth, the misfit and mother's favorite, affectionately known as "Jafey."


Name a Haiti Team Up To the Task
To the Editor:
"Which Way Forward on Haiti?" (news analysis, March 9) discusses the Administration's strained relations with Haiti's ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The latest peace plan for Haiti, intensely promoted and allegedly drafted by Lawrence Pezzullo, United States special adviser on Haiti, is amateurish and unabashedly contrary to the stated United States objective of restoring democracy to beleaguered Haiti.


Fund's Suit Against Morningstar Dismissed
The California Court of Appeals has dismissed a libel lawsuit brought by the Pilgrim Group, a mutual fund company in Los Angeles, against Morningstar Mutual Funds, a newsletter that published an article a year ago that was critical of Pilgrim's advertising.
"The court dismissed all the claims," said Don Phillips, publisher of Morningstar Mutual Funds, which is owned by Morningstar Inc., a financial research company in Chicago.
"It was a very thorough victory. Pilgrim failed to point out anything at fault in our article."


Blackman Is Fitting In, So Forget the Early Jitters
Rolando Blackman's performance in his last two games has convinced some people that his confidence is back.
He says it never left.
"I've played for 13 years and 11 of those were great years," said Blackman, reflecting after his 13-point effort Saturday helped the Knicks win their season-high ninth consecutive game.
"Not good years, they were great years. For me, I'm just trying to get the rust off, trying to find my place on this basketball team and gain acceptance again from the guys I'm playing with.


Eternal Spring Hopes
To the Editor:
Many New Yorkers have been talking about our difficult winter, but may be missing an important aspect of the story.
It seems to me, from recollection of past years, that the quality of weather forecasting has improved dramatically.
Instead of dismissing tomorrow's forecast as a wild guess, I have built up the confidence to schedule around it.


Wake Held for 2 Priests Killed in Car Crash


Theodore M. Black Is Dead at 74; Headed New York Regents Board
Theodore M. Black, a book publishing executive and former Chancellor of the New York State Board of Regents, died on Saturday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
Mr.
Black, who lived in Port Washington, L.I., was 74.
He had been ill with liver and kidney problems, said his son, Walter J. Black 2d.


Lewis Grizzard, 47, Writer and Master Of Southern Humor
Lewis Grizzard, the writer and columnist who recalled the mythic South with folksy humor and nostalgia, died yesterday in Atlanta.
He was 47 and lived in Atlanta.
Mr.
Grizzard died at Emory University Hospital, where he had suffered extensive brain damage after heart surgery.
He had a living will saying his life should not be prolonged in such a situation, the hospital said.


A Cable Challenger for PBS As King of the Preschool Hill
Nickelodeon, a cable channel that has won the hearts and eyes of grade schoolers across America, is about to take on one of its last remaining competitors for young audiences -- Barney.
This week, Nickelodeon will announce plans to spend $30 million in the next three years to produce programs directed at the preschool audience now loyal to PBS.
That group has watched programs like "Sesame Street" and "Barney and Friends" on public television stations for years, but Nickelodeon executives say they think those shows are vulnerable.


Sports of The Times; Give Three Cheers for 2-Point Conversion
NOW that the National Football League appears about to adopt the 2-point conversion, coaches surely will adopt the little card that a college coach pulls out of his back pocket as if it were a crib sheet for a math test.
In a way, it is.


Correction
A brief report in the "On Stage, and Off" column on Friday about the York Theater Company's revival of "Merrily We Roll Along" misstated where the show is to be staged.
It is to open on May 19 at St.
Peter's Church in the Citicorp Center, the York company's usual home, not the Minetta Lane Theater.


Howard C. Westwood, Expert in Airline Law, 84
Howard C. Westwood, a lawyer with the Washington firm of Covington &amp; Burling and a specialist in airline law, died on Thursday at his home in Washington.
He was 84.
The cause was emphysema, said a spokeswoman for the firm.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Two wealthy entrepreneurs plan to form a company to develop a global satellite communications network far more ambitious than anything contemplated before.
Indeed, the project is so big that it might be dismissed as a fantasy were it not for the two people behind it: Craig O. McCaw, who built McCaw Cellular, and William H. Gates, the man who made Microsoft a software powerhouse.
The new company, Teledesic, proposes to build a $9 billion system with 840 small satellites that would send information to and from virtually any spot on the planet.  [ Page A1. ]


Kenneth St. Joseph, 81, Geologist And Pioneer in Aerial Archeology
Prof.
Kenneth St.
Joseph, a British geologist who helped develop the use of aerial photography for the archeological study of the Roman empire and other scientific fields, died on March 11 in Histon, near Cambridge, England.
He was 81 and lived in Histon.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Macy Plan Said to Be Faltering
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company's carefully prepared plans to emerge from bankruptcy, painstakingly knitted together at more than 55 meetings with creditors over several months, appeared to be rapidly unraveling yesterday.
Less than 24 hours before the board was to meet to vote on a reorganization plan for Macy, senior creditors were threatening to throw their support behind Federated Department Stores Inc., a big creditor that has proposed a merger with Macy.
Macy has vowed to stay independent, and until late last week it appeared that its influential secured creditors would go along.


Tar Heels Fall Through Cracks
They never had a margin for error.
Not after winning the third N.C.A.A. championship in the history of the University of North Carolina.
Not with one of the most scrutinized recruiting classes in the history of the college game returning for a senior season.
And not with the addition of Rasheed Wallace and Jerry Stackhouse, freshmen who would be instant kings most anywhere else but had to be incorporated into a championship unit here.
Never mind that the experience, maturity and skill of George Lynch was gone to the Los Angeles Lakers.
A team less than 10 miles up the road from Chapel Hill, N.C., had somehow found a way to win two consecutive national championships.
And it is like all those bumper stickers say: If God isn't a Tar Heel, then why is the sky Carolina blue?


Tomba Picks Up a Slalom Title Without Putting On Skis
Jubilation broke out today among Alberto Tomba's cronies.
Who could resist not teasing the ebullient Italian skier who so often plays jester himself?
One of Tomba's assistants sneaked up to dump a silver bowl of ice cubes over his boss's head.
Then a snowball fight ensued outside the World Cup race office here, with the swarthy Tomba, bundled in his green, yellow and orange team jacket, defending himself like a kid let loose in the park.


CHRONICLE
BILL WATTERSON , the reclusive creator of the comic strip "Calvin and Hobbes," is taking the rest of the year off, done in by deadline pressure, the syndicator of the comic strip said.
Since 1986, Mr.
Watterson has chronicled the antics of a little boy with a huge imagination, Calvin, and his stuffed toy tiger, Hobbes, who comes to life in the child's mind.


B.U. and Michigan Are Top Picks
Boston University and Michigan were selected last night as the top-seeded teams in the National Collegiate Athletic Association hockey tournament.
The Terriers won the Hockey East championship Saturday night at Boston Garden with a 3-2 victory over UMass-Lowell.
The victory included an automatic bid into the 12-team tournament.
Harvard also gained an automatic bid after defeating Rensselaer, 3-0, in the ECAC championship game at Lake Placid, N.Y.


Critic's Notebook; What Composers Write, Players Shape
We in our way compose the music we love.
Stand close to a favorite piece, and it will move and touch us: two metaphors perhaps more real than we acknowledge.
The emotion lays hands on us.
We are pushed or drawn by currents.
Stand outside this same piece and we transform it.
Now we see without touching.
There is comfort in proportion, fascination in asymmetry, delight in the arrangement of color.
This is relativity demonstrated all over again.
For if we wish to change the weight, the dimensions and the behavior of a musical object, we can.
We have only to move our sensibilities to a different position and set up our instruments of observation anew.
And if we are not musicians, musicians can do these things for us.


CHRONICLE
HE'S BACK!!!
JOEY BUTTAFUOCO , who was sentenced to six months in jail last November for the statutory rape of Amy Fisher, is scheduled to be released Wednesday and his wife, MARY JO , his lawyer, Dominic Barbara, friends, family and business associates are giving a homecoming party Thursday night to celebrate his release.


Review/Music; Marathon for a Master Of the Popular Song
Irving Berlin had little doubt about what constituted a good popular song.
It should be easy to sing, easy to remember and applicable to everyday events, he wrote very early in his career.
Until his death in 1989 at 101, the composer stuck by those principles.
At "Wall to Wall Irving Berlin," the 12-hour marathon of Berlin music and reminiscences at Symphony Space on Saturday, more than 130 Berlin songs were performed by musicians from the worlds of Broadway, cabaret and jazz.
Every selection conformed to the composer's esthetic of simplicity and populism.
For Berlin's genius was his ability to create songs in which the words and the music were fused into an alloy that made them feel indivisible and quintessentially American.


As Serbs Pull Out, U.N. Convoy Ends Long Siege of Bosnian Town
Maglaj, a besieged Muslim enclave in northern Bosnia, received its first convoy of relief supplies in five months today when nine United Nations trucks arrived with 90 tons of wheat flour and beans.
"Nine people were evacuated from Maglaj for medical treatment," said Kris Janowski, Sarajevo spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
"They are going to Zenica hospital for the time being."


Mullen Suffers Seizure During Practice
Islander forward Brian Mullen, who had a mild stroke nine months ago, suffered a seizure during a team practice this morning and had to be rushed by helicopter to North University Hospital in Manhasset, where he was later listed in stable condition.
The 32-year-old Mullen had returned to practice with his teammates last month in the hope of eventually returning to action.
It was not immediately clear if today's seizure would mean that Mullen would have to discard his plans to play again.


Gay Leaders Say Good Will For Giuliani Has Dissipated
Three months into the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, many gay politicians and leaders of some gay-rights organizations say they have become deeply disappointed with the Mayor, suggesting that he has shown little or no sensitivity to their concerns.
Many advocates for gay issues contend that while support for Mr.
Giuliani was far from universal among gay people during last year's campaign, many of them nonetheless offered the new Mayor a measure of good will and were hopeful that they would be consulted about important policy issues relating to homosexual New Yorkers.
But now, many contend, the good will is dissipating.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the regular weekly auction today of new three-month and six-month bills.
Traders said that at the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.47 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.83 percent.


Essay; Leach Vs. Gonzalez
Eight members of the great Chicago White Sox team had just been indicted for conspiring with gamblers to throw the 1919 World Series.
A young fan, tears in his eyes, ran up to Shoeless Joe Jackson and pleaded: "Say it ain't so, Joe."
I feel that way about House Banking Chairman Henry Gonzalez.
He was my hero.
For years, while Beltway elitists joined bankers' lobbyists to scoff at his ponderous style, I admired his courage in taking on the titans of the executive branch and the regulatory agencies.


States Line Up In Bill Aimed At New York
In the halls of the Capitol as in the rest of the country, it's always been easy to bash New York as the big bad state awash in Wall Street's wicked riches.
Now, a fight over hundreds of millions of dollars in unclaimed stock dividends and interest has 47 states and big majorities in Congress backing a bill demanding that New York share some of the wealth.
The battle has worked its way through the courts for several years, its eye-glazing complexities little understood, if quite alluring to the treasurers of the states that stand to gain.


Whose War Is It Now?
Bombs are raining on Afghan civilians.
Since January, heavy fighting has been spreading across Afghanistan as a militant fundamentalist Prime Minister and a former Communist general wage war with a fundamentalist President.
This week, United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali will dispatch a newly appointed personal envoy to try to negotiate an end to the fighting.
The peace effort is long overdue.
In Kabul, the Afghan capital, there are house searches, roundups and rapes, many of them by former mujahedeen -- the "holy warriors" who fought the Soviet-backed Communist regime during the 1980's -- who are allied with one faction or the other.


Milky Way Gets a Tug Way Out There
Somewhere far out in the universe, something is exerting a tremendous pull on the Milky Way galaxy, which includes the solar system, and most of its neighboring galaxies, astronomers have found.
The unexpected discovery may force a revision of some basic notions about the universe.
What is tugging at these galaxies is not known, but it may be invisible matter clumped on much larger scales than can be readily explained by any current theory.


Flood of Prisoner Rights Suits Brings Effort to Limit Filings
After three decades of startling growth, civil rights lawsuits brought by inmates protesting prison conditions in New York and elsewhere across the nation have become one of the largest categories of all Federal civil filings.
Over the years, the civil rights suits have become a powerful method to force improvements in prison medical care, legal access and inmate treatment.
But along with such landmark cases have come a bounty of frivolous and groundless complaints.


Boston Journal; No Southie Parade, but a Proud Party
St.
Patrick's Day was not the same this year in South Boston, a neighborhood of blue-collar workers, wooden three-decker houses and fierce Irish pride.
For the first time in nearly a century there was no parade.
Its organizers, a veterans group, had canceled the procession after the state's highest court ruled that a gay grouphad the right to be included.
To South Boston, which has felt under siege ever since court-ordered busing for school integration began 20 years ago, it was yet another assault by outsiders.
But some things don't change, and one of them is Billy Bulger's St.
Patrick's Day luncheon at the Bayside Club.
Mr.
Bulger, who rose from a South Boston housing project to become not just the state senate president but one of the most powerful men in the state, presided today, as he has for 28 years.
And for a few hours in a packed, overheated old tavern, with Mr.
Bulger singing Irish songs and roasting his friends and foes over boiled corned beef and cabbage and green ice cream, this St.
Patrick's Day was like all the others.
On this day Senator Edward M. Kennedy, United States Representative Joe Moakley, Gov.
William F. Weld (one of only a few Republicans, and a token Yankee to boot) and Mayor Thomas M. Menino, along with dozens of state and city legislators, put on their green ties and made the journey over the bridge and across Fort Point Channel to South Boston.
So did Bob Sances, a guy from the neighborhood who made good -- he is an engineer -- and moved to the suburbs, but still returns to see his old friends from M and Seventh Streets.
"Finally, after all these years I got in," Mr.
Sances said, taking his place at a long table festooned with green cloth napkins and pots of clover.
"I grew up with Billy Bulger. He's a very deep thinker. He doesn't like to talk to the press." The senate president reads Latin and Greek, and he doesn't hold press conferences.
Mr.
Sances added, with some pride, "I came in the V.I.P. door." It was the only door.
To get there, the 600 or so invited guests had to climb the rickety fire escape.
Mr.
Sances was lucky.
He got a chair, one of 200.
At 10:45 A.M.
President Clinton himself was on the telephone.
"I know that this morning I'm just the other President on the phone," he said to Mr.
Bulger, with his remarks amplified over the public address system.
Mr. Bulger said, "I commend you for your humility."
While Mr.
Bulger and the former Mayor, Raymond Flynn, who is now the Ambassador to the Vatican, are both from South Boston, they have never been close.
"It's great you appointed Ray Flynn to the Vatican," Mr.
Bulger said to Mr.
Clinton.
"It shows you have a great sense of humor." Later in the conversation, he added: "You were kind to take him from us."
Towering over the compact Mr.
Bulger, Governor Weld, who is 6 feet 4 inches tall, stood by, waiting for a word with the President.
The President from Hope, Ark., and the president from South Boston joked about Mr.
Weld's patrician roots, his house in Cambridge (viewed as an elitist foreign country by South Boston), and his zeal for squash.
"Oh, does he love squash," said Mr.
Bulger, who keeps trim by running on a treadmill.
"It's a real class thing. I never played squash. No one around here ever played squash."
Mr.
Clinton told Mr.
Weld: "Your family came over here on the Mayflower and went to Plymouth Rock. My family came to Arkansas in a Plymouth pickup and went to work for Mayflower Van Lines."
The crowd loved it.
And so it went, with more jokes, and lots of singing, for three hours.
Toward the end, the podium was taken by John Hurley, president of the Allied War Veterans Council of South Boston, which canceled the parade after the state's highest court ruled it could not ban the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston from marching.
Mr.
Bulger, who married his high school sweetheart, Mary, and raised nine children in South Boston, reminded his guests that community mattered more than anything.
"The South Boston parade belongs to South Boston," he said.
And he led the room in a rousing chorus of an old neighborhood anthem, "Southie Is My Hometown."
Back across the bridge, the Irish-American gay group that was not a part of Southie's traditions had its own St.
Patrick's Day party, at the Arlington Street Church.


World Economies


PAC Pollution
Representative Tom DeLay of Texas knows what it takes to get ahead in Congress these days.
It takes money, and lots of it.
Thus Mr.
DeLay, who seeks to become the next House Republican whip, is following the example set by many of his ambitious colleagues.
He plans to form his own political action committee.
With the money he raises for his "leadership PAC," Mr.
DeLay will be able to dole out contributions to G.O.P.
Congressional candidates -- buying gratitude that can only help him in the whip race.


A Controversial Decision Turns N.Y.U. Into a Pumpkin
Midnight struck about 9 P.M.
Saturday for New York University's cinderella season, thanks to a controversial call that helped cost the Violets the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III men's basketball championship.
Instead of a national title, N.Y.U. had to settle for being runner-up after a 66-59 overtime loss to Lebanon Valley College near Hershey, Pa., enrollment 950.


Police Corruption in New York: As Expected, a Blight Returns
Ever since Police Commissioner Theodore Roosevelt dismissed policemen who took money from brothel owners and politicians, the New York City Police Department has gone through a corruption crisis about every 20 years.
Now senior police officials are warning of another.
They say the arrest of three officers on Friday on charges of assault and robbery was just the beginning of a long series of corruption revelations that will go beyond the preliminary findings of a mayoral commission last year.


Freshman Puts UConn Women In Final 16
Connecticut Coach Geno Auriemma, concerned with Auburn's overall height advantage, started a 6-foot-7-inch freshman, Kara Wolters, alongside Rebecca Lobo in today's second-round National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament game.
It was a master stroke.
With those two players dominating inside, top-seeded Connecticut crushed Auburn, 81-59, before a capacity crowd of 8,241 at the Gampel Pavilion.
With the victory, the top-seeded Huskies reached the East Regional semifinals and will face fourth-seeded Southern Mississippi on Thursday at Rutgers University.


Man Shot and Killed at His Birthday Party
A birthday party for a Long Island teen-ager ended with the 19-year-old shot and killed by a gunman in a parking lot early this morning, the police said.
The victim, Steven Jason, who was shot and slightly wounded in a separate incident on Dec. 7, had been celebrating with more than 100 friends at the American Legion Hall on Sunrise Highway in Freeport when he left around 2 A.M. to walk a friend to her car.


Italian Tycoon, Campaigning In Sicily, Denies Mafia Link
With the issue of politicians' links to the Mafia dominating Italy's election campaign, the media tycoon Silvio Berlusconi came to the heartland of Sicilian organized crime today to deny assertions that his candidacy was supported by the mob.
More than 4,000 supporters of his Forza Italia party heard Mr.
Berlusconi denounce his critics and declare: "We say it loud and clear. Every vote for Forza Italia in Sicily, in Calabria, in Campania and everywhere else in Italy will be a vote against the Mafia."


Balboni Heading For Final Roundup
After all these years, Steve Balboni still speaks softly and carries a big stick.
"It's a monster of a bat," David Cone said in the Kansas City Royals' clubhouse last week.
"Today you see guys using 31- or 32-ounce bats, but he's still using his 36-ouncer. You'd be hard-pressed to find another around the league."


No Headline
For 23 years before President Nixon opened the door of relations between China and the United States, there was no trade whatsoever between China and the United States.
I think you lived quite well.
And so did we. -- QIAN QICHEN, Foreign Minister of China.  [ A1:4. ]


London Journal; For 20%, He Sells Scandal, Keeping Britain Agog
Three flights above New Bond Street, over a beauty parlor, is the office of Max Clifford, p.r. agent in the raw.
It is decorated with stories that he has massaged, maneuvered and leaked onto front pages of the tabloids.
They are mounted behind glass and pinned to the wall like trophies.
Mr.
Clifford is in the midst of an interview, expounding upon his skill in "directing traffic," as he calls the art of planting and suppressing stories, when in walks a motorcycle messenger wrapped in red leather.
The messenger delivers a package from The News of the World that contains another mounted trophy, "Chief of Defense in Sex and Security Scandal."


New Makeover for Mademoiselle
The magazine's venerable title suggests young ladies with white gloves and impeccable manners.
Topics under the previous editor in chief, however, included how to rent a pornographic video (recommendations included) and what a kick some people get from shoplifting.
Little wonder, then, that Elizabeth Crow, Mademoiselle's third editor in chief in two years, has the daunting task of clarifying the magazine's identity and lifting its sagging fortunes.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Using crowing roosters and ringing business cards to tap a boom in point-of-purchase displays.
DOUG LEEDS used to have a business card that rang like a telephone, but that was hardly the craziest gizmo he ever created.
Visit a sporting goods store and check out those long legs that appear to be crashing through the ceiling with Converse basketball shoes on the end of them.
That is a Leeds creation.
He also developed a button of Cornelius the Rooster that is placed within the reach of children near Kellogg's Corn Flakes in grocery stores.
A press of the button makes the rooster cock-a-doodle-doo.


INSTEAD OF SHELLS, SARAJEVO SOCCER
Eager to patch together a sense of normal life in Sarajevo,United Nations officials today mustered parachutists, folk singers and even a British marching band to reward fans who trusted them enough to attend the soccer game at a shell-pocked stadium here.
"This is an irreversible process," said Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose of Britain, commander of the United Nations military force in Bosnia.
"The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have had enough of this senseless killing and destruction of their beautiful country."


In the Sound: Stars vs. Shellfish


Bridge
To find some 400 enthusiasts focusing intently on a part-score deal at 3 A.M. might seem improbable, but it happened early Sunday at the conclusion of the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship here.
The team of Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., Gaylor Kasle of Boca Raton, Fla., Chip Martel of Davis, Calif., Lew Stansby of Castro Valley, Calif., Michael Rosenberg and Zia Mahmood, both of Manhattan, led by exactly one imp after gaining 20 in the previous three boards.
They, of course, did not know it, but the Vugraph spectators did and were riveted to their chairs.
The opposing team of Ron Gerard of White Plains, George Steiner of Seattle, Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan, Norman Kay of Narberth, Pa., and Sidney Lazard of New Orleans, was in a position to regain the lead and win the most famous title in the American bridge calendar.
Again, the audience knew it: They were looking at the deal shown, and could see that Kaplan and Lazard, as East-West, could make three clubs.


Playing Jelly Roll Some More
Two years ago, Vernel Bagneris, the New Orleans-based creator of the Off Broadway shows "One Mo' Time" and "Further Mo' " put together a cabaret tribute to Jelly Roll Morton that became one of the most successful shows ever to play at Michael's Pub.
"Vernel Bagneris Presents Jelly Roll Morton: A Me-morial," a collaboration with the Norwegian pianist and Morton scholar Gunnar Larsen, wove re-enactments of the pianist's reminiscences (taped for the Library of Congress) with vintage Morton songs played with vigor and precision by Mr.
Larsen.
Now the team has returned to Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street, Manhattan) for an open-ended run with "Hoo-Dude," which is billed as "an embellishment" of the original show.
In "Hoo-Dude," Mr.
Bagneris, as Morton, tells many of the same stories that animated the earlier show.
There is the tale of his having once sold, door to door, a tuberculosis remedy that was actually Coca-Cola laced with salt.
In another recycled tale, he laments having burned all his expensive suits when an enemy posing as a psychic told him it was the only way to end a voodoo curse.


Force Won't Solve Turkey's Kurdish Issue
To the Editor:
The Turkish antiterrorism police detained six Kurdish members of parliament after the Turkish parliament voted to lift their immunity March 2.
The state security court wants to charge the lawmakers with supporting the Kurdish separatists of the Kurdistan Workers Party, or P.K.K.
The action could ruin elections scheduled for March 27, especially as Ankara has brought respected observers in to monitor the election, as requested by the European Parliament.
More violence and instability are expected in Turkey, which already suffers from a 10-year war and crumpled economy.


Review/Pop; Optimism and Melancholy Of a Special Celtic Brand
Midway through the first number of the Chieftains' concert at Carnegie Hall on Thursday to celebrate St.
Patrick's Day, a dancer, Michael Flatley, bounded out from the wings and tap-danced his way across the stage.
It was meant to be dramatic and it was, a sort of Irish version of Las Vegas drama.
The musicians in the Chieftains, who have been around as a group for 30 years, know their show business, and for the next several hours they mixed extraordinarily beautiful solos and Irish New Age music with jokes and hokum.
The concert also featured Sinead O'Connor.
Before Miss O'Connor appeared during the second half, a stream of guests came on.
Ashley McIsaacs, a young fiddler from Canada, danced and played at the same time.
Carlos Nunez, from Galicia in Spain, performed a piece on the Spanish version of a bagpipe.
Those two musicians were meant to show how the Celtic tradition had spread around Europe.
To emphasize the connections, Kevin Conneff, who plays the bodhran (a large tambourine) with the Chieftains, sang a Celtic song from Brittany, and the band played "Arkansas Traveler" from an album they did with American country musicians.


Correction
It is with great chagrin that we acknowledge two or arguably three errors in our French in last Thursday's editorial on the drive to purge the French language of English intrusions.
The phrases should have read bete noire, heures de grande ecoute and, arguably, cris de coeur.


Mets' Rookie Receiver Sending a No. 1 Signal
Kelly Stinnett can remember his past performances -- make that his past performance -- in spring training.
In two springs with the Cleveland Indians, Stinnett, a catcher, played one inning and made one plate appearance.
He was hit by a pitch in the at-bat, and he didn't foul up any pitches behind the plate.
The Indians didn't care much, anyway.
With the catchers they have, including Sandy Alomar, they did not see Stinnett making their major league roster.
And so they exposed him to the Rule 5 draft last December.


When Hopes Go South on Heading North
Bernie Williams and Melido Perez, two critical components on the Yankees and two players whose lengthy absence could stall the team's potential progress in the American League East, might not even be on the 25-man, opening day roster.
Guess what? It was not a thrilling weekend for the Yankees.


Mail Order Shifts Its Pitch to Cable
Direct mail is about to become even more direct.
Eight catalogue retailers are bypassing the post office and beaming their merchandise right into homes.
Catalog 1, the new cable shopping channel developed by Time Warner and Spiegel that hits the airwaves in four test markets next Monday, features the wares of eight well-known retailers with sophisticated direct-mail operations.


Now, Sarajevo Hears the Cries of Soccer Fans


CHRONICLE
EDWARD KAMAU BRATHWAITE , a poet, has won the $40,000 Neustadt International Prize for Literature, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Mr.
Brathwaite, who is from Barbados, is a visiting professor at New York University.
His 10 collections of verse include "Rights of Passage," "Masks" and "Islands," which were later published as a trilogy.
His poetry is drawn from Caribbean cultural experience, especially those relating to its African origins.


New Disclosures Surface On CUNY's Chancellor
Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds, who appears before City University trustees today to account for her outside corporate work, spent so much time away from her previous job as Chancellor of the California State University system that trustees there ordered her to resign from all but two corporate boards.
The search committee recommending Dr.
Reynolds for the chancellor's job in 1990 was not aware of the criticism, said Edith B. Everett, vice chairman of the CUNY board.


U.S. to Russia: A Tougher Tone and a Shifting Glance
Stung by months of criticism that it has favored Russia unduly, the Clinton Administration has altered its policies, adopting a tougher tone toward Russia and focusing more than before on other former Soviet republics.
Although the Administration seems too proud to admit that any new approach was needed, there is an unmistakable change in tone toward a newly nationalist Russia and far more emphasis on bolstering the security and economies of the other republics.


Lawyers in New York Defend Their Right to Mislead
Ten months after Armand P. D'Amato was convicted of fraud in a scheme to influence his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York legal establishment has taken up his cause, saying he was convicted of something many lawyers do and should be allowed to do: filing misleading bills.
While the case drew much attention with revelations that an official at the Unisys Corporation had paid Mr.
D'Amato to win access to the Senator, as a legal matter the crime was not influence-peddling but mail fraud.
Mr.
D'Amato was convicted and sentenced to five months in prison because his law firm sent bills to Unisys for consulting work that Mr.
D'Amato never did.


G.E. Seeks to Make Appeal To Kemper Investors on Bid
Increasing the pressure on the Kemper Corporation to accept its $2.2 billion takeover offer, the GE Capital Corporation asked Kemper yesterday for a list of shareholders, "so that we may communicate directly with them and let them make the determination regarding our proposal."
GE Capital also disclosed that it had bought a stake in Kemper, whose board unanimously rejected the $55-a-share cash offer on Thursday.


Aggies Edge San Diego St. In a Duel in Overtime
Texas A&amp;M 75; San Diego State 72
Lisa Branch hit the go-ahead layup in the final seconds of overtime yesterday to lift Texas A&amp;M to a 75-72 victory over San Diego State in a National Collegiate Athletic Association second-round West Regional game in San Diego.


Dance in Review
Merce Cunningham  City Center
One pleasure inherent in the dances of Merce Cunningham is the way they allow the viewer to enter and roam within them.
The specifics are clear in "Cargo X," a 1989 piece set to music by Takehisa Kosugi and performed by the Merce Cunningham Dance Company on Thursday night.
The set, designed by Dove Bradshaw, consists of a high ladder and sprigs of rather overblown and brightly colored flowers.
There are seven performers.
They are dressed in unitards whose colors are as intense as those that drench the backdrop behind them.
And Mr.
Cunningham has given the dancers rooted movement, quick footwork by bodies pushing down in resilient plies, for instance, in relatively circumscribed individual spaces.


Mark Stevenson, Actor, 44
Mark Stevenson, an actor who performed solo shows on Keats and Shakespeare and also established a booking agency in New York, died on Wednesday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 44.
The cause was AIDS, said his mother, Dorothy Stevenson.


Arafat Hopes for Early Deal On an Israeli Troop Pullout
Hours before he met briefly with Israeli negotiators tonight, Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, said in an interview that the terms of an Israeli troop withdrawal from parts of the West Bank and Gaza strip may be settled sometime in the next few weeks.
Appearing serene during the hour-long conversation today, Mr.
Arafat said that the months of P.L.O.-Israeli negotiations that have been conducted cannot be swept away, although he conceded that his persistence in talking with Israel has cost him dearly.


Hearing Love Poems Before Hearing Music
The actors Nancy Marchand and Paul Sparer are to read love poems and letters by Marlowe, Shelley, Byron, Wordsworth, Blake, Elizabeth Barrett Browning and others as a prelude to the New York Philharmonic performances on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday at Avery Fisher Hall.
The readings are to begin at 7 P.M., the concerts at 8.
The music program, conducted by Kurt Masur and with Viktoria Mullova as violin soloist, consists of lushly romantic works by Schoenberg ("Verklarte Nacht") and Berg (Violin Concerto, "To the Memory of an Angel") and Beethoven's Eighth Symphony.
One of the readings will be a translation of the Richard Dehmel poem "Zwei Menschen" ("Two Mortals"), on which "Verklarte Nacht" is based.


Look What the GATT Dragged In
This rural town of 1,800 people is now home to the largest hog-breeding company in the world, the British-owned Pig Improvement Company.
For urbanites who think that hogs smell like frying bacon and associate pigs with Wilbur in "Charlotte's Web," here's some news: Pork is political, and pigs are an environmental hazard.
Many European companies, hampered from expanding at home by tough pollution laws, are taking advantage of America's less stringent standards.
And the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade will dramatically increase the amount of pork the U.S. can export to Europe -- 624,000 metric tons in 1999, up from less than 100,000 tons in 1991.
This will make the U.S. the center of global pork production, and companies are rushing to raise hogs in new places.
One Danish company even plans to raise 600,000 hogs in Alaska.


Welfare Planners Struggle Over Final Sticking Points
Three days before presenting President Clinton with a plan to transform the welfare system, dozens of his aides gathered behind closed doors on Saturday for a frank, sometimes anguished, debate about race, class, sex and the impact of their decisions on the lives of millions of poor people.
Some officials likened their work to that of the civil rights pioneers, praising the emerging plan as a historic opportunity to fight poverty and reverse family breakdown.
Others called some of its provisions misguided, hubristic or downright mean.


Nobel Winner to Speak
The Nobel laureate Wole Soyinka is to deliver the American Film Institute's 12th annual Patricia Doyle Wise Lecture on Thursday at New York University.
The lecture is to be the keynote address of "Black Cinema: A Celebration of Pan-African Film," a conference and film festival.
Mr.
Soyinka, a Nigerian playwright and poet, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1986.
Information: (212) 998-1713.


Why Corporate Boards Don't Need Chancellors
To the Editor:
As a so-called corporate governance gadfly (a stockholder who files shareholder proposals to improve corporate performance), I do not agree with Leslie Koltai (letter, March 8), that university chancellors should spend much time on corporate boards of directors in pursuit of corporate contributions for their schools.


Reviews/Pop; Gipsy Kings, Urgently and Passionately
Since emerging six years ago with a debut album that became an international hit, the Gipsy Kings have reigned virtually unchallenged over their own lucrative corner of the world-music market.
The group, three of whose members are sons of the famous flamenco singer Jose Reyes, makes passionate folk-pop music that takes the flamenco tradition as its stylistic base and stirs in contemporary instrumentation and international flavors.
At Radio City Music Hall, where the group (augmented to 11 from 7) opened a two-evening engagement on Friday, the Gipsy Kings showed that dilutions of their essential style can be carried only so far before that style begins to lose its potency
Much of the power of flamenco lies in the tension between the rigidity of its musical form and its tradition of packing explosive, ornamental guitar improvisations into very small spaces.
The group's principal soloist, Tonino Baliardo, is brilliant at it.
And its lead vocalist, Nicolas Reyes, who sings mostly in Gitane, a Gypsy dialect that is a mixture of Spanish and French, has the urgency of a soul singer pushing his voice to its physical limits.
His melismatic flourishes, which imitate flamenco's fluttering, tremulous guitar lines, have a raw, emotional vibrancy that suggests a passion barely under control and tinged with a fatalistic foreboding.


Dance in Review
Mauri Cramer and Scot Willingham Patricia Beaman and James Martin  Context Studio 28 Avenue A (at Second Street) East Village
Mauri Cramer and Scot Willingham are strong dancers with highly individual presences.
Patricia Beaman and James Martin are as distinctive a duo.
But the program they shared on Friday night could have used a broader assortment of choreographic visions.


Arkansas Has to Fight Way to Sweet 16
Nolan Richardson was a little-known, untested coach in 1980 when he became head coach at Tulsa.
It was an even swap -- Tulsa had never hired a black coach and Richardson had never coached at a Division I university.
He quickly built Tulsa into a winner: a National Invitation Tournament championship in 1981, his first season, and three trips to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament before leaving for Arkansas in 1985.
This afternoon it all came full circle: Tulsa upset Oklahoma State, 82-80, and Arkansas whipped Georgetown, 85-73.
Next week in Dallas the teams will meet in the Sweet 16.


We Still Have to Do Something About Deficit
To the Editor:
Maybe it was best that the balanced-budget amendment was voted down, but there is still a critical need to force the country to mend its profligate ways.
I believe the structural deficits of the last decade are almost criminal.
Everyone vaguely understands that our debts will be handed down to future generations for them to pay.
In the strictest sense, this burden imposes taxation without representation on those generations.
They will have no say in how the money is spent, yet they will be responsible for providing the funds.


Asia Pacific Alignment Is Off to an Upbeat Start
The intriguing question raised by the first meeting of the finance ministers of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum is whether the world is seeing the birth of a new alignment that will eventually replace the Group of Seven as the globe's most influential economic-political club.
The 18 finance ministers ended their two days of talks here on Saturday night by announcing a series of studies on how to better manage the $1 trillion in capital expected to flow into the Asian and Pacific region in the next decade and by scheduling meetings to coordinate financial activities.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Federal Budget . . .Feb.
Tuesday  Merchandise Trade . . .
Jan.
Wednesday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
Feb.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Existing-Home Sales . . .
Feb.
Friday  None


Whitewater Prosecutor Agrees on Plea Bargain
David Hale, a former municipal judge in Little Rock, Ark., who was facing trial on fraud charges later this month, has reached a plea agreement with the special prosecutor investigating the Whitewater affair, said Mr.
Hale's lawyer, Randy Coleman.
Mr.
Hale has said that Bill Clinton as Governor of Arkansas twice pressed him in 1985 and 1986 to make a loan from the federally sponsored lending company he then operated.
The loan would have indirectly helped the Whitewater Development Company, the real estate venture involving Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, as well as Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  NBD Bancorp Inc Standard Products TUESDAY  H F Ahmanson &amp; Co Capitol Amern Finl Corp Centerior Energy Knight-Ridder Inc Nipsco Inds Inc United Dominion Rlty Tr THURSDAY  Boston Edison Co Campbell Soup Co Enhance Finl Svc Gr Penn Cent Corp Pier 1 Imports Trans-Atlantic Hldgs FRIDAY  Pacific Telesis Group


Empty Shelves, Empty Minds; Budget Problems Drain Libraries of Their Lifeblood: Books
At the Bloomingdale branch of the New York Public Library, a teen-ager asked for Richard Wright's "Black Boy," a toddler requested "The Little Engine That Could" and a businessman asked for any of several computer books.
None of the books were available.
The Bloomingdale branch, like others in the city's library system, is suffering from too many empty spaces.
In field after field and collection after collection, the branch, at 150 West 100th Street, finds it has a dearth of the books people most want.
It is a condition that Paul LeClerc, president of the Public Library, worries will result in "sclerosis of the collections" as critical books go unacquired, unrepaired or unreplaced.


Jazz Through the Voice Of Cassandra Wilson
Cassandra Wilson is one of those singers who can make the smallest gesture resonate with meaning.
She will drop perfectly placed phrases against an icy clear background, then underscore them with a hand slicing across her body, or with a flick of her hair.
And she has the goods to back up her drama.
At 35, Ms.
Wilson is the most important singer to come along in jazz in the last 10 years.
She recently released a watershed recording, "Blue Light 'Til Dawn" (Blue Note), and is appearing at the Bottom Line tonight to air it out. (She will also be performing on April 1 and 2 at Lincoln Center, singing a part in Wynton Marsalis's new jazz suite.)


District of Columbia May Seek Federal Bailout
The District of Columbia has such financial problems that it may be forced to borrow money from the Federal Government to pay its bills, a blow to efforts by the municipal government to win more independence from Congress, officials say.
"The situation is that they have really had unbalanced budgets for the last several years," said Philip M. Dearborn, a financial research director of the United States Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations.
"They've used up all their cash and are in a very difficult cash situation now."


California Race May Be the Key To White House
The most important electoral battle of 1994, they say with metronomic regularity at the White House, is the contest for the governorship of California.
"From President Clinton's point of view," agreed Bob Mulholland of the California Democratic Party, "it's even more important than keeping control of the Senate. If we shoot ourselves in the foot and lose this race -- and we well may -- the Republicans could have 54 electoral votes in their hands."


Killer in Hebron Carried Israeli Rifle, Settler Says
A settler who drove Baruch Goldstein to the Hebron mosque where he gunned down Muslim worshipers last month testified today that Dr.
Goldstein was carrying the same type of rifle that was used in the massacre.
His words conflicted with testimony last week that suggested an accomplice may have carried the weapon.
The doctor gave no hint of what he was about to do, the settler, Motti Unger, a security officer on jeep patrol in Qiryat Arba, told an Israeli commission investigating the slaughter.


Gauging the Consequences of Spurning China
As the Clinton Administration weighs whether to renew China's "most favored nation" status after the strained visit by Secretary of State Warren Christopher to Beijing, legions of American business leaders and Washington lobbyists for industry and trade associations are describing the consequences of withdrawing the designation in near-apocalyptic terms.
But some economists and legislators, pointing to the United States' $22.7 billion trade deficit with China -- second only to its $59.32 billion deficit with Japan -- suggest that much of the oratory about damage to American exports and investment in China is overstated and that higher duties could go some distance toward trimming the trade deficit.


North Korea Bars A-Plant Survey; Threatens to Quit Nuclear Treaty; Japan Seeks Chinese Help
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan pressed Chinese leaders today to exercise greater influence on North Korea so it would give up any nuclear ambitions, saying he was "gravely concerned" about the looming crisis.
"More than any other country, China has the deepest relations with North Korea," Mr.
Hosokawa said at a news conference today after talks with President Jiang Zemin and Prime Minister Li Peng.
"Therefore China could work to move North Korea in a positive direction instead of a negative one."


Taking Advantage of Their One Shot This Year


Margeotes, Fertitta Is Chosen by Coty
Coty Inc. in New York said it had selected Margeotes, Fertitta, Donaher &amp; Weiss in New York to handle advertising for its Jovan Musk fragrance line and Coty Wild Musk brand.
The Jovan brands were handled in-house and fielded out on a project basis to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago, while the Coty brand was handled by Beber Silverstein &amp; Partners in Miami.
Billings were estimated at $8 million to $10 million.


Review/Television; A Debate on Welfare as the Root of Much Evil
The provocative title of tonight's "Firing Line" debate, "Resolved: Welfare Has Done More Harm Than Good," is matched by the spirited two hours that follow.
William F. Buckley Jr., the program's graying eminence, leads the team in support of the proposition, blaming America's welfare system for breeding single-parent families and the attendant ills for which the inner cities are now famous.
Mr.


Honoring Birgit Nilsson
Birgit Nilsson is to be the guest of honor at a lunch given by the Metropolitan Opera Guild and open to the public on Friday at 12:45 P.M. in the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, Park Avenue at 50th Street.
The baritone Hermann Prey is to sing a short program.
Licia Albanese, Rose Bampton, Evelyn Lear, Sherrill Milnes, Anna Moffo, Roberta Peters, Rise Stevens and Thomas Stewart are among the past and present singers who are to attend.
Tickets to the event, which is a benefit for the guild, are $125.
Information: (212) 870-7492.


Gretzky Ties Howe Mark On No. 801
He had scored only one goal in seven previous games, and people were starting to wonder about the mounting pressure and frustration in Wayne's World.
His Los Angeles Kings have played badly all season.
His friend and business partner, John Candy, died of a heart attack.
His house suffered severe damage in the Northridge earthquake on Jan. 17.
Lately, he had been bothered by the flu, and as hard as Wayne Gretzky chased Gordie Howe's National Hockey League career goals record, he simply could not seem to catch him.


At Home Abroad; Out Of This Chrysalis
There has never been anything exactly like it: an advanced industrial country transforming itself, in deliberate steps, from rule by an elite racial minority to a mass democracy.
That is the extraordinary process now taking place in South Africa, pointing to an election April 27-28 in which the black majority will be able to vote for the first time.
The process produces daily wonders and ironies, none more symbolic than the scene in a lofty round chamber of the main government building here the other evening.


Plush Condos Do Not a Russian Venture Make
Isolated on a remote field of a vast Russian collective farm called Lenin's Legacy, lies a freakish sliver of the suburban American dream.
Behind high steel gates, rows of semidetached, pearl gray wooden town houses are artfully arranged along flagstone paths.
Each of the 67 prefabricated units is equipped with plush wall-to-wall carpeting, a working fireplace, two-car garage, air-conditioning, microwave oven, washing machine, dryer and cable television.
A few yards away, 40 more units are under construction.


Patents
MANY prospective parents become acquainted with their children long before the little ones leave the wombs, through the grainy fetal outlines that appear in sonogram images.
Robert S. Ledley, the inventor of a whole-body computerized axial tomography, or CAT, scanner and a professor at the Georgetown University Medical School, proposes taking that prenatal acquaintance to a whole new level.


Illinois Candidate Transforms Herself
Pool sharks are not supposed to look like Dawn Clark Netsch, the bookish, silver-haired, 67-year-old woman who won the Democratic primary for governor of Illinois on Tuesday.
But never judge a sharpie by her smile.
It was Ms.
Netsch's ability, or luck, in sinking a couple of tough shots in a television campaign commercial that helped alter her image to a down-to-earth contender from that of a stuffy schoolmarm and moved her toward becoming Illinois's first woman nominated for governor by either major party.
A Commercial That Worked
Until the last few weeks of the primary, though, she was given little chance by the pols in the back room.
For one thing, they said, she talked too much for her own good, sounding like some kind of egghead.
She taught law for 18 years at Northwestern University, her alma mater, and maybe that explains it.
But she must have been nuts, they said, when at the start of her campaign she told the public -- without a gun pointed at her head -- that she wanted to raise state income taxes by $2.5 billion to pay for education and property tax relief.


Cuomo Seeks to Sweeten Proposals for Tax Cutting
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo wants to sweeten his election-year package of tax-cut proposals by giving credits to companies that paid taxes on operating losses from 1990 through 1993, most of them large manufacturers and securities concerns.
The retroactive credits represent a new twist on a tax-reduction proposal made by Mr.
Cuomo in January when he introduced his $33.4 billion budget for the fiscal year beginning on April 1.
In his original plan, Mr.
Cuomo called for giving companies credits on future operating losses.


In Los Angeles, Big Aftershock From January's Large Earthquake
A strong aftershock to January's earthquake shook the Los Angeles area today, causing minor new damage to freeways and buildings, briefly knocking out electrical power and sending thousands of residents scurrying for cover.
But the tremor, which struck at 1:21 P.M. and was measured at 5.3 on the Richter scale of ground motion, caused no major injuries or damage.
It was followed at about 3:30 by its own aftershock of magnitude 3.4.


Owls' Strategy Is Used Against Them
As the seconds ticked toward the end of someone's season, the game was not at all the anticipated, combustible mix of Grumpy Old Men.
Instead, the second-round meeting between Bob Knight's Indiana Hoosiers and John Chaney's Temple Owls, their contrasting styles with a common, fervent appreciation of defense, was about ideas and creativity, two elements that have not been attached to either coach's names very often in the final weeks of hotly controversial seasons.
And in the final minute, when Indiana's 67-58 victory was sending the Hoosiers to an East semifinal, the afternoon was about the pain of letting go, as Chaney, at the abrupt end of a 23-8 season, greeted Aaron McKie and Eddie Jones at the end of their collegiate careers.


Dance in Review
Keith Glassman  Dia Center for the Arts
Keith Glassman was at his choreographic best when he blended dancing with wrestling, bragging and beer.
This mixture took place in "Bout," one of the works Keith Glassman and Dancers presented on Thursday night.


Review/Opera; Students Take On the Hurdles of 'Cosi'
The Mannes College of Music's opera division, directed by Paul Echols, has recently expanded its yearly schedule from one production to three.
Friday's performance of Mozart's "Cosi Fan Tutte," produced by Mr.
Echols and conducted by Will Crutchfield, seemed to justify these ambitious plans.
One might have expected the resources of a small school to come up short in this large and difficult opera, but Mannes's student singers and players handsomely overcame most of the hurdles in their way.
With a minimum of directorial fuss, Mr.
Echols moved the action to an airy, turn-of-the-century setting, somewhere between W. S. Gilbert and Noel Coward.
Vanessa James, the set and costume designer, created a lovely veranda backdrop for the various goings-on; Guglielmo and Ferrando arrive in their tennis whites and sit down to tea.
This sort of light touch might offend purists, but it makes a good antidote to the underlying mean-spiritedness of Lorenzo da Ponte's scenario. (No other opera I can think of is quite so forthright in its contempt for women.)


An Accuser Becomes a Target
Just six months ago, Kenneth Gribetz seemed to be riding a crest in his 18-year career as Rockland County's District Attorney, contemplating a bid for state attorney general after winning the convictions of officials of the local gas and electric company for spending customers' money on political donations.
Now Mr.
Gribetz is himself under a cloud, one that grew from his own use of campaign donations.
Much of the evidence against him is being provided by people wounded in the utility case and in other cases brought by his office.


Market Place; Wilshire Technologies' cry of 'bear raid' failed to halt a steep plunge in the company's share price.
IT has become fashionable when a company's stock starts dropping like a rock for executives to blame a "bear raid" by evil short-sellers spreading unfounded rumors in an effort to drive the stock price down and make a profit from the decline.
But sometimes, as the case of Wilshire Technologies shows, when companies claim to smell a bear, investors should smell a rat.
While for most investors Wilshire's story is merely a cautionary tale, it is unlikely to have a happy ending for the company's shareholders.
The stock, which in November changed hands for as much as $21.63, dropped to $8.38 on March 14 -- when it was suspended by the American Stock Exchange.
It has not traded since, and the outlook is less than bright.


Notions of Beauty Transcend Culture, New Study Suggests
Beauty is not, as egalitarians like to think, in the eye of the beholder.
Nor is it as strongly influenced by culture as many have long assumed.
Rather, an accumulating body of evidence indicates that concepts of attractiveness may be universal and hard-wired into the human brain, whether that brain serves a Briton or a Japanese.
This "wiring," a built-in genetic tendency that evolved over millenniums through natural selection, seems to prompt men to select as most attractive those women whose facial characteristics are associated with youth and good health, both of which are important to reproductive viability.


Sampras Takes Healthy Step Over Agassi
Faced with a hairy, healthy gazelle in the form of his mobile challenger, Andre Agassi, the world's No. 1 player, Pete Sampras, proved under sauna-like conditions today that he is nigh unto invincible even when a member of the walking wounded.
After nearly having to default in the final of the Lipton Championship because of a violently upset stomach, Sampras collected himself after dropping the opening set and plugged along until he was assured of the 5-7, 6-3, 6-3 victory that anointed him the first back-to-back champion in the tournament's 10-year history.
It was also his ninth consecutive triumph in a final against a fellow American.


AN ORBITING SYSTEM IS PLANNED TO LINK MOST OF THE GLOBE
Two of the nation's wealthiest entrepreneurs in communications and computers, Craig O. McCaw and William H. Gates, plan to disclose on Monday the formation of a company to develop a global satellite communications network far more ambitious than anything contemplated before.
Indeed, the project is so big and so radically different from current satellite systems that it might be dismissed as an idle fantasy were it not for the two people behind it: Mr.
McCaw, who built McCaw Cellular Communications into the largest cellular telephone company, and Mr.
Gates, who turned the Microsoft Corporation into the biggest software company in the world.


Roberts Proves Himself Not Just a Money Man
For a dozen years, Sundays on the PGA Tour had always belonged to someone other than Loren Roberts.
There had been seconds and there had been thirds, brief glimpses of his face on the television screen, always as an afterthought or a bit-part player in the tournament cast.
He suffered the snide compliment, golf's version of the bum's accolade: he was the richest non-winner on tour, a man who had collected $2.1 million in checks and nothing in silver cups or crystal trophies.
All that changed today at Arnold Palmer's Bay Hill Club, where Roberts outlasted one of the best fields of the year, stared down a collection of bigger-name players and won the Nestle Invitational by one stroke.


Accounts
*
The Clorox Company of Canada, Toronto, to Young &amp; Rubicam Toronto, to handle advertising in Canada for all of its food and cleaner products including Pine-Sol, Soft Scrub and Hidden Valley Ranch salad dressings.
Ash &amp; Smith, Toronto, previously handled advertising for Pine-Sol, while advertising for Clorox's other products had been inactive.
In the United States, Y.&amp; R.'s San Francisco office handles several Clorox accounts and serves as the lead agency for all Clorox international brands.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Uno Restaurants Inc., Boston, to Rotando Partners Advertising, Stamford, Conn., to handle the creative and media planning portion of its account, which had been at Decker Rickard, Glastonbury, Conn.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.


Reforming Rent Rules
Once again, as they do every three years, New York City's rent regulations are expiring.
And once again, City Council members are battling over whether and how to revise them.
At least this time they are actually considering a sensible, if modest, reform of the laws.
If the bill now pending passes, wealthy renters benefiting from artificially low rents will have to pay more.
That bill -- the city's version of an even more modest state law decontrolling luxury apartments -- is hardly adequate reform, but it is at least a first step in the right direction.
Real reform is politically impossible, considering the influence the renters' lobby has with elected officials.
Supporters of rent controls wrongly but persuasively argue that the controls protect the poor and middle class, and that without those regulations most renters would be gouged by nefarious landlords.
But any decontrol law could be written to protect renters from abuse.


Center for Children With H.I.V. Has Anniversary Celebration


Reforms in Mexico Put in Doubt By Opposition of Leftist Leader
As the Mexican Congress prepares to take up the most significant proposals for democratic change since President Carlos Salinas de Gortari took office five years ago, the outcome has been thrown into doubt by a split in the country's strongest opposition party.
Hours after legislators of the leftist Democratic Revolutionary Party voted on Friday for a special congressional session to approve reform laws agreed to in weeks of negotiations, their presidential candidate, Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, said he would reject the changes as insufficient.


North Korea Bars A-Plant Survey; Threatens to Quit Nuclear Treaty
Hours before the International Atomic Energy Agency was expected to recommend economic sanctions, North Korea said this morning that it would no longer allow inspections of its nuclear sites.
It added that if the United States resumed military exercises on the Korean peninsula, it would pull out of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
In an angry, six-page denunciation of the Clinton Administration and the atomic energy agency, issued by North Korea's Foreign Ministry, the Communist Government in Pyongyang charged that "the United States committed a perfidious act" that "may bring the Korean nation back to the phase of confrontation and war."


Scribes' Revenge: Potshots at Everyone at the Gridiron Banquet
The Washington press corps plays gadfly to the occupants at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue most of the year.
The journalists nitpick and scrutinize until the annual hiatus for the Gridiron Club dinner.
Then, they skewer in skit and song.
This year's 109-year-old annual dinner party at the Capital Hilton Hotel on Saturday night had members of the press taking bipartisan potshots at everyone: Democrats like President Clinton, Republicans like Senator Bob Dole, independents like Ross Perot and the harder-to-categorize David R. Gergen, adviser to Presidents of all ideologies.


Electric Cars Race Silently Into the Future
As the cars raced around the track, the spectators' ears strained for the sound to match what they saw, but there was only a ghostly whoosh.
The cars gave the impression that they were serenely gliding by, making it hard to believe that they were traveling at 80 miles an hour.
But they were.
These souped-up cars were electric, some drawing enough current to run a small neighborhood, all employing advances in electronics.
One, a converted Indianapolis 500-class car, set a record this weekend, of 107 miles an hour, for an electric vehicle on a one-mile oval course.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  Hit and Hug for Jordan  Michael Jordan got his third hit of the spring in Miami yesterday, and a hug from a woman who jumped out of the stands.
Jordan went in as a defensive replacement in right field in the sixth inning of an exhibition game between the Chicago White Sox and Florida Marlins.
It was quite an inning.
A fan leaped from the right-field seats, ran over to Jordan and hugged him.
On Jordan's first at-bat in the eighth against left-hander Rich Rodriguez, he hit a chopper to third baseman Jerry Browne, who tried to backhand the ball,but couldn't.
Jordan was credited with a hit. (AP) N.H.L.
Vanbiesbrouck Saves  Dave Lowry assisted on the tying goal and scored another and John Vanbiesbrouck had 45 saves to lead the Florida Panthers to a 5-3 victory over division rival Philadelphia last night in Miami.
The Panthers solidified their hold on the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference with 73 points to 69 for Philadelphia and the Islanders. (AP) Flames 6, Maple Leafs 3: Robert Reichel scored three goals and defenseman Al MacInnis had a goal and five assists for Calgary in Toronto.
Calgary was 30 seconds into killing a first-period penalty when MacInnis's slap shot hit the bar in the back of the net, but the puck exited so quickly, the red light didn't go on.
Play continued for two minutes, when it was whistled dead on a penalty.
Officials, having reviewed the play, then awarded MacInnis the goal. (AP) N.B.A.
Sonics Use 1-2 Punch  Seattle's Gary Payton scored a season-high 32 points, and Shawn Kemp had a triple double for the SuperSonics, who rode a 17-2 third-period surge to a 124-115 victory over the Hornets yesterday in Charlotte.
Kemp had 15 points, 11 rebounds and a career-best 12 assists. (AP) Hawks 101, Celtics 80: Atlanta beat host Boston, assuring the Celtics of their first losing season in 15 years.
Kevin Willis had 31 points and 14 rebounds for the Hawks.
She finished at 15-under 277 and beat Beth Daniel and Elaine Crosby by four shots.
The 30-year-old Englishwoman climbed to second on the tour money list with $153,055. (AP) HORSE RACING  Classy Mirage Wins  Classy Mirage, with Robbie Davis aboard, snapped a three-race losing streak by winning the $100,000-added Grade II Distaff Handicap by 4 1/2 lengths over Jill Miner at Aqueduct.
Air Port Won finished another 1 3/4 lengths back in third in the field of eight fillies and mares.
Classy Mirage, coupled with Deputy Miss, returned $5.20, $3 and $2.60. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL  White Plains Champs  John Woodbury scored 23 points but it was Ross Corley's last-minute assists and a crucial rebound by Pat Goessling that gave White Plains a 65-60 victory over West Genesee and the Class A title at the New York state boy's basketball championships yesterday in Glens Falls.
Jermaine Young had 20 points for White Plains and was named the Class A tournament's most valuable player. (AP)


Polls Indicate Victory by Rightist in Salvador Election
El Salvador's conservative ruling party appeared tonight to be heading toward a strong victory in the first national elections since a peace accord two years ago ended a civil war, according to independent projections tonight.
With 26 percent of the votes counted, elections officials said Armando Calderon Sol, the presidential candidate of the rightist Nationalist Republican Alliance, had 50.7 percent, while the leftist coaliton candidate, Ruben Zamora, had nearly 28.6 percent.


White Oak Proceeds To Aid Hawkins Troupe
Baryshnikov Productions has announced that it will contribute $65,000 to the Erick Hawkins Dance Company.
The money, just over half the net proceeds from the White Oak Dance Project's recent engagement at the New York State Theater, is to be used for rehearsal pay, new choreographic projects and the revival of the Hawkins classic "8 Clear Places." The costumes for the piece were destroyed by a flood at Mr.
Hawkins's modern-dance studio in SoHo three days before his January season at the Joyce Theater.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
AK Steel Holding Corp., Middletown, Ohio, an initial public offering of 15.75 million shares.
CS First Boston.


Pacific Bell to Set a Test for Digital Movies
Pacific Bell will announce on Monday a plan to conduct a test of technology for transmitting movies, live events and high-definition video directly from Hollywood studios to movie theaters in digital form.
The technology, using high-speed fiber optic networks, would bypass the traditional system of producing multiple copies of films and physically distributing them to theaters.


Film and Television
New York City's feature film industry recovered strongly last year after a poor 1992.
Total shooting days, a barometer of the industry's health, rose 65 percent, and feature film starts statewide jumped to 53 from 43.
The surge followed a economic recovery in film and television production and the resolution of a labor dispute that led Hollywood studios to boycott the city for seven months in 1990-1991.
Last year seven productions started shooting in New Jersey, while Connecticut had none for the third year in a row.
Television production in New York City has grown steadily in recent years, but production of commercials has continued to fall off, a trend begun in the late 1980's.


William Bergsma, A Music Professor And Composer, 72
William L. Bergsma, a composer of symphonies, chamber music, songs and other works, died on Friday at Swedish Hospital in Seattle.
He was 72 and lived in Seattle.
The cause was a heart attack suffered in the hospital, where he was being treated for a broken hip, said his daughter, Anne, of Seattle.


The Electronic Word Went Out
To the Editor:
The credit (or blame, as some insist) for defeating an amendment to President Clinton's schools bill in the House of Representatives late last month must go to home-schooling parents, who inundated Washington with letters, faxes and telephone calls that shut down the Capitol switchboard.
The troubling amendment would have required all schoolteachers to be certified to teach the subjects they were assigned.
What was ultimately responsible for the explosiveness of the outcry was an awareness that spread like an infectious disease over the computer networks of America.


METRO DIGEST
THE BURDEN OF PRISONERS' RIGHTS SUITS  Tens of thousands of civil rights suits have been filed in recent years by inmates protesting prison conditions in New York and elsewhere across the nation.
Over the years they have become a powerful method to force improvements in prison medical care, legal access and inmate treatment.
But along with such landmark cases have come a bounty of frivolous and groundless complaints.
The lawsuits have burdened the courts and overwhelmed the state attorneys who have to defend their prison systems, costing taxpayers millions in legal fees.
A1.


Dance in Review
Jonathon Appels  St. Mark's Church
Two pieces presented by Jonathon Appels on Saturday night looked like the work of a man who loves dance.
But both "Personal Names," the 1991 duet that opened the program, and Mr.
Appels's new "Fields and Stars" also bore the mark of a choreographer who came late to the art and is not comfortable with it as a medium of expression.


Fire Kills 5 Children in a Boston Suburb


SOCCER
Games All Over
With the opening of the World Cup 87 days away, several qualifiers for U.S.A. '94 will engage in preparatory matches tomorrow, with Brazil versus Argentina and Germany versus Italy at the forefront.


Kindness, Then Rage: The Death Of a Woman
MARIKO WESTBROOK loved living in Newark, in her doorman building overlooking a maple-lined park.
She'd stroll along Broad Street to shop, stop for tea at one of a half-dozen diners she made her own, volunteer at church dinners.
A familiar figure, she seemed more like a suburban society matron than a woman alone in a big city.


Review/Film Festival; A Probable Killer With an Ax or Two to Grind
Lodge H. Kerrigan's "Clean, Shaven" quickly demonstrates that Mr.
Kerrigan is capable of scaring the daylights out of his audience, given the right material.
Mr.
Kerrigan, who wrote, produced and directed this unsettling psychological portrait, begins by powerfully conveying the disturbed mental state of his film's main character.
Peter Winter (Peter Greene) appears to be a child-killer, but not much about him is objectively clear.
The film heightens the tension by confining its narrow focus to Peter's bizarre, angry view of the world.
As the soundtrack reverberates with conversational snippets and uncategorizable sounds, the camera shows how Peter's field of vision deliberately excludes other people.
He is seen traveling alone, in a car whose windows he protectively pastes over with tabloid newspapers.
Even so, memories intrude, and they crop up in ways that are as frightening to the viewer as they are to Peter.
It's impossible to guess what sort of minor event might send him over the edge.


Council Vote Lifts Control On Luxury Rents in Future
The New York City Council yesterday approved a small but politically contentious change in rent regulations that over several years will lift controls from at least 1,500 apartments with relatively wealthy tenants, most of them in Manhattan.
The Council's bill expanded a plan passed by the State Legislature last summer that deregulated about 12,000 luxury apartments.
Under that state law, owners can charge market-rate rents once tenants move out of apartments that were renting for $2,000 or more as of Oct. 1, 1993.
Even if the tenant does not move out, the rent protections disappear when the lease expires if the tenant makes more than $250,000 a year.


Classical Music in Review
Ridge Theater  The Kitchen
John Moran's "Everyday Newt Burman," presented last year by the Ridge Theater at La MaMa, sticks in the mind as a phenomenally imaginative evening of music theater.
Having based previous operas on legendary media phenomena -- "The Jack Benny Program" and "The Manson Family" -- Mr.
Moran invented his own archetype in the hapless clown of the title.
Multi-layered sound design, disorienting lip-sync theatrics, mournful Minimalist patterns and a dazzlingly eclectic pop-culture sensibility combined to form an operatic world unlike any other.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.22
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.61
3.47
2.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.90
3.83
3.05
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.55
6.48
5.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.95
6.90
6.80
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.79
7.67
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.01
5.99
5.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Gains Reported in Effort to Resume Mideast Talks
After 24 hours of intense talks, Palestinian, Israeli and United States negotiators reported late tonight that some progress had been made in seeking a formula that would permit a resumption of negotiations between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The P.L.O. broke off talks with Israel following the Feb. 25 massacre of Palestinians by an armed Jewish settler in the West Bank town of Hebron.
Since then, the P.L.O. has said it would only resume the talks after insuring what it has described as adequate protection for Palestinians from armed Jewish settlers and the removal of settlers from the heart of Hebron, a city of 110,000 Arabs.


Investigating a Medical Maze: Virus Transmission in Surgery
IN a cluster of cases that has mystified medical detectives, 18 patients who underwent heart surgery at two hospitals associated with the University of California at Los Angeles over a 10-month period in 1991 and 1992 developed hepatitis B several weeks after their operations.
The sleuths believe they know who the carrier of the virus was: a surgeon.
But only after more than a year and a half of investigation do they have a clue as to how the patients became infected.


HEAVY ARMS FOUND CLOSE TO SARAJEVO
United Nations peacekeepers have discovered the most serious violation yet of NATO's ban on heavy weapons around Sarajevo, uncovering concealed tanks, howitzers, mortars and anti-aircraft guns, a United Nations spokesman said here today.
Maj.
Simon MacDowall, the spokesman, said the Canadians discovered one Soviet-built T-72 tank, three Soviet-built T-54/55 tanks, four 105-millimeter mortars and 18 smaller mortars while patrolling the hills around the village of Cifluk, just off the road between Sarajevo and Visoko.


Classical Music in Review
Music From Japan  Asia Society
The Music From Japan festival, in its 19th season over the weekend, centered on tradition and innovation, and the juxtaposition was stark at the second concert, on Saturday evening.


Amtech
Traders abandoned the Amtech Corporation yesterday, selling its shares, when the Dallas maker of electronic toll collection systems said toll authorities in New York and other states had chosen a rival's system.
Nasdaq trading in the company's shares was halted at the start of the session, then resumed shortly after noon.


Crime Decisions for the House
The House Judiciary Committee has improved on the Senate's crime bill.
On some issues the committee has fumbled, leaving it up to the full House membership, when the bill reaches the floor this week, or later to a Senate-House conference, to make it better or keep it from getting worse.
Both bills have a valuable core: $22 billion to put more police into communities, cope with bulging prisons and provide a smidgeon of support for prison drug treatment and other preventive programs.
But the Senate, with no guidance from the White House or Justice Department, overdosed on floor amendments, including the popular "three strikes, you're out" life sentencing for third-felony offenders.


Rates Jump as Bond Traders Expect a Fed Increase Soon
Short-term interest rates jumped to their highest level in nearly 21 months yesterday as investors and dealers sold Treasury securities on expectations that the Federal Reserve would raise its interest-rate target this week.
Traders and investors are focusing on when and how large the next interest-rate increase by the Fed will be.
The Federal Open Market Committee, the policy-making arm of the central bank, meets today for the first time since short-term interest rates were raised on Feb. 4.


On Wearing Your Rue With a Difference
To the Editor:
The knowledge that rue was widely considered in Renaissance Europe both as a contraceptive and an abortifacient (Science Times, March 8) newly illuminates Ophelia's final scene in "Hamlet."


Don G. Goddard, 89, Expert on Alcoholism
Don G. Goddard, a former broadcaster who became known for his work with geriatric alcoholism and other addictions, died on Sunday at Boswell Hospital in Sun City, Ariz.
A Sun City resident, he was 89.
He suffered a long illness, his family said.


American Healthcare Management Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Act Up, Diverse, Nonpartisan, Fights Both AIDS and Bigotry
To the Editor:
In "How to Grow Extremists" (Op-Ed, March 13), Shelby Steele wrongly lists Act Up as a dangerous hate group seeking unfair entitlements for homosexuals.
The AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power is a diverse, nonpartisan coalition fighting bigotry.


Joseph C. Hawthorne, Conductor, Dies at 85
Joseph C. Hawthorne, a former conductor of the Chattanooga and Toledo Symphony Orchestras, died on Sunday at the Veterans Hospital in Bedford, Mass.
He was 85 and lived in Cambridge, Mass.
He died after a long illness, said his wife, Hazel.


AIDS Protest Hangs From City Hall -- Briefly


The Assault on 114,381,625,757,888,867,669,235,779,976,146,612,010,218,296,271,242,362,562,561,842,935,706,935,245,733,897,830,597,123,563,958,705,058,989,075,147,599,290,026,879,543,541
MATHEMATICIANS say they are close to breaking a cryptographic stronghold that was not expected to fall for many years.
The item is a 129-digit number that was first described in 1977 as proof of the security of a new public cryptographic system.
The number is known for short as RSA 129 after the initials of its inventors and its number of digits.
The new coding system depended on very large numbers that were multiples of two primes, a prime being a number divisible only by itself and one.


New President Is Appointed At Barnard
A champion of separate women's colleges was named the sixth president of Barnard College yesterday and reaffirmed the value of an independent, single-sex Barnard that cooperates with, but is not overseen by Columbia University.
The new president, Judith R. Shapiro, is provost of another sister school of the Ivy League, Bryn Mawr, and a noted anthropologist who specializes in gender differences.


Nathan H. Mitchell, Tax Commissioner, 90
Nathan H. Mitchell, a former deputy state tax commissioner, died on Saturday at St.
Luke's Hospital.
He was 90 and a resident of Manhattan.
He suffered a heart attack, his family said.


By Design; Not Just for Farmers
Having made the transition from work clothes to fashion, overalls now come in a variety of fabrics and lengths.
With designers like Donna Karan and Gianni Versace showing overalls, it was inevitable that there would even be overalls dresses.
Bergdorf Goodman has DKNY's pin-striped short-skirted overalls ($155) and a private-label overalls dress with a denim bib and long floral-printed skirt ($165).


Reliance Financial Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Computerland, Now Vanstar, Shifts Focus
The Computerland Corporation, once the country's largest in-store retailer of personal computers, said today that it had changed its name to Vanstar Inc. and would concentrate on direct sales and contract services to large companies.
The company, which in recent years has moved away from retailing and into direct sales, sold its Computerland franchise and distribution division, as well as the Computerland name, to Merisel Inc. six weeks ago for $110 million.
Vanstar, however, retains the right to the Computerland name abroad.


Critic's Notebook; In Texas, An Agenda You Can Dance To
About halfway through his annual all-star concert, Jimmie Dale Gilmore peered fondly at the crowd in the City Coliseum here.
"There's something so different playing at home," he said, and considered for a moment.
"It's good, though."
Home for Mr.
Gilmore is Austin, Texas's capital and the site of the state university.
The historical combination of rowdy legislators and eager students has yielded an extraordinary concentration of bars where live music is performed.
Since the 1960's, when the Sir Douglas Quintet fused norteno, or Tex-Mex music, with garage-band rock, and the 1970's, when Willie Nelson came up with a personal, eclectic country music, Austin has harbored nonconformists with a lingering sense of tradition.


Oxford Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Lazard Finds Brawny Ally for Derivatives
The growing derivatives business requires brains, to concoct complex financial transactions, and brawn, to have the financial strength to stand by what are generally private contracts between two parties that can extend as long as 10 years.
So when Lazard Freres, the brainy 98-pound weakling of investment banks, decided to start trading derivatives, it needed a muscular financial partner.
And today it plans to announce a joint derivatives venture with one of the world's burliest banks, Credit Agricole of France, the 11th largest in the world.


At Mezzina/Brown, A Top Officer Quits
R.
Scott Wills, who has been executive vice president at Mezzina/Brown Inc. of New York since it acquired his agency, Wills &amp; Evans, July 1, has left amid a dispute and accepted a job with a former client.
"There were irreconcilable differences," Mr.
Wills said yesterday, confirming a report of his departure this week in Advertising Age.
"From the time of the acquisition, they did not allow me to work on any of the business I brought over." As a result, he added, he has accepted the new position of senior vice president of marketing at Zing Systems L.P. of Englewood, Colo., an interactive television company that had been a client of Wills &amp; Evans and continued at Mezzina/Brown until recently.


Spectrum Chooses Low-Tech Chief
Having grabbed for the stars and come up with a handful of dust, Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. turned to a low-profile financial specialist on its board, Edward W. Maskaly, and yesterday named him chairman and chief executive.
The appointment of Mr.
Maskaly fills the gap left when John Sculley resigned on Feb. 7 after less than four months at Spectrum, a wireless communications company based in Manhasset, L.I.


Incentives Abound For Knicks Vs. Bulls
After a long practice today, Anthony Mason was sitting next to a cooler sipping on a soft drink and talking tough.
"We're getting the job done," said Mason, who has helped the Knicks (45-19) reel off nine straight victories and tie Atlanta for the best record in the Eastern Conference.
"Our starters are playing well, and, despite injuries, we're getting help off of the bench.


Becoming a Land of the Smoke-Free, Ban by Ban
Once, in a country proud of its rugged individualism, frontier spirit and wild-blue-yonder toughness, smokers were in the ascendant.
They moved through clouds of blue from the movies to the malls.
They flicked embers at total strangers in hazy, jazz-filled bars.
They exhaled a mix of nicotine, carbon monoxide and invisible carcinogens in cozy corners at their jobs.
They puffed with impunity from coast to coast.
Now: quarantine.


Frenchman Charged In Jews' Killing Says He's No Anti-Semite
Testifying for the first time in his trial for crimes against humanity during World War II, Paul Touvier denied today that he was anti-Semitic even though he had sworn to combat "Jewish lepers" when he joined a pro-Nazi militia in occupied France.
Mr.
Touvier, who is accused of ordering the execution of seven Jews in 1944, said he took the oath as part of a group.
"They're just words," he told a court in Versailles.
"The author didn't intend to have a mean tone." He also insisted he had no direct relations with Gestapo officials.


CHRONICLE
Some London police officers are in trouble for giving royal treatment to the PRINCESS OF WALES.
Over the weekend, the Princess parked her green Audi convertible in a tow-away zone in the Knightsbridge section of London, within walking distance of Harrods and the designer boutiques on Sloane Street.
Two officers placed a signed note, written on Metropolitan Police letterhead, on her windshield that read: "Vehicle broken down. Please don't clamp." But, according to The British Press Association, the Princess's car was working just fine; she just couldn't find a legal parking space so she enlisted the help of some chivalrous police officers.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday about the international airdrop operation for Bosnia misstated the timing of the scene shown, in which a plane was refueling on a foggy tarmac.
It was last month, not last week.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
American companies are prospering, but announcements of job cuts this year are more numerous than ever and seem likely to continue.
Technological advances let companies produce more with fewer employees.
With price increases harder to get, corporate America often maintains profits by slicing labor costs.
And job shedding has become fashionable.  [ Page A1. ] Companies
Potentially setting off a price war in the market for cholesterol-lowering drugs, Sandoz said it would sell a new treatment for nearly 50 percent less than similar products now available.  [ D1. ]


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions yesterday about a wake for two Greek Orthodox priests misidentified the bishop at the right.
He was Metropolitan Silas, Bishop of New Jersey, not Archbishop Iakovos, Primate of North and South America.


Rightist Party Retains Power in Salvadoran Election
El Salvador's rightist governing party, Arena, has preserved its hold on power with a sizable victory over leftist rivals who were taking part in an election for the first time since the country's 12-year civil war ended two years ago.
In a presidential vote on Sunday that was followed by strenuous assertions of fraud by leftist leaders, Arena, formally the Nationalist Republican Alliance, emerged with nearly twice as many votes as the Democratic Convergence, the coalition that includes the former guerrillas of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front.


An Obligation for Hebron's Arab Clans: Revenge
Karama Jabri has five sons.
Today they are plowing the fields next to their house.
Soon, when the Israelis lift the round-the-clock curfew that has been in force since the massacre of Palestinian worshipers by a Jewish settler, they will return to their small garage to repair cars.
And sometime, before they die, they promise to see the relatives and friends who were killed or wounded in the massacre avenged.
"This is how it goes here," said Nadir Jabri, as he looked up from behind the mule-driven plow that was churning up the damp earth.
"When a son or a father is killed we must take revenge. It is a social obligation. We do not rest until the soul of our relative is avenged."


Complexity for Diversion and Study
BETWEEN order and chaos lies complexity.
Order, or stability, is a static or repeating state.
Anyone who has ever run the Game of Life on a computer has watched patterns swirl before coming to a halt or settling into a boring and repetitive cycle.
Chaos, which has had an enviable press in recent years, seems utterly random, beautiful and useless.
Complexity, the narrow strip between stasis and randomness, is where we and elephants and dandelions live, "chaotic enough to adapt and seek out new behaviors, but stable enough to hold onto those that work."
The quotation is from "Enter the Complexity Lab," by William H. Roetzheim (Sams; $24.95), a book and accompanying disk that explain and demonstrate key components of complexity theory.


YELTSIN CAN'T END RUMORS OF ILLNESS
Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin flew today to the Black Sea resort of Sochi to meet with President Boris N. Yeltsin for what the official Russian news agency Itar-Tass described as "important and difficult" talks.
The meeting, shown tonight on the evening news, came after a weekend of rumors that had raised questions not only about Mr.
Yeltsin's physical and political health, but also about his whereabouts.
The President flew to Sochi for a two-week working vacation on March 14.


Three Men Indicted In Kerrigan Assault
A grand jury investigating the clubbing attack on Nancy Kerrigan indicted three men today on charges of racketeering, conspiracy and second-degree assault and named Tonya Harding as an unindicted co-conspirator in the case.
The indictments accused Harding, her former husband, Jeff Gillooly, and three others of conspiring to "unlawfully, intentionally and knowingly cause physical injury to Nancy Kerrigan by means of a dangerous weapon."


John Yeon, Architect, 83
John Yeon, an architect primarily known for houses designed in the regional style of his native Northwest, died on March 13 at his home in Portland, Ore.
He was 83.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


4 in Blast Case Said To Fast in Protest
The four men convicted in the World Trade Center bombing have been on a hunger strike to protest conditions at the prison where they are awaiting sentencing, a lawyer who spoke with two of the men said yesterday.
The lawyer, William M. Kunstler, said that Mohammed A. Salameh and Mahmud Abouhalima called him late yesterday afternoon from the Federal penitentiary at Lewisburg, Pa., to say that two of them had been on a seven-day strike and that the two others had not eaten for 11 days.


Chess
There is no tournament for the world championship.
The title is decided by a head-to-head match.
But if any tournament could be likened in prestige to the championship, it would be the Linares International in Spain, which finished on March 14 with a remarkable result: Anatoly Karpov of Russia, who lost the world title to his countryman Gary Kasparov in 1985, finally got revenge by running away with first place in Linares with a whopping 11-2 score, 2 1/2 points ahead of his nemesis, who tied for second.
Karpov got a $7,000 prize, an amount rumored to be just a fraction of what he was paid to appear at this elite event.
But whatever the total secret sum might be, it could not have given the 42-year-old Karpov anywhere near the satisfaction of getting out of Kasparov's shadow for once.
FINAL STANDINGS  Player . . .
W. . . .
L. . . .
D. . . .
Pts.
In Linares, Karpov played efficiently, gliding along with effortless moves and letting his opponents make the mistakes.
But there was one shining exception, his bright performance in attack against the Bulgarian grandmaster Veselin Topalov in Round 4.


Campbell Soup Shifts Account to BBDO
BBDO New York is picking up another chunk of business from the Campbell Soup Company, with billings estimated at $12 million to $15 million, from Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. of New York.
The shift involves a portion of Campbell's flagship "red-and-white" soups account that centers on advertising soups as recipe or cooking ingredients.
The move, effective in August, will consolidate all of the red-and-white account at BBDO, which gained the bulk of the estimated $70 million assignment in June from Backer Spielvogel.
Gary S. Moss, vice president of global advertising at Campbell in Camden, N.J., confirmed a report of the change this week in Adweek, adding that it was motivated by a desire to consolidate the red-and-white account at one agency again, as in the past, rather than by any dissatisfaction with Backer Spielvogel.


2 Hospitals in Boston Complete Their Merger
TWO major teaching hospitals in Boston, the Brigham and Women's Hospital and the Massachusetts General Hospital, have officially merged under a new parent corporation called Partners Healthcare System Inc., the hospitals announced yesterday.
The two hospitals, once fierce rivals, reported last December that they would merge.
The formal action was taken after the hospitals satisfied various internal, legal and regulatory requirements.
Attorney General Scott Harshbarger of Massachusetts approved the merger this month.
Last month, the Massachusetts Department of Public Health gave its approval.


Asian Gang Members Arrested in Kidnapping
After secretly observing a $20,000 ransom payment on a Lower East Side street corner, Federal agents arrested 10 Asian gang members who they said had kidnapped and tortured four illegal immigrants from China over the weekend.
One of the victims told law-enforcement officials that on each of the three days he was in captivity, the kidnappers pistol-whipped him, gagged him with his own shirt, kicked him and punched him.
At one point, the victim was also burned with a hot metal rod on his back and chest.


Don't Force All Americans Into Managed Care
To the Editor:
"Mr. Stark's Race Backward" (editorial, March 10), responding to my health care reform proposal, is inaccurate and misleading.


Price War On a Drug Is Seen
Lighting a fuse in what could be an explosive price war in the enormous market for cholesterol-lowering drugs, Sandoz Ltd. said yesterday that it would sell its new cholesterol drug for nearly 50 percent less than similar products now on the market.
The monthly retail cost for the most common dosage of the widely used prescription drugs, called HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, will drop from the $70 to $80 that Merck &amp; Company and the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company now charge to just over $40 for the Sandoz drug.


Suds Appeal
Nadia Klimova, an office manager, blushed at being found at Moscow's Rossiya concert hall last week ogling the star of "Simply Maria," a Mexican soap opera that has more than 140 million Russian aficionados.
A soap, she told a Times reporter, "is for people with a very low level of culture. But for me it's psychotherapy. We live in hard times, in a gray, difficult country. It's like a fairy tale."


At Nationals, 2 Slim Victories
The American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals ended here last night, and a Californian expert completed a rare double.
Chip Martel of Davis, Calif., who was a Vanderbilt Knockout Team winner Friday night, won the Open Swiss Teams with different teammates: Perry Johnson of Farmington Hills, Mich., Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., and Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill.
Both his victories were by minuscule margins -- one imp in the Vanderbilt and three-tenths of a victory point in the Swiss.


Fastest Gun on Earth: Goals Go Beyond Planet
USING an experimental gun about 60 feet long, scientists at Sandia National Laboratories have blasted a small projectile to a speed of 10 miles a second, which is thought to be the highest velocity ever reached on earth by any object larger than a speck of dust.
In announcing the achievement, Sandia said its new gun, the Enhanced Hyper Velocity Launcher, would enable engineers to measure the effects of a micrometeorite or chunk of space debris colliding head on with an orbiting space station at a combined speed of 36,000 miles an hour.
The gun will also help engineers to design and test protective shields for orbiting communications satellites.


For the Botanical Garden, the Outlook Is Clear


Classical Music in Review
Arianna Goldina and Remy Loumbrozo  Duo-Pianists Alice Tully Hall
Arianna Goldina and Remy Loumbrozo, young duo-pianists, offered a mix of original and transcribed music on Saturday afternoon.
The firm anchor of this program was Bartok's great chamber piece, the Sonata for Two Pianos and Percussion.
Its dark energies and flashes of fun ended an afternoon that had begun with the calm and order of Schumann's Six Studies in the Form of a Canon (here in Debussy's arrangement).


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
California Energy Co., Omaha, is selling $400 million of senior discount notes due in 2004 and priced at $755.23 per $1,000 bond to yield 10.25 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The notes carry a zero coupon for three years, then pay 10.25 percent to maturity.
Noncallable for five years, the notes are rated Ba3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BB- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Novell to Acquire Wordperfect
In a two-part deal intended to give it a vast extension of its reach in software, Novell Inc. agreed today to acquire the Wordperfect Corporation in a stock swap valued at $1.4 billion.
Novell will also purchase Borland International's Quattro Pro spreadsheet business for $145 million.
The acquisitions would give Novell, already the leading provider of network operating system software, an instant stake in the market for application programs, notably Wordperfect's word processor and Borland's spreadsheet.


Machado Gets 12 Years in Prison
Former New York Mets and Milwaukee Brewers pitcher JULIO MACHADO was sentenced to a 12-year prison term yesterday by a judge in Venezuela, for fatally shooting a secretary after a traffic accident in 1991, according to Radio Rumbos.
The station said the sentence was handed down by Judge RAQUEL RIMER DE ORELLANA of the First Circuit Court in Barquisimeto, 180 miles east of Caracas.


And the Winners Were ...
BEST PICTURE "Schindler's List"  BEST DIRECTOR  Steven Spielberg "Schindler's List"  BEST ACTOR  Tom Hanks "Philadelphia"  BEST ACTRESS  Holly Hunter "The Piano"  BEST SUPPORTING ACTOR  Tommy Lee Jones "The Fugitive"  BEST SUPPORTING ACTRESS  Anna Paquin "The Piano"
A complete list is on page C18.


Pennsylvania Restrictions on Abortion Take Effect
The waiting room at Planned Parenthood's abortion clinic here was crowded as usual with somber young women and a few male companions.
But today was different.
The 14 women were the first group that the clinic was serving under the state's new abortion law, which took effect on Sunday after nearly six years of litigation.
The clinic's staff clearly resented having to comply with the regulations: a lecture on abortion by a doctor; a 24-hour waiting period, and, for women under the age of 18, the consent of a parent or a judge.


A Sure Sign That Summer Can't Be Far Away


Owners Debate Multi-Sport Ownership
The question of whether to dismantle the National Football League's persistent stance against allowing corporations or individuals who own other pro sports franchises to own an N.F.L. team was the chief item of discussion among the league owners this afternoon at their annual spring meeting.
One league official present at the meeting described the discussions as "hot and heavy."
The issue has been pushed to the forefront because the Miami Dolphins' present owners, led by the team president, Tim Robbie, want to sell the Dolphins -- for a reported $128 million to $138 million -- to H. Wayne Huizenga.
The problem is that Huizenga, who also owns Blockbuster Video, already owns baseball's Florida Marlins and hockey's Florida Panthers.


Westchester Replaces Medical Center Leadership
Westchester County replaced the leadership of its medical center today to gear itself up for the more fevered competition of the health-care marketplace of the future.
The action comes after several years in which the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla has seen New York City hospitals like Beth Israel, Mount Sinai and New York Hospital-Cornell pick off potential patients by affiliating with smaller hospitals and chains of doctors' offices.
Meanwhile, rival hospitals in the area have been gaining new referrals by aggressively seeking contracts with health-maintenance organizations.


Everglades: Paradise Not Quite Lost
AT first glance, the Everglades gives no obvious hint that even though it remains one of the world's superlative ecosystems it is sorely in need of restoration.
But such an effort is now getting under way, and none anywhere is more ambitious.
Along Shark River Slough, a main channel in the heart of the great marsh, cloud shadows race across a carpet of eye-high, wheat-colored sawgrass that flashes shades of lemon, lime and pink as it runs to the horizon.
Emerald tree islands break the flat expanse here and there.
Closer in, surrounded by clumps of algae that float among the sawgrass stems and form the base of the marsh's food pyramid, alligators lie in water less than a foot deep.
One carries her baby on her back.
Bullfrogs croak.
Turtles mate.
A deer delicately browses.
Wading birds like egrets, ibises, herons and wood storks hunt, preen and squawk.


Israeli Army Has Double Standard on Shooting, General Says
A former commander of Israeli forces in the occupied West Bank told an Israeli commission investigating the Hebron massacre today that the army's rules on firing during violent disturbances "discriminated" between Jews and Arabs.
The testimony by Brig.
Gen.
Moshe Yaalon, who was West Bank commander in 1992 and 1993, was the first in which a senior officer explicitly defined the army's policies on when to open fire as following different standards for Israelis and Palestinians.


Sports of The Times; Blues Faded After Keenan Said 'Potvin'
THESE trades will not help or hurt, you understand.
These trades are only a symptom of the full-riot-gear, all-hands-on-deck, man-the-battle-station panic that has been gripping the hallowed halls of Gulf &amp; Western or whoever owns the Rangers today.
For months now, I have been wondering how the Rangers would accomplish not winning the Stanley Cup this year, for the 54th consecutive season.
I'm not quite clear why the Rangers ever should win the Stanley Cup, but folks around New York think it is their divine right, the poor blokes.


Washington Talk; Advocating One Thing, Doing Just the Opposite
For months now, Senate Republicans and conservative Democrats have been bashing the Clinton Administration for cutting military spending too far, too fast.
But in the last few weeks, many of the same lawmakers who have trumpeted the need to increase military spending have voted in favor of measures that would slash billions of dollars from the Pentagon's budget in the name of fiscal responsibility.


The New Power Macs Seen as a Triple Threat
APPLE'S new Power Macintoshes have been unveiled at last.
There is a price war in the air, the software makers are making sweet promises, the competition is bellowing, and Macintosh shoppers are emerging from hibernation.
Spring has come once again to the computer industry.
The Power Mac desktop computers introduced last week at Lincoln Center in New York represent the most significant new products developed by Apple Computer Inc. in several years, at least since the Powerbook portables.


INSIDE
Salvadoran Right Holds On
In the first national election since El Salvador's civil war ended two years ago, the rightist governing party has won a sizable victory.
Page A3.
Accord Reached in Somalia
Somali faction leaders agreed to form an interim government and to distribute power later, in talks brokered by the United Nations.
Page A8.
Secret Talks on Data Deals
Microsoft and A.T.&amp; T. have been secretly exploring potential ventures, including interactive television and on-line computer services.
Page D1.
Unusual Raid on Teamsters
Hoping to halt the hemorrhage from its treasury, the Teamsters union sent agents to its four regional offices to take control of finances.
Page A12.
New President for Barnard
A champion of women's colleges was named to head Barnard College, and affirmed the value of an independent, single-sex Barnard.
Page B1.
Restoring the Everglades
An ambitious project is under way to preserve one of the world's most spectacular and endangered ecosystems.
Science Times, page C1.


Gore Sees Privatization Of Global Data Links
Discussing a favorite theme, Vice President Al Gore told a United Nations telecommunications conference here today that a "planetary information network" should be created to promote economic growth, foster democracy and "link the people of the world."
"It will be a means by which families and friends will transcend the barriers of time and distance," he said.
"It will make possible a global information marketplace, where consumers can buy and sell products."


Corrections
An article on March 7 about new car-pool lanes on Interstate 80 in Morris County, N.J., referred incorrectly in some editions to the number of such lanes in the metropolitan area.
In addition to sections of Interstate 84 and 91 in Connecticut, which were mentioned, the approaches to the upper level of the George Washington Bridge from Route 4 and Interstate 95 in New Jersey have car-pool lanes, and the Lincoln and Holland Tunnels have special approaches for buses and car pools during rush hours.


Mexico's Ruling Party Wins Under a Shadow
The ruling party appears to have won a state election in Mexico, but complaints of irregularities could add to fears about the fairness of Mexico's coming presidential election.
The election on Sunday for Governor of the state of Morelos, just south of the capital, was the last before the presidential contest on Aug. 21.
The Morelos race was considered safe for the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, but it was watched closely for indications of the depth of PRI's commitment to clean elections.


For Marquette, Misfits Aren't Miscast
The coach and his players have something special going.
Perhaps that could be said of all 16 teams left in the N.C.A.A.
Division I men's basketball tournament, but clearly none more than Marquette.
Kevin O'Neill has produced a Sweet 16 team off the nation's recruiting scrap heap, and as he playfully makes fun of his athletes, they just wink back.
"It's all in the family," said Tony Miller, his point guard.


No Headline
"I don't think the reason you have a women's college is because women think differently from men. But rather, that women need a place that belongs to them. The surrounding society is not one where the sexes are equal." -- JUDITH R. SHAPIRO, the new president of Barnard College.  [ B4:3. ]


Looking Casual, Japan's Prime Minister Ends Visit to China


CHRONICLE
Spago, the West Hollywood restaurant that's usually open seven nights a week, was dark last night.
"We closed in honor of Irving and Mary Lazar, as a tribute," BARBARA LAZAROFF, who owns the restaurant with her husband, WOLFGANG PUCK, said yesterday, referring to the couple whose annual Oscar night party was for many years the most sought-after invitation in Hollywood.
Mr.
Lazar, the agent known as Swifty, died in December at the age of 86; Mrs.
Lazar died the previous January.


Accounts
*
Automatic Data Processing, Roseland, N.J., to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct, New York, from Lowe Direct,, New York, as the advertising agency of record on its account, with billings estimated at $6 million.
Ogilvy Direct was awarded the account following a review that included Wunderman Cato Johnson, New York, as the other finalist.


Xerox Picks E.D.S. for Data Duties
In possibly the largest contract of its kind, the Xerox Corporation yesterday selected Electronic Data Systems, the data-processing unit of General Motors, to take over most of its information-management operations.
A Xerox spokesman, Jeff Simek, said that the two companies were still negotiating terms of the contract.
Industry analysts have estimated that it is worth about $4 billion over a 10-year period, significantly more than the $3 billion contract that the Computer Sciences Corporation signed with General Dynamics in 1991.
Mr.
Simek would not comment on the length or cost of the contract, but did say that it would probably be signed in June.


Mayor Picks Rye Official For Jail Post
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani will name Anthony J. Schembri, the Police Commissioner of Rye, as Correction Commissioner today, replacing Catherine M. Abate, who has run New York City's jail system for nearly two years, a senior administration official said last night.
Two officials close to the Mayor said yesterday that Ms.
Abate, one of the few holdovers from the Dinkins administration, had been asked to resign.
Calls to her office were referred to the Mayor's office.


Stocks Fall on Anxiety Over Interest Rates
Stock traders did not have to reach for their third cup of coffee yesterday.
The pre-dawn news of a sharp drop in the Hong Kong market was eye-opening enough.
But if today is anything like yesterday, many sleepless traders may be carrying thermoses of coffee with them.
If the Federal Reserve Board does not deliver today the interest-rate increase that traders and investors seem to be demanding, to stem an inflation that does not yet exist, then traders will swoon, and stocks may plunge.
Traders will spend the next few days or weeks trying to outmaneuver the expectations that a rate increase is still around the corner.


The 'Wrong' Sex: A New Definition Of Childhood Pain
EVEN when he was just 3 years old, the boy spent hours preening himself in front of a mirror, dressed up in his mother's clothes, makeup and jewelry.
He shied away from rough-and-tumble games with other boys, preferring to play dolls with girls.
His favorite stories featured women: Snow White, Rapunzel and Alice in Wonderland.
He hated being a boy, he said; he'd rather be a girl.
He once told his therapist, "if you wear girls' clothes you could really become a girl."


Hunt Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Devil Shots Earn Half A Reward
It was not lost on the Devils that the Rangers made five trades today before the National Hockey League trading deadline, while the Devils made none involving an N.H.L. player.
"Obviously they're thinking about us," said center Bernie Nicholls.
"They were sitting comfortably a month ago. Now we're right there with them. They felt a need to make deals and we didn't. Hopefully we can prove now that our decision was correct."


Reliance Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Uncovered Short Sales Increase on 2 Exchanges
Apparently emboldened by recent weakness in stock prices, speculators pushed up the number of shares sold short and not yet covered in the most recent reporting period, two stock exchanges reported yesterday.
The New York Stock Exchange said its total short position increased 3.4 percent during the monthlong period ended March 8, to a record 1.37 billion shares.
The increase was the second largest in the last six months, and seemed to reflect rising confidence among bears that the long-awaited, often-predicted market correction was beginning.


PATTERNS
Speaking of Accessories
Robert Lee Morris, taking on the role of interviewer for the Council of Fashion Designers of America's video about accessories, was having the same sort of problem that Larry King might experience: his subject just wasn't agreeing with the interview premise.
Mr.
Morris reworded and cajoled, but he just couldn't get Candy Pratts Price, Vogue's fashion director of accessories, to agree that Vogue, in a fit of minimalism, had abandoned accessories.


Harvard School Drops Publishing Unit's Chief
The executive who hired and then tossed aside two editors for The Harvard Business Review, and who was about to lose the magazine's publisher, discovered yesterday that she was being forced out of her job.
The Harvard Business School replaced Ruth R. McMullin as the president and chief executive of its publishing unit.
The unit, which oversees all of the school's publishing activities from books to videos, has been struggling to find its way in an increasingly cluttered marketplace.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Sent Michael Jordan, outfielder, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.


Apple and I.B.M. Offer Look at Their Microsoft Challenge
Taligent Inc., the joint venture of Apple Computer and I.B.M., gave computer industry executives here today the first public look at the software system that it hopes will challenge the Microsoft Corporation's dominance of the computer software business.
The Taligent system is intended to change how software developers write programs and users operate machines, and the company gave a peek at the new approach to using computers.


Lesson of Kites and Snails
IN Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge, the northernmost stretch of the remaining Everglades ecosystem, the difference that water quantity makes to the Everglades' biological health has been strikingly demonstrated in the case of a hawklike bird called the snail kite.
The Loxahatchee reserve is perhaps the ecosystem's healthiest and most vital segment.
Its upper reaches are a mosaic of relatively open and deep water decorated by white lilies and punctuated by lush tree islands.
Wading birds of several kinds flee the approach of a roaring airboat.
The lower reaches consist of classic wet prairies of sawgrass, which stands well above a person's head but bends easily for the boat's swift passage.


Capital Mayor Now Faces Voters Uneasy With Her
Four years ago, Sharon Pratt Kelly campaigned for mayor brandishing a broom and shovel that she said were needed to clean up the fiscal and bureaucratic mess left by her predecessor, Marion S. Barry Jr.
Today, Mrs.
Kelly may need that shovel to dig herself out of the political morass she has stumbled into.


Bruins' Neely Lost for Season
CAM NEELY of the Boston Bruins, the second-leading goal scorer in the National Hockey League, is out for the season with a torn knee ligament.
Neely, who has 50 goals in 49 games, was injured after becoming entangled with New Jersey defenseman KEN DANEYKO in the third period of Saturday's game at Boston Garden.
He twisted his right knee as the two players slid past the net and into the boards.
The 28-year-old right wing underwent a magnetic resonance imaging test at Massachusetts General Hospital yesterday and later met with the team's physician, Dr.
BERT ZARINS.


Leader in House Proposes Trims On Health Plan
A powerful House committee chairman is circulating a scaled-back alternative to President Clinton's health care bill.
It would maintain the President's goal of health insurance for all Americans while cutting the bureaucracy to administer it, reducing the cost to small business and promising not to increase the Federal deficit.
The plan, being put forward by Representative John D. Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who heads the Energy and Commerce Committee, is the first significant movement by Mr.
Clinton's supporters to trim the President's plan in the hope of gaining enough votes to pass it.


Tracking Down Michigan Moose No. 9 for a 600-Mile Checkup
HIS ears, yellowish-brown, were as soft as velvet, all 10 inches of them.
His staring eyes were huge.
He let out a low snort as his broad nose was stroked.
His long legs were folded under his enormous body in the deep snow.
This was Michigan's Moose No. 9 in repose, briefly tranquilized by darts carrying a powerful narcotic.
It had taken wildlife biologists on snowshoes upward of two hours to track him, using hand-held radio directional antennas tuned to a transmitter attached to a leather collar on a second bull moose, who was quite probably one of No. 9's offspring.
The two had bedded side by side in a forest of balsam, black spruce, hemlock, silver maple and yellow birch in temperatures of zero and below.


Officer Is Stopped With Stolen Plates
A New York City police officer who faced dismissal from the force four years ago was arrested Sunday in New Jersey when a state trooper who stopped him for speeding found stolen license plates on the officer's personal car, the authorities said yesterday.
Police officials from New York City and New Jersey said they could not explain why the officer, Willie L. Thomas, an 11-year veteran assigned to the 23d Precinct in East Harlem, had the stolen New York State plates on his 1990 Acura when he was stopped in southern New Jersey shortly after 5 P.M.
Sunday.


Gartner and Amonte Go in Rangers' 5-Deal Flurry


Mercer-Ferguson Referee Claims He Heard Nothing
The man closest to the action in the Ray Mercer-Jesse Ferguson fight, Referee Wayne Kelly, has told investigators he did not hear Mercer make a bribe offer to Ferguson during their bout 13 months ago.
Yesterday, the prosecution made the reluctant admission it may be forced to call Kelly to the stand.
One of Mercer's defense lawyers, Dominic Amorosa, told the jury in his opening statement last week that the prosecution would not call Kelly.
Assistant District Attorney Roslynn Mauskopf contended yesterday that the remark was "improper," presumably because it planted in the jury's mind the idea that the prosecution was withholding a witness who could testify to Mercer's innocence.
She said the prosecution reserves the right to call Kelly.


Continuing Prayers for the Rebbe


Bell Atlantic Looks Ahead
Just a month after the collapse of a proposed merger with Tele-Communications Inc., the chairman of Bell Atlantic, Raymond W. Smith, vowed today that his company would make other deals to transform itself into a communications and entertainment business.
"The merger with T.C.I. was a means to an end, not the end itself," Mr.
Smith told delegates at the National Association of Broadcasters convention here.
"Our intention to be a video provider predated our attempt to merge with T.C.I."


The Dean on the Bicycle
To the Editor:
"Wouldn't anyone want to be a law school dean?" asks David Margolick's March 11 At the Bar column, and answers, "Not really, as some current searches confirm." I'm reminded of an observation by Hardy Cross Dillard, University of Virginia Law School dean from 1963 to 1968: "The deanship requires someone bright enough to do the job and stupid enough to take it."


New Yorker's Job: Snagging Hurtling Bodies
Ladies and gentlemen, and children of all ages: Performing now in Ring 3 with the Flying Vargas, the world renowned fifth-generation Mexican family of circus aerialists, is that dashing young trapeze artist, Peter Gold.
Peter Gold?


Tech Data Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Metropolitan Reports Profit
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company announced yesterday that it grew in 1993 and earned a profit despite unfavorable publicity about improper sales practices of some agents.
Although Met officials have said that other companies have taken advantage of its problems to poach on Met Life customers, financial reports issued yesterday showed that the annualized premiums and other sales for the year grew to $15.2 billion from $13.4 billion a year earlier.
Sales of personal insurance, which accounted for about a quarter of all sales, grew more than 25 percent in the year.


People
*
John Glorieux, an executive vice president and account managing director at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, was named chief executive at Young &amp; Rubicam London, succeeding Jerry Judge, who left to join Lowe Howard-Spink, London, as chief executive.
Y.&amp; R. New York has not yet named a successor to Mr.
Glorieux, 47, who has handled worldwide responsibilities on the Dr Pepper KFC, and Army accounts. *
Tom Hanft was named to the new position of senior vice president and account management director at Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco.
He had previously been account services director at Campbell Mithum Esty, Minneapolis.


Sphere Drake Holdings Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


King High Stops Lincoln and Marbury for City 'A' Title
From the opening tipoff of the Public Schools Athletic League A Championhip between Lincoln and Martin Luther King high schools last night at Madison Square Garden, many of the 9,520 spectators filled the arena with shrieks of "You the man, Stephon, you the man!"
But when the final buzzer sounded, and Martin Luther King stormed off the floor with a 73-66 upset, Lincoln's Stephon Marbury, who most basketball experts consider the top guard in the nation, no longer seemed to be a man playing among boys.


Franklin Quest Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Playing Again O.K. for Mullen
The convulsive seizure that struck Brian Mullen during an Islander practice on Sunday may keep him from rejoining the team this season but should pose no obstacle to his resuming his career next fall.
That was the word yesterday from Dr.
Ralph Sacco, the neurologist who has cared for Mullen since the forward suffered a stroke last August.


Eckerd Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Giuliani Tells Blacks His Budget Won't Cut Into the Gains They Have Made
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani told a predominantly black group of business owners yesterday that although his budget-closing plans would be painful, the pain would not fall disproportionately on black New Yorkers.
Speaking at a luncheon of the Greater Harlem Chamber of Commerce, the Mayor noted that it was unlikely that many in the audience were among his supporters and he sought to ease fears that his administration's budget plans would be more severe on black New Yorkers


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location will be shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ADD POLICE TO CUTS, FISCAL AGENCY URGES
The chairman of the state's Municipal Assistance Corporation called on Mayor Giuliani to include police officers, firefighters and teachers in his budget cuts as a way of proving to other municipal unions that the sacrifices he expects of them will be shared by all.
A1.


Macdonald Carey, 81, Film Actor With a Soap Opera Career, Dies
Macdonald Carey, who flourished in the 1940's and 50's as one of Hollywood's handsome leading men and then spent the better part of three decades playing a kindly patriarch, Dr.
Tom Horton, on the NBC television soap opera "Days of Our Lives," died yesterday at his home in Beverly Hills.
He was 81.
In September 1991, Mr.
Carey had a cancerous tumor removed from his lung.
He returned to the television show after a period of recuperation.


Guilty Plea by Arkansas Man Linked to the Clinton Inquiry
Government lawyers confirmed today that David Hale, a former municipal judge in Little Rock, Ark., planned to enter a guilty plea on Tuesday as part of an agreement with the special prosecutor investigating President Clinton's real estate investments in Arkansas.
As is usual in such arrangements, prosecutors would not say to what charge Mr.
Hale, who had been facing a trial later this month on fraud charges, would plead.
He is expected, however, to plead guilty to at least one felony and has agreed to cooperate with the prosecutors in their inquiry.


In Atlantic City, Suspicion Is a Way of Life; Casino Agents Keep an Eye on Things . . . and People, and Machines
Security in a gambling casino, where millions of dollars change hands every day, is an around-the-clock exercise in making sure the wrong hands don't pocket some of them along the way.
At the slot machines, at the green felt gambling tables and elsewhere out of sight, hundreds of eyes and hidden television cameras watch the players, the dealers and milling onlookers for the moment when temptation and opportunity lead a patron or employee to cheat, filch or, as happened last month on a crowded casino floor, rob.


On My Mind; No More Mr. Hangdog
Step back one clear minute and we discover this about Clinton foreign policy:
On two of the most important issues in the world the U.S. is acting with coolness and courage, the only country providing leadership or sense of direction.


Making Hospitals a Little Less Scary


Observer; Why Alma Slept
As you know, the world is speeding toward a total communications breakdown even as the communications industry foolishly thumps its chest about the coming glories of the information superhighway.
Evidence amassed by our researchers leaves no doubt the cataclysm will occur sooner than original projections indicated.
Those were based on the number of telephone callers who required police attention after encountering phone-answering machines, voice-mail systems and robotic phone instructions.


Clarcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Critic's Notebook; Viewing Violence: Harmful, but How and to Whom?
Salvos keep being fired off in the battle over television violence.
It is a juicy mark and has already invited enough noise and smoke to violate environmental rules about public issues.
The "something must be dones!" give no sign of diminishing.
Last Friday "Investigative Reports," Bill Kurtis's series on the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network, got around to the subject.
This follows hard upon a conference on "Children and the News Media" (carried in part by C-Span) that I attended early this month at Stanford University.
Both sounded alarms without doing much to clarify what one of Mr.
Kurtis's experts called mildly "an often-confusing debate."


Butcher Decides to Call It Quits
SUSAN BUTCHER has announced her retirement from the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race, the 1,100-mile mushing marathon that she has won four times.
Butcher, 39, made the announcement at Sunday night's Iditarod awards dinner.


Arthur Taubman, Entrepreneur, 92; Aided Jews in War
Arthur Taubman, a self-made businessman who built the Advance Stores auto parts chain into a multimillion-dollar business, died on March 15 at his home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 92.
During World War II, Mr.
Taubman also helped about 500 European Jews reach the United States by filing affidavits with the immigration authorities saying the Jews were relatives.
When questioned by Federal officials, he said any Jew facing death in Nazi-occupied Europe was his first cousin.


SENIOR DEMOCRATS BACK FULL HEARING INTO WHITEWATER
In a day of curious political handsprings over the Whitewater matter, senior House Democrats abruptly canceled what was to be Congress's first serious hearing on the affair.
But then realizing that they appeared to be concealing something, they hastily called for full-scale hearings as early as next month.
As a result, the Democrats, who planned to permit only incidental queries about the affair at a routine hearing on Thursday on the savings-and-loan bailout, now seem to have committed themselves to a far broader hearing with testimony that is potentially more damaging.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FRUIT OF THE LOOM INC., Chicago, said it had completed the acquisition of Gitano Group Inc., New York, for $100 million.


Political Chaos in Zaire Disrupts Efforts to Control AIDS Epidemic
While many African countries denied the existence of an AIDS problem for much of the last decade, Zaire was different.
It had a vigorous prevention campaign, the continent's best-trained scientists and best-equipped laboratories outside South Africa, and a steady flow of money from abroad to help fight the epidemic.
These days, Zaire's fortunes have never seemed bleaker.
Recent surveys and anecdotal evidence suggest that the epidemic is accelerating at a startling rate.
Some hospitals report that close to 80 percent of their patients are infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


Market Place; Winners and losers as Japan expands cellular phones.
WHILE it has garnered all the headlines, the new trade agreement that improves access for Motorola is not the biggest development in Japan's cellular telephone market.
Come April 1, regulatory changes will unleash a new burst of competition, spurring growth for the heretofore sluggish industry and providing new opportunities and new pitfalls for investors.
Consumers will be able to buy portable phones for the first time, instead of having to lease them from the phone company at inflated rates.
Consumer electronics manufacturers will flood into the market, driving down the price of handsets.


Bonilla Bothered By Batting
Bobby Bonilla never swung and missed during his two times at bat this afternoon at Thomas J. White Stadium.
For that, he is grateful.
When Bonilla makes contact with the ball while batting right-handed, he does not feel searing pain from his injured right rib cage.
Otherwise, though, he is still in trouble.


Boy Who Disappeared Seeks Rabbi as Guardian
The turbulent saga of 15-year-old Shai Fhima took another turn today when the youth tried to flee from his mother's home and later reopened a court petition to live with an Orthodox rabbi in Rockland County.
After spending three days with his divorced parents, which included shopping at a mall in Wayne, N.J., watching some movies and engaging in a playful water-pistol duel with his 10-year-old half brother, the youth decided he wanted to resume a strict religious life, his lawyer, Eric Ole Thorsen, said after a late afternoon court hearing here.


VIACOM CONSOLIDATES AFTER BUYOUT OF PARAMOUNT
In a revamping of Viacom Inc. in the wake of its buyout of Paramount Communications, the company said yesterday that it was consolidating all its interactive and new-media business under Edward D. Horowitz, a newly appointed senior vice president for technology and chairman and chief executive for new media and interactive television.
Mr.
Horowitz will oversee a newly created unit that incorporates Viacom New Media, which develops interactive software, including the company's interactive test in Castro Valley, Calif.
The unit will also include the Paramount Technology Group.


Earnest H. Royal, 76, Vermont Restaurateur
Earnest H. Royal, a Vermont restaurateur and long-time board member of the National Restaurant Association, died on March 13 at Rutland Regional Medical Center.
He was 76 and lived in Lake Bomoseen.
The cause was a heart attack, said Willa Royal, his wife of 56 years.


Job Extinction Evolving Into a Fact of Life in U.S.
The economy is growing and American companies are prospering, but announcements of job cuts this year are more numerous than ever.
While there are no good measures of how much "fat" still remains in corporate America, the pressures are such that cuts seem likely to continue for months, or even years.
This is an unusual moment.
Although many American companies have become as efficient and modern as those in Japan and Germany, several forces have arisen that continue to push them to shed workers.
Advances in technology are allowing companies to produce much more with fewer employees.
With price increases hard to get, companies increasingly maintain profits by slicing labor costs.
And job shedding has become fashionable -- the mark of a good manager.
A whole industry of consultants has arisen to preach it.
No End in Sight
"It is going to be a permanent condition, that companies are constantly reorganizing and reshaping themselves," said Audrey Freedman, a labor economist and consultant, referring to the job cutbacks that have become a regular event among prosperous as well as hard-pressed companies.


Classical Music in Review
Orchester der Beethovenhalle Bonn  Avery Fisher Hall
Dennis Russell Davies, the American conductor, brought his German orchestra to Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday evening.
In the first of two consecutive evenings, the Orchester der Beethovenhalle Bonn, where Mr.
Davies is general music director, played music by Brahms, Beethoven and Victor Ullmann.


Verona Journal; Where Juliet Pined, Teen-Agers Now Plot Murder
Since Shakespeare's day one thing has set this city apart from other gracious Italian places, at least in the minds of its visitors -- romance.
But these days, winged love and tender words seem the last things on Verona's mind.
With a series of killings staining its image of itself, the sweet sorrow has turned sour and the city's elders seem more preoccupied with a question they would rather not ask or answer in public: Has the city fallen prey to what people call the "Verona syndrome," meaning, in the words of a local reporter, "a concentration of evil" among its young people?


Exel Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


The 1994 Oscar Winners
Here are the winners of Oscars at the 66th annual Academy Awards ceremony:
Film: "Schindler's List," Universal


Tadiran Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Out of the Boudoir and Into the Real World
Is that a slip or dress?
Is that a T-shirt or an undershirt?
Is that a bathrobe or an evening coat?
The answer is that if you can't tell, it doesn't matter.
Many of the same styles show up in high-fashion and innerwear collections, and savvy women have discovered they can often get the same thing for less money in the underwear department.
A few years ago it was bustiers and camisoles to wear under suit jackets; now, it's T-shirts under slip dresses.


Trans World Music Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Private labels, once dull, no-frills staples, are now being promoted with the fanfare of name brands.
PRIVATE label is going public.
Private-label products are the pantry staples usually sold under the names of the supermarkets and other stores offering them to shoppers as lower-priced alternatives to nationally advertised name brands.
Traditionally, they have been shelf sleepers, clad in prosaic packages, bearing soporific names and promoted only in ad circulars and along the aisles in which they slumbered.


Don't Force All Americans Into Managed Care; Provide Incentives
To the Editor:
Your March 10 editorial is on the mark to call for "integrated networks of doctors and hospitals that are paid a fixed annual fee for taking care of enrollees."


Executive Changes
ABN AMRO BANK U.S.A., Chicago, named Thomas F. Fleming Jr. executive vice president and manager of the bank's New York branch.
Mr.
Fleming had been managing director of the insurance and mutual fund department at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.
AMERICAN EXPRESS CO., New York, named Timothy S. Davis senior vice president for government affairs, succeeding Richard M. Moose, who joined the State Department as Under Secretary for Management.


Don't Force All Americans Into Managed Care; Medicare's Success
To the Editor:
The gratuitous criticism of the Medicare program in "Mr. Stark's Race Backward" (editorial, March 10) represents opinions not supported by the data.
While Medicare certainly has problems that can and should be addressed, it is a far more successful program than you indicate.


Quake or No Quake, the Show Must Go On
The movie stars and the nominees and the studio executives who arrived in stretch limos at the 66th annual Academy Award ceremonies were jittery.
It wasn't just the awards.
It was the aftershock.
The big 5.3 magnitude aftershock on Sunday afternoon, which sent people fleeing stores and movie theaters, rattled nerves as well.
Even movie-star nerves.


Spielberg Wins at Last With 7 Oscars for 'Schindler's List'
"Schindler's List," Steven Spielberg's wrenching drama about the Holocaust, dominated the 66th annual Academy Awards last night, winning seven Oscars, including those for best picture and best director.
The film, which was lavishly praised by the critics and scored a solid hit at the box office, was considered a shoo-in in both categories.
The awards were a milestone in Mr.
Spielberg's career.
Although he is the most commercially successful director in Hollywood history, an Oscar, and recognition by the academy as a serious cinematic artist, eluded him until last night.
He was previously nominated as a director three times, for "Close Encounters of the Third Kind," "Raiders of the Lost Ark" and "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial." As a producer, he had been nominated twice, for "E.T." and "The Color Purple."


CBS's Pilson: Hit Man Leaveth
The announcement last Friday that Neal Pilson would step down as president of CBS Sports came as no surprise.
Every few months, the rumors revived.
When the Winter Olympics ended last month, the grapevine came alive once again.
Last Friday, Pilson asked for reassignment to the CBS Broadcast Group as a senior vice president, working on new business.
Pilson did not want to discuss how voluntary his request for reassignment was.
Nonetheless, colleagues said he had discussed wanting to leave CBS Sports by the time he turned 55, a year from April.


Clinton Target: Teen-Age Pregnancy
President Clinton's assistants have drafted a plan that urges him to lead "nothing less than a national mobilization" against teen-age pregnancy and promote some of the values that have historically been seized by Republicans, including sexual abstinence.
The plan is intriguing less for its specific recommendations, which are still being debated, than for its thematic thrust.
It would use a Democratic bully pulpit to emphasize the importance of work, family and personal responsibility -- the same themes that Republicans have often used in contending that the Democratic Party lacks mainstream values.


U.S. Goes to U.N. to Increase The Pressure on North Korea
The United States started to build support today at the United Nations for tougher measures against North Korea, including economic sanctions.
It also moved toward strengthening its military position on the Korean peninsula by ordering the dispatch of Patriot anti-missile interceptors.
The Administration's actions are the latest moves in the growing confrontation between the United States and North Korea over the Koreans' refusal to allow full inspection of its nuclear program.


CHRONICLE
BLAINE TRUMP was feeling pretty virtuous while dining on caviar and scallops at the Russian Tea Room on Sunday night.
Mrs.
Trump, a board member of God's Love We Deliver, an organization that delivers hot meals to homebound people with AIDS, was participating in a fund-raiser for the group.


Somalia's Faction Leaders Agree to Form an Interim Government
Somali faction leaders agreed today on the formation of an interim government and said they would sign a "declaration of national reconciliation" on Tuesday, a United Nations spokesman said.
The spokesman for the United Nations operation in Somalia, George Bennett, said the agreement was reached after several days of talks in Nairobi between leaders of all 15 Somali factions.
The meetings were mediated by the United Nations special representative to Somalia, Lansana Kouyate.


B.C. Now The Honored Survivor In Sweet 16
They were responsible for those loud noises you may have heard late Sunday afternoon, the door that slammed shut on the University of North Carolina while 16 others, from here to Florida and all the way to Arizona, creaked open amid the screams.
By the time the Boston College Eagles returned home Sunday night to a greeting not unlike the one the football team received following its victory at Notre Dame exactly four months before, they had become the favorites of a coast-to-coast following.
Because the Eagles, with their memorable victory over the defending national champions, had created Anybody's Tournament.


Dallas Journal; Crime Learns a Sanctuary's Address
In a city that delights in designer-label neighborhoods and cars, a recent series of violent crimes in the upscale North Dallas section has come like a sucker punch of reality.
Two men were shot to death this month in their driveways in an area of sprawling ranch-style houses and two-story Georgians where murders are not supposed to happen.
After all, Mayor Steve Bartlett lives there, as does Ross Perot.


Cal's Kidd Seems Pro Bound
California's all-America point guard, JASON KIDD, has called a news conference for tomorrow and The San Francisco Chronicle reported that the sophomore was expected to enter the National Basketball Association draft.
Kidd, who has led Cal to National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament berths in two straight seasons, was not available for comment yesterday, the school's sports information office said.
Cal Coach TODD BOZEMAN did not immediately return a phone call seeking a comment.
There has been speculation through the season this would be the final collegiate season for Kidd, the national leader in assists.
He has two seasons of eligibility left.
His high-scoring teammate, LAMOND MURRAY, a junior, also was expected to leave school early for the N.B.A. draft on June 29.


RESULTS PLUS
N.I.T.
Xavier Beats Northwestern  At Evanston, Ill., Jeff Massey hit a go-ahead jumper in overtime and Brian Grant made 2 free throws with 4 seconds leftlast night to lead Xavier to an 83-79 victory over Northwestern in the second round of the National Invitation Tournament. (AP)


Cable Giant To Establish Distinct Units
Tele-Communications Inc. confirmed yesterday that it was carrying out a broad reorganization that would create four separate divisions.
The company plans to divide its operations into a domestic cable and communications operation, a programming company, an international cable operation and a venture capital arm, said Lela Corcouras, a Tele-Communications spokeswoman.


Q&amp;A
Pineapple Seeds
Q.  Where are the pineapple's seeds?


Russia Is Holding Up Seed Bought by U.S.  For Armenia Relief
More than a thousand tons of wheat seed purchased by the United States for this beleaguered country, where there are lines for rationed bread, are being held up by Russia, which is demanding payment of a 30 percent export duty, according to relief organizations and American diplomats here.
Under an agreement signed by the United States and Russia two years ago, no duties are to be imposed on the import or export of relief assistance.


Reinstatement of Charges Is Sought in a Rape Case
State Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell asked a court yesterday to reinstate a first-degree rape indictment against five upstate men who acknowledged that they had sexual intercourse with a woman who was unconscious.
The men had been permitted to plead guilty to minor charges and fined a total of $840 each.
In his motion, filed in State Supreme Court in Canton, Mr.
Koppell said the plea bargain was invalid because of a series of procedural errors by the District Attorney handling the case and the town court judge who accepted the defendants' guilty pleas to misdemeanor charges.
A hearing on the motion was set for April 15 before Acting Justice Eugene L. Nicandri.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  TALKS ON NORTH KOREA SANCTIONS  The United States opened talks at the United Nations on possible economic sanctions toward North Korea and took steps to strengthen its military position in South Korea.
A1  MENACE OF AIDS IN ZAIRE  Political chaos in Zaire and the withdrawal of Western aid have destroyed the country's progressive AIDS prevention and treatment program, with the rate of the disease increasing at a startling rate.
A1  ISRAELI POLICY AT ISSUE  A witness told the commission investigating the massacre in Hebron that different standards exist for treatment of Israelis and Palestinians, raising broader issues about policy in the territories.
A10  The massacre caused grief and challenged Palestinian honor.
A10  Israel and the P.L.O. talked about resuming negotiations.
A10  SERBS VIOLATED ORDER  United Nations peacekeepers said they found a cache of Serbian weapons in the area around Sarajevo from which the Serbs had been ordered to withdraw them.
A5  TENSE TALKS IN RUSSIA  President Boris Yeltsin of Russia and the Prime Minister were having talks described as "important and difficult" after a weekend of rumors about Mr.
Yeltsin's physical and political health and whereabouts.
A11  Russia demanded an export duty on U.S. aid for Armenia.
A11  SOMALIA PLAN APPROVED  Somali faction leaders agreed in talks brokered by the United Nations to form an interim government, under a plan that leaves the distribution of power in a new Government until later.
A8  SALVADORAN RIGHT WINS  El Salvador's rightist governing party won a sizable victory over leftists in the first national elections since the end of the country's civil war two years ago, though a presidential runoff vote might be needed.
A3  The ruling party won a state election in Mexico.
A3  In South Africa, 21 prisoners died in a protest.
A8  Verona Journal: Something is rotten in Verona.
A4  National A12-17, B6  WHITEWATER, OFF AND ON  House Democrats abruptly called off what was to be the first serious Congressional hearing on the Waterwater affair and then, realizing they appeared to be concealing something, hastily called for hearings as early as next month.
A1  A man linked to the Clinton inquiry accepted a plea agreement.
B6  NO QUICK END TO JOB CUTS  American companies are prospering, but announcements of job cuts this year are more numerous than ever and seem likely to continue for months, or even years.
A1  SCALED-BACK HEALTH PLAN  In the first significant move from supporters of President Clinton's health plan to scale back his proposal in the interest of winning Congressional approval, a powerful house committee chairman is circulating a reduced version.
A1  THERE'S SMOKE AND IRE  When New York City lawmakers proposed an anti-smoking laws last week, they joined a nationwide trend in which a confusing morass of laws backed by weak enforcement but strong peer pressure is making the use of tobacco increasingly an act, like sex, that is suitable only for the privacy of a home.
A1  TEAMSTERS RAID THEMSELVES  The national Teamsters president sent agents to four regional offices to confiscate bank accounts and records in hopes of halting the financial drain that threatens to wipe out the union's strike fund.
A12  FEAR IN PROSPEROUS DALLAS  Dallas Journal: A series of violent crimes has jolted an affluent area of North Dallas.
Prosperous homeowners have become targets of young robbers who cruise local highways looking for expensive cars, then follow them home.
A12  A MAYOR UNDER FIRE  With Washington's financial problems worsening and the city facing long plague of drug-related killings, residents are demanding changes, and the Mayor, Sharon Pratt Kelly, appears to be the target of their frustration.
A14  TWO SIDES OF LAWMAKING  Washington Talk: Illustrating how lawmakers often say one thing and do another on difficult political issues, some of the same members of Congress who have been criticizing plans to cut the military budget have been voting for measures to slash Pentagon spending.
A14  DEVELOPING INNER CITIES  The Department of Housing and Urban Development announced an unusual partnership with private companies and foundations to encourage development in distressed neighborhoods.
A15  A PLAN ON TEEN PREGNANCY  In a plan intriguing more for its theme than its content, President Clinton's aides are urging him to undertake a campaign against teen-age pregnancy, promoting values like sexual abstinence.
B6  Pennsylvania's restrictive abortion law went into effect.
A12  Seven people died in a Chicago arson fire, and a man was charged.
A15  Florida was urged to compensate victims of a racial attack.
A17  Metro Digest B1  A CALL FOR SHARING BUDGET PAIN  The chairman of the state Municipal Assistance Corporation urged Mayor Giuliani to include police officers, firefighters and teachers in his budget cuts as a way of proving he expects everyone to sacrifice.
A1  Business Digest D1  Fashion Page B7  Out of the boudoir, into the real world.
Science Times C1-13  A gleam of hope for the Everglades in a restoration plan.
C1  A new definition offered for gender-identity disorder in children.
C1  A huge number is about to be conquered, mathematicians say.
C1  The Doctor's World: How did a surgeon spread hepatitis B?
C3  Naturalists elated over the success of a moose lift in Michigan.
C4  Arts/Entertainment C15-22  Oscar night in Hollywood.
C15  That man on the flying trapeze.
C15  South by Southwest music conference.
C15  Film: "Clean, Shaven." C19  Books: Studying Bach like baseball teams.
C21  Obituaries B8  Macdonald Carey, actor.
Sports B9-15  Baseball: Selig and senators tangle on antitrust.
B9  Basketball: Boston College most honored survivor.
B9  Hockey: Rangers make sweeping changes.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Beware the hawks on Korea.
Crime decisions for the House.
Suds appeal.
Reclaiming cities, street by street.
Letters  Russell Baker: Why Alma slept.
A.
M.
Rosenthal: No more Mr.
Hangdog.
Mark Riebling: Counterintelligent system.
Chronicle B4 Chess C12  Crossword C21


Pollution Of Water Tied to Oil In Ecuador
AFTER three decades of oil exploration and production in Ecuador's Amazon region, sections of the rain forest are now so contaminated that Indians and colonists living there are exposed to high risks of cancer, a new water sample study indicates.
"Drinking water, bathing and fishing water and produced water samples contained levels of toxic oil constituents many times greater than" the safety guidelines set by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the study concluded.
The report was released yesterday in Washington by the Center for Economic and Social Rights, a New York-based health and human rights group.


2 Rival Plans Submitted For Macy
Failing to reach an agreement on a single plan to get R. H. Macy &amp; Company out of bankruptcy, the company's board yesterday submitted two proposals to Cyrus R. Vance, the court-appointed mediator in the case.
The board, which has split over how to value Macy, is scheduled to meet again today, people close to the company said yesterday.
Macy is to present its plan of reorganization to creditors Wednesday.


Selig Tangles With Senators on Antitrust
A hearing into baseball's exemption from antitrust laws produced a prolonged contentious exchange today between Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, and Senator Howard Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, over the authority of the commissioner under the owners' restructuring of the office.
"The fact is he has more authority than he had in the past," Selig said in one exchange.


Teamsters Chief Raids Regional Offices
In an extraordinary maneuver, Ron Carey, the president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, sent agents to all four union regional headquarters in the United States today to keep watch over their bank accounts and financial records.
Calling the offices "fertile ground for corruption and mob influence," Mr.
Carey said he wanted to shut them down and divert dues they collect to the deeply depleted coffers of the national headquarters.
The teamsters, long the nation's richest union and a generous dispenser of contributions to politicians, is in desperate straits these days, with a membership that has plummeted to 1.4 million today from nearly 2 million 15 years ago.
In a telephone news conference after today's raids, Mr.
Carey said that at current spending levels the union could be out of strike-support funds by June and all other operating funds by next year.


Reclaiming Cities, Street by Street
Scour the Federal budget and you will not find an urban policy that comes close to addressing the decrepit housing and economic deprivation of city ghettos.
A creative plan announced yesterday by the Federal Government, seven foundations and three corporations is therefore welcome.
The unusual private-public coalition pledged to put almost $90 million behind local community development corporations, called C.D.C.'s, that build housing and commercial enterprises in the country's worst-off central city neighborhoods.
The $90 million is expected to trigger an additional $660 million from private lenders and other sources.


RESORTS INTERNATIONAL FILES BANKRUPTCY PLAN
Merv Griffin's Resorts International Inc. filed a prepackaged bankruptcy plan today under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code to eliminate almost $500 million in debt.


Microsoft and A.T.&amp;T.'s Brief Fling
Even as Craig O. McCaw and William H. Gates planned their newly disclosed $9 billion satellite communications venture, Mr.
McCaw was attempting to play matchmaker between Mr.
Gates's Microsoft Corporation and top officials of A.T.&amp; T. in an effort to draw the two companies into a strategic alliance.
For three months, the world's largest software and telecommunications companies have been secretly exploring a series of potential joint ventures including interactive television, on-line computer services and software.


Miscellany
*
Brockway Direct Response Television, Huntington, L.I., has formed a unit, Brockway New Venture Partnerships, to finance infomercial marketing projects.
The new division, to be headed by Richard Brockway, founder and chairman of Brockway Direct, is expected to create as many as 15 infomercials during the next two years.


Bentt Released From Hospital
MICHAEL BENTT, who suffered brain injuries in a heavyweight title fight, was released from the hospital yesterday.
"He looks good, but feels weak and tired and is obviously subdued," said JONATHAN BARNETT, a member of Bentt's management team.
Bentt lost the World Boxing Organization heavyweight title when he was knocked out by HERBIE HIDE in the seventh round at the New London Stadium on Saturday night.


HUD and Private Sector Unite to Push Development of Poor Areas
The Department of Housing and Urban Development today announced an unusual partnership with a group of private companies and foundations to encourage development in distressed neighborhoods.
The Government is contributing $20 million to the National Community Development Initiative to form an $88 million fund, which will make loans and grants to nonprofit neighborhood groups known as community development corporations.
The money is to be used to build or rehabilitate housing, provide social services and start businesses.


Fiscal Agency Asks Giuliani to Include Police in Cutbacks
The chairman of the State Municipal Assistance Corporation yesterday called on Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to include police officers, firefighters and teachers in his budget cuts as a way of proving to other municipal unions that the sacrifices he expects of them will be shared by all.
In an interview, Eugene J. Keilin, who recently took over from Felix G. Rohatyn as head of the agency set up to help the city recover from its fiscal crisis of the 1970's, said the Mayor was wrong to declare "sanctuaries" in his effort to improve productivity and eliminate 15,000 city jobs over the next year and a half.


Judge Orders Reducing Number Of Men at a Shelter in Brooklyn
A state court judge ruled yesterday that New York City must reduce the number of men sheltered at a Brooklyn armory from more than 500, to 200, because of an inadequate sprinkler system.
City officials said yesterday that they would appeal.
They contend that the Sumner Avenue armory meets fire codes and is safe.


Settlements Shouldn't Be in Mideast Talks
To the Editor:
Re "Get Rid of the Settlements" (Op-Ed, March 7):


Amre Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yankees Trade Assenmacher (Will Hitchcock Be Moving In?)
The Yankees juggled their bullpen, potentially decreased their payroll and probably opened up a roster spot for Sterling Hitchcock tonight when they traded Paul Assenmacher to the Chicago White Sox for a minor leaguer pitcher, Brian Boehringer.
The trade left the Yankees with two true lefty relievers in Paul Gibson and Steve Howe, but the deal will probably enable Hitchcock or maybe even the lifelong starter Bob Ojeda to be included on the roster as a reliever.


Autopsy Ties Diet Book Author's Death to Drugs and Heart Disease
The New York City Medical Examiner's office said yesterday that the death last month of Dr.
Stuart M. Berger, an author of best-selling nutrition and diet books, stemmed from heart disease, with cocaine abuse as a significant contributing factor.
In an autopsy report, Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner's office, said that Dr.
Berger, 40, died on Feb. 23 of hypertension and cardiovascular disease and that "significant contributing factors" to his death were cocaine abuse and obesity.


O'Rourke Proposal Calls for Raising Sales Tax to 7.25%
The sales tax in most Westchester County communities would rise by half a percentage point, to 7.25 percent, under a plan proposed today by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke.
The added revenue, estimated at $33 million, would be split between the county and its towns, villages, small cities and school districts to help them "stabilize or reduce property taxes," Mr.
O'Rourke said.


Beware the Hawks on Korea
North Korea can still avoid a confrontation with the international community by keeping the promise it made earlier this month and allowing inspectors back into its nuclear sites to complete their work.
Otherwise it may soon face economic sanctions for its noncompliance with the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
Pyongyang's obstinacy may leave President Clinton no choice but to press for limited economic sanctions through the United Nations.
But in doing so he needs to hold open the door to diplomatic dialogue, which is the only way out of his, and North Korea's, nuclear predicament.


CUNY Trustees Find No Violation in Chancellor's Trips
Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds's out-of-town trips to attend corporate board meetings did not violate the City University of New York's policy on time away from her job, several trustees said yesterday.
The trustees discussed the matter at their board meeting after Dr.
Reynolds submitted documents showing she spent 22 1/2 days away from the university in 1993 to attend meetings of five corporate boards and a nonprofit board on which she serves and earned $153,900 for such work.
Her university salary is $158,000.
Asking for Calculations
Dr.
Reynolds and several top officials had to make the disclosure on their outside work and income, and the time spent earning it, after some trustees complained last month that they did not know she served on so many boards, and said she was away too often.


Ojeda Makes a Pitch To Focus on the Game
Bob Ojeda has already claimed a sizable victory in his comeback from a tragic boating accident last spring because questions about baseball now outnumber questions about Little Lake Nellie.
He is a pitcher again with the Yankees.
He is more than just a survivor.
He is more than just the passenger who was luckier than Tim Crews and Steve Olin.
Another monumental victory will be attained by Ojeda if he continues his impressive pitching and snatches the final spot in the rotation with the Yankees, a possibility that is looking more realistic with each start.


Continental Homes Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


CHRONICLE
STEVE ALLEN'S bad back is good news for admirers of BARBARA COOK.
On Thursday, Mr.
Allen, the humorist and television talk-show pioneer, canceled his one-week appearance at the Cafe Carlyle because of sciatica, and Ms.
Cook, the lyric soprano, who usually sings at the Carlyle in the fall, agreed to fill in at the last minute.


Books of The Times; Dissecting Bach Fugues Like Baseball Teams
Bachanalia  The Essential Listener's Guide to Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier  By Eric Lewin Altschuler  254 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95
In "Bachanalia: The Essential Listener's Guide to Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier," Eric Lewin Altschuler, a young physicist and mathematician, sets out to do for 48 of J. S. Bach's most famous preludes and fugues for the keyboard what Bill James has done for big-league baseball.


CABINET EXPRESSES FEARS ABOUT PLAN TO ALTER WELFARE
After working for nearly a year, President Clinton's aides presented him today with an ambitious plan to overhaul the welfare system, but the Cabinet has expressed reservations about the way the plan would be financed, arguing that the strategy could hurt the needy.
The mid-level officials drafting the plan have been trying to pay for a $15 billion package of training and work programs by cutting other programs for the disadvantaged.


Clinton Arts Dinner Whetted Appetites Still Unsatisfied
On Oct. 7 last year, before an enthusiastic crowd of 600 on the White House lawn, President Clinton presented 12 people with the National Medal for the Arts, commenting on how the work of each recipient had touched his life.
That night the recipients, who included William Styron, Robert Rauschenberg, Arthur Miller, Paul Taylor and Billy Wilder, were honored at a formal dinner and at a concert that was so spirited it brought forth comparisons to the legendary evening in 1961 when President John F. Kennedy and his wife had Pablo Casals perform in the East Room.
Coming just after the smooth and rapid confirmation of the actress Jane Alexander as the chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, that October day seemed to many people in the arts to be all but the dawn of a second golden age.


Witnesses to a Massacre


The Nets Dodge A (7-Foot) Bullet
You know the night isn't going well when some guy named Bob Martin is dunking on you.
Bob Martin is a 7-footer who plays for the Los Angeles Clippers.
In his last game before the one tonight against the Nets, he came off the pine to get 2 points in three minutes.
He is one of those players who is an eyelash away from selling cars.
So while some of the Nets' big men did their best potted-plant imitations, the Bob Martins and Elmore Spencers of the world were able to look like Willis Reed.
At times, poor defense by the Nets made just about all of the Clippers look like All-Stars.


Don't Walk, Run!
THIS, in effect, is the message given to many elderly people who try to cross busy city streets while the traffic light signals "Walk" and then flashes "Don't Walk" to warn that the light is about to change.
A study of pedestrians at a busy intersection in Los Angeles found that 27 percent of elderly people who began to cross as soon as the light flashed 'Walk' were unable to reach the opposite curb before the light changed against them.
At least one-fourth of those who were unable to cross in time were left stranded by at least one lane of traffic, according to a report in the current issue of The Journal of the American Geriatrics Society.
In the study, Dr.
Russell E. Hoxie and Dr.
Laurence Z. Rubenstein of the University of California at Los Angeles School of Medicine watched 1,200 people trying to cross a street in an area where a lot of older people live.
They found that all the younger pedestrians, who walked at an average speed of 1.27 meters a second, managed to get across the street in time.
But among older pedestrians, whose walking speed averaged 0.86 meters per second, only 73 percent crossed in time.


Fuller (H.B.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.36
2.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.50
3.61
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.79
3.90
3.01
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.42
6.55
5.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.84
6.95
6.76
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.72
7.79
7.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.99
6.01
5.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Struggling With the Fed's Fallout
If inflation is under control -- and by most accounts it seems to be -- why did the Federal Reserve raise short-term interest rates yesterday?
One reason may be that the Fed sees inflationary pressures that normal mortals do not.
But another reason is that the monetary authorities needed to send a calming message to investors, who had pushed long-term interest rates up to almost 7 percent.


Merrill Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


ABC's Lineup for World Cup
ABC, which will show 11 of the 52 World Cup matches, yesterday named its two announcing teams: AL TRAUTWIG and RICK DAVIS, and ROGER TWIBELL and SEAMUS MALIN.
JIM MCKAY will be the host of the games.
Davis, Twibell and Malin will also work for ESPN, which will air the remaining 41 games.


Side Dish Becomes the Main Attraction
THE spinach and yogurt combination that is a traditional Persian or Iranian side dish can, with the addition of potatoes, be turned into a meatless main dish.
The dish includes plenty of cooked onion, which adds sweetness and mellowness to food that would otherwise be tart.
When nutmeg, a sweet spice, is also added, the dish that results has no harsh edges and lots of appeal.


COMPANY NEWS: California Dialing; Add Yet Another Number To the Los Angeles Area
Despite the earthquakes, mud-slides, firestorms and other natural disasters that have driven people away from Southern California, demand for new telephone numbers is growing so rapidly here that telephone company officials plan to introduce a fourth area code in 1996.
Gene Sherman, vice president for external affairs for Pacific Bell, said today that the company was quickly running out of telephone numbers in the 213, 310 and 818 area codes, which currently serve the Los Angeles metropolitan area.
The reason is the proliferation of cellular telephones, pagers, facsimile machines, business telephones and multiple telephone lines.


Giuliani Assails Fiscal Agency Chief Over Views on Cuts
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani sharply criticized the chairman of the state's Municipal Assistance Corporation yesterday, saying he had overstepped his role in recommending that the Mayor include police officers, firefighters and teachers in an effort to reduce the municipal work force.
But Mr.
Giuliani said he would ask the Police Department to assume more tasks, if not budget cuts.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that those new tasks would include taking over some or all of the functions of traffic-enforcement agents now employed by the city's Transportation Department.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Congressional maneuvering over the question of hearings into the Whitewater land dealings of the Clintons referred incorrectly in some copies to a man shaking hands with Representative Lee Hamilton.
He was a Congressional aide, not Representative Robert H. Michel.


Royal Return for Leibrandt
The Kansas City Royals looked to the past yesterday for the left-handed starter they sought all spring.
But CHARLIE LEIBRANDT, still recovering from surgery he had in October to repair a partially torn rotator cuff, probably is a long shot.
The Royals signed Leibrandt, who pitched on their 1985 championship team, to a free-agent contract. (AP)


Ewing Approaches His Proving Ground
The entire second half was this frustrating chase for the Chicago Bulls, the Knicks holding a carrot out and yanking it back.
Six points.
Four points.
Eight points.
Two points.
Then, the score 72-70, here came Toni Kukoc, flying down the left side, on the break, palming the ball in his left hand, leaving his feet for the shot that would knock that infernal carrot to the bottom of the net.


Executive Changes
BANK OF AMERICA, San Francisco, named Gerald Doherty group executive vice president.
DATASTREAM INTERNATIONAL, New York, the London-based unit of Primark Corp., providing on-line global financial information and fund management services, has named Ira Herenstein as president of its North American operations.


Sports of The Times; A Final Thought On Upsets
MY first exposure to a so-called upset came in March 1963.
The national championship game between Cincinnati and Loyola was blacked out in Chicago so we listened to the game on radio.
Cincinnati was the two-time defending national champion, but the Bearcats were about to be ambushed.
Chicagoans already knew that but the rest of the country didn't.


Travelers And Met Life Weigh Deal
Reaching for greater size and economic power in the rapidly changing managed health care market, Travelers Inc. and Met Life said yesterday that they were exploring "possible alliances among their health care operations."
By joining forces, the two New York-based companies would get closer to the big leagues of managed care, although they would still be well behind the largest national health insurers, Kaiser Permanente, Prudential, Cigna and Aetna.


New York Officials Try To Keep Championship Site
A day after the New York City high school basketball championships were marred by a clash between 200 or so fans at Madison Square Garden, school officials scrambled yesterday to identify and punish the troublemakers and to persuade Garden officials not to evict the annual championships from the arena.
The 20-minute melee, which broke out after Robeson High School won the B Division championship by beating George Washington, 63-60, in overtime on a 3-pointer at the buzzer, threatened the future of the Public Schools Athletic League championships at the Garden.


Giuliani Names a Correction Chief With TV Panache
Anthony J. Schembri led a police department of fewer than 40 officers for 13 years in the small suburban community of Rye in Westchester County.
But Hollywood found him a few years ago, making him the inspiration for "a tough but charming police commissioner" on the ABC dramatic series "The Commish."
And now he has been discovered by New York.


Teamster Chiefs Continue Fight Against Audits
Three representatives of Ron Carey, the president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, entered the street-level offices of the union's Eastern Conference here a little before noon today and asked for Walter J. Shea, the region's chairman.
Mr.
Carey had defeated Mr.
Shea in the first democratic election for the union's presidency in December 1991, and the visit was not a friendly one.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the appointment of a chief executive at Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. misstated the month in which Jasmine Ltd., the former employer of the new Spectrum executive, sold its stock to the public.
The sale was completed in December, not November.


ConAgra Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


First Arabs to Address Hebron Hearing Say They Heard Explosions
Palestinian survivors of the Hebron massacre testified today before an Israeli commission of inquiry, providing the first Arab accounts at the public hearings.
Muslim officials from Hebron refused to testify last week, and today at least one witness arrived with a summons from the Israeli military.
Mutual distrust permeated the session.


Abdication at CUNY
The board of trustees of the City University of New York deserves a flunking grade for its craven handling of the controversy over whether Chancellor Ann Reynolds spends too much time away from her job.
The trustees largely took the embattled chancellor's word for the number of days she spent going to meetings of six boards -- five corporate and one nonprofit -- on which she serves.
It took her word that these outside activities did not interfere with her management of CUNY.
And it shied away from seeking a detailed accounting of her trips out of town as requested by at least one trustee.


Campo Electronics Appliances &amp; Computers Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Miscellany
*
Martin/Williams Inc., Minneapolis, formed an independent sales promotion unit that will operate as Option One, the same name as its sibling British sales promotion company.
It will be headed by Debby Waring as vice president and managing director.
She was previously co-managing director at Option One in London.


Panel Hears Pleas to Gain Share of Unclaimed Sums
A parade of officials from around the nation came before a Congressional subcommittee today to plead for a share of unclaimed stock dividends and interest that New York has collected for years, while New Yorkers insisted that their state should not have to pay out money it has long since spent.
At issue is a bill that would redistribute to 47 other states money that New York, Delaware and Massachusetts have taken from big banks and brokerage concerns in their states when no address for the owner could be found.
If applied retroactively, as its sponsors want, it could cost New York $600 million or more, and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has made its defeat a major priority.


Why Junk the Old Car if You Can Recycle It?
To the Editor:
The problem of secondary hazardous waste, which is produced after the life of a product, has been ignored by the Environmental Protection Agency and Congress.
Secondary hazardous waste is responsible for the clutter of our public parks, the oil found in our drinking water and the thousands of tire dumps all over the United States.


Amonte Nearly Went to Isles
Tony Amonte, the former Ranger, was a member of the Chicago Blackhawks tonight when his new team played at Detroit.
But Amonte nearly became a member of the Islanders on Monday.
After acquiring Amonte from New York in a deal that sent Stephane Matteau and Brian Noonan to the Rangers, Chicago General Manager Bob Pulford tried to trade Amonte to the Islanders.


Man Held in Train Killings Is Beaten, Jail Officials Say
Colin Ferguson, who is accused of killing six people on a Long Island Rail Road train in December, suffered a broken nose and a swollen left eye today when he was attacked by other inmates at the Nassau County Jail, county officials said.
The attack occurred shortly after Mr.
Ferguson's lawyers had notified jail officials of a report from another inmate that their client was going to be beaten.
Jail officials said that they were following up on the lawyers' warning when word reached them of the assault.


CHRONICLE
When the playwrights TERRENCE MCNALLY and CRAIG LUCAS began to read from their works at the Poetry Center of the 92d Street Y on Monday night, it was clear why they had been willing to miss the beginning of the Academy Awards broadcast.
Mr.
McNally, whose play "Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune" was turned into a movie starring Al Pacino and Michelle Pfeiffer in 1991, began by reading the "playwright's prayer" from his 1982 play, "It's Only A Play." When he read the lines: "Bless the theater in which we all serve. Bless this ancient art form, which is so superior to the movies," the audience of 400 applauded in agreement.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Acquired Lee Tinsley, outfielder, from the Seattle Mariners for a player to be named later.
Designated Billy Hall, infielder, for reassignment.


Court Orders City to Open Fiscal Monitoring Office
For five years, New York City's government has stubbornly defied a provision in the 1989 City Charter requiring the creation of an independent fiscal monitor to keep an eye on city budget-makers.
Today, the state's top court ruled unanimously that the city could no longer ignore the law and ordered that the Independent Budget Office be established.
Designed by Charter revisionists as a counterweight to the immense budgetary power of the Mayor and the City Council Speaker, the office was supposed to provide nonpartisan analysis of fiscal issues to individual City Council members, borough presidents, community boards, government watchdog groups and private citizens.
It could investigate the accuracy of the Mayor's revenue estimates, question the wisdom of selling city hospitals, or analyze proposals to consolidate city agencies.


Academic Disciplines Increasingly Entwine, Recasting Scholarship
Human DNA can best be understood if studied as "a work of literature." That, at least, is the contention of Robert Pollack, a professor of biological sciences at Columbia University who has just unveiled the theory in his book "Signs of Life."
Scholars and scientists will recognize Professor Pollack's thesis as an example of one of the hottest trends in current academic life: interdisciplinary studies.
At campuses across the country, biology is merging with physics and chemistry, anthropology is borrowing from literary theory and feminist studies, economics is mixing with cognitive psychology and bio spheric studies, and political science is absorbing mathematics, molecular biology and environmental studies.


G.O.P. Plays Down 'Ideas' Survey, Finding Some Are Divisive
Urging them to show that they belonged to "a party of ideas," Republicans last fall surveyed more than 800,000 of their most active supporters on major issues.
But now that nearly 134,000 responses are in, they are not entirely comfortable with the ideas they are receiving.
To their surprise, the Republicans found that some party loyalists' opinions were not what they had expected, especially on abortion, an issue on which the respondents were deeply split.


Spy for Israelis Is Likely to Lose Clemency Plea
President Clinton is almost certain to reject a petition for clemency by Jonathan J. Pollard, the American convicted in 1987 of spying for Israel, senior Administration officials said today.
The Government's national security agencies and the Justice Department are unanimously opposed to clemency for Mr.
Pollard, a view conveyed to the White House today by Attorney General Janet Reno, the officials said.


A Comfortable Park Bench Is a Right of Spring


Review/Television; Celebrating New York, Guided by A Kennedy
Channel 31's six-part series "Heart of the City," which starts tonight, celebrates New York and New Yorkers.
Thanks, we need that.
Going behind the discouraging headlines about violence and poverty, ignoring the disaster troops in search of sensational stories for the nightly newscasts, these half-hours sing of local heroes quietly trying to improve something called the quality of life.
Presenting their stories is a handsome host who introduces himself simply: "Hello, I'm John Kennedy." John F. Kennedy Jr. reaps a smart career move.


Squeezing North Korea: Getting Blood From a Stone
From the first threats a year ago about imposing economic sanctions against North Korea to force it to give up its nuclear ambitions, the Clinton Administration and its allies in Asia have been confronted with a peculiar quandary: How do you isolate the world's most isolated country?
Unlike almost every other country in the world, North Korea has long focused on "juche," or "self-reliance," a central feature of the ideology of Kim Il Sung, the North's "Great Leader." To rely on any other country, he told his people in 1955, is ultimately to compromise the country's political independence.


G.O.P. Leader Will Run For Governor as 'Moderate'
Surrounded by 20,000 cherry-colored petition papers, Richard M. Rosenbaum, the state Republican Party leader in the Rockefeller era, today announced his candidacy for governor.
Charging that the Republican Party had shifted too far to the right, Mr.
Rosenbaum said in stops around the state that he would run an outsider's campaign and denounced leaders wrangling over a candidate to challenge Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo this fall.


AT LUNCH WITH: Joe Queenan


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  TURNING OFFICES INTO APARTMENTS
The former Gulf and Western Building, which has stood for 24 years like a vastly oversized gatepost at the southwest corner of Central Park, would be emptied of office tenants, stripped to its steel skeleton and turned into an extravagant apartment tower under plans announced by a redevelopment team.
A1.


Metropolitan Diary
A LETTER from a pleasantly surprised New Yorker:
Maybe it was the honest-to-goodness sunshine, determined to convince us that it really was the big goodbye to galoshes and gloom.
More likely, though, it was the unexpected acknowledgement that it's no longer cool to call the city heartless and cold.


A Sunny Day Beckons the Winter-Weary Outdoors


Nick Price Is Making It Look Simple
The unending search for golf's secret, the Rosetta Stone that will unlock the mystery of par and translate bogeys into birdies, is one of the game's most enduring quests.
For most players, it is a futile pursuit.
Nick Price clearly is not most players.
He has, at least temporarily, found the secret.
In the last 19 months since he won the 1992 P.G.A.
Championship, Price has transformed his game from good to great.
He has entered "the zone," a special sweet spot in time where the complex becomes simple and where the most difficult game to subdue somehow becomes easy.


Wilder Hints at Re-entering Roiling Virginia Senate Race
L.
Douglas Wilder, the former Governor of Virginia, said today that he might re-enter the United States Senate race he abandoned two months ago, in part because the current candidates had made the state the butt of late-night television jokes.
Mr.
Wilder, a Democrat who left office in January, said he was responding to calls and letters he received from supporters after recent disclosures about the personal life of the incumbent, Senator Charles S. Robb, a fellow Democrat.


Florida Is a faceless Team Out of the Blue
Amid the abundant joy here today in celebration of just the second Sweet 16 appearance by a University of Florida basketball team in the program's 75 years, there is anger and some confusion.
The Gators were allotted 1,000 tickets to the East regional commencing Friday at Miami Arena, 850 of which will go to alumni who have demonstrated their faithfulness (read: money) and the remainder to students.


Surgery for a Cardinal Catcher
St.
Louis Cardinals catcher TOM PAGNOZZI will need arthroscopic surgery to repair torn cartilage in his left knee and will be out four to six weeks.
Pagnozzi caught a spike blocking a ball in the dirt in Monday's exhibition loss to Cincinnati.
He missed a month last season after an operation on the same knee. (AP)


CHRONICLE
There were a lot of designer umbrellas in the cloak room at Gracie Mansion on Monday night.
DONNA HANOVER GIULIANI gave a reception for the corporate sponsors of Seventh on Sixth, the company that organizes the fashion shows in tents in Bryant Park, and for the designers who will show their clothes there beginning April 6.
FERN MALLIS, the executive director of Seventh on Sixth, was characteristically blunt about how the cocktail party at the Mayor's residence came about.
"We requested it," she said as waiters offered canapes to guests, including the designers Mary McFadden, Kenneth Richard, Victor Alfaro, Nicole Miller and Christian Francis Roth.
"The Mayor's wife is very supportive. We're still working on her husband. We'd like the city to help with the tents. We raised over $1 million in private money to hold the shows."


1,000 March in AIDS Protest and 47 Are Arrested


Andretti and Mansell Clear Air
MICHAEL ANDRETTI and NIGEL MANSELL both say their angry confrontation before the season-opening Indy-car race Sunday in Australia was nothing more than a verbal disagreement in the heat of the moment.
It was reported by a freelance photographer working for The Associated Press that Mansell, angry over what he perceived to be a dangerous move by Andretti on a pace lap, walked up to Andretti and angrily pushed him on the shoulder.


Correction: Potato and Chickpea Soup With Yogurt
A recipe on March 2 for potato and chickpea soup gave an incomplete instruction for the step in which the yogurt is added.
A corrected version follows.


Police Delay Rounding Up Truant Youths
The New York City Police Department has delayed a plan to deploy officers to round up teen-age truants, amid criticism from civil liberties advocates and a member of the Board of Education that the police would inevitably treat minority students more harshly than white youngsters from affluent families.
Police officials said the postponement, which they said would be only for a week or so, was needed to improve coordination with the Board of Education and did not signal any substantive change in the plan.
Under the proposal, scores of police officers in all five boroughs would be assigned to truancy efforts to curb mischief and crime by youths.


Rich Are Wary of Michigan's Revolt
One week after Michigan voters overwhelmingly chose a revolution in the way they finance public schools, those who live in and run the state's richest school district are not too sure about the whole idea.
That district, Bloomfield Hills, attracts many of the state's affluent people, in part because of the quality of its schools.
Its 4,288 residents include the recently retired chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, Lee Iacocca, the Detroit Pistons basketball star Isiah Thomas and the portrait painter and feminist Patricia Hill Burnett.


Harvey H. Segal; Author, 71
Dr.
Harvey H. Segal, an economics professor and author of a book highly critical of American business, died on Monday at Sloan-Kettering Memorial Hospital.
Mr.
Segal, who lived in Manhattan, was 71.
The cause was kidney and bone cancer, said his wife, Eloise.


Hillhaven Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Furon Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 18
Mar. 11
Mar. 19
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
6.8
6.7
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.0
Gasoline stocks
222.7
225.7
233.0
Distillate stocks
102.3
103.0
101.5
Crude imports, daily
7.3
5.7
5.4
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.5
1.6
Crude stocks
341.2
329.0
330.9
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
87.1
87.3
86.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Editors' Note
An obituary on Feb. 8 about Richard M. Bissell Jr., a former senior official at the Central Intelligence Agency, connected President Kennedy with the creation of "a top-secret assassination project whose target was Fidel Castro." The article said that Mr.
Bissell was responsible for the project, and that it was created at President Kennedy's request after the failed 1961 invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.
The obituary should have made it clear that accounts differ on the President's role.
A C.I.A. document quotes Mr.
Bissell as saying the White House urged the creation of a unit capable of carrying out assassinations, and Mr.
Bissell testified before a Senate committee in 1975 that he had no reason to challenge the document's accuracy.
But he later testified before the committee that there was no White House urging for such a project.


Books of The Times; Belfast's People Put Their Troubles Into Words
May the Lord in His Mercy Be Kind to Belfast  By Tony Parker  358 pages.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $25.
The citizens of Belfast say:


Personal Health
PARENTS and teachers who are otherwise conscientious about checking on the safety of children's recreational activities may not even think that hazards could lurk in a youngster's pursuit of arts and crafts.
After all, what adult did not color and paint as a child, apparently without mishap?
But a lack of awareness and vigilance can sometimes result in acute injuries or chronic exposure to a more distant danger.
For example, some years ago a kindergarten child who had spilled paint was told by his teacher to clean it up with turpentine.
The child, whose clothing became saturated with this toxic solvent, developed a red, scald-like rash over most of his body and within a week was having seizures.


INSIDE
Finger Pointed at Clinton
The special counsel promised a "vigorous" inquiry into claims that Bill Clinton applied pressure to secure a business partner's loan.
Page A18.
When Is Doubt Reasonable?
The Supreme Court warned states that judges often give juries an outdated and potentially confusing definition of reasonable doubt.
Page B8.
Taxing Cigarettes for Health
A Congressional subcommittee voted to raise the Federal tax on cigarettes by $1.25 a pack to pay for universal health coverage.
Page A16.
How a Dream Merger Faded
A clash of corporate cultures ultimately doomed the seemingly alluring combination of Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications.
Page D1.


Wine Talk
KENDALL-JACKSON VINEYARDS is the American restaurantgoer's favorite winery, and merlot is the grape of the moment, according to a poll by Wine and Spirits magazine.
The poll, taken annually for the last five years, is based on queries sent to the 40 most popular restaurants in each of the Zagat restaurant guides to 18 American cities.
The Zagat guides are compilations of readers' preferences.


Food Notes
What's New in Seafood?
At the International Seafood Show in Boston last week, browsers had a chance to try some noteworthy new items, including tiny farm-raised clams from Florida, called petite little necks, and silken smoked dogfish from the Grenadines.


High Court Warns About Test for Reasonable Doubt
Examining the way judges instruct juries on finding guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, the Supreme Court today warned states that a common definition of reasonable doubt that refers to jurors' "moral certainty" of guilt is outdated and potentially confusing.
Nonetheless, the Court upheld the use of that instruction in two death penalty cases on the ground that there was no "reasonable likelihood" that the jurors in those cases were actually confused by the disputed phrase in the context of the jury instructions as a whole.


It's Sweetest Moment of Knicks' Winning Streak
The Knicks would have enjoyed winning their 10th consecutive game against any team.
But for New York, beating the Chicago Bulls made last night even more enjoyable.
Continuing their unbeaten march through the month of March, the Knicks outlasted the Bulls, 87-78, at Madison Square Garden.
Their 10th consecutive victory gave the Knicks (46-19) their longest winning streak of Pat Riley's three-year tenure as coach.
The last time the Knicks won 10 consecutive games was during the 1972-73 season, when they won 11 straight games, and ultimately the N.B.A championship.
Last night's victory pulled New York into a tie with the Atlanta Hawks atop the Eastern Conference.


Christopher Says U.S. Stays Firm on Korea, but Pledges Diplomacy
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that the United States would defend South Korea against any aggression, but that Washington would pursue diplomatic moves before seeking sanctions against North Korea over its refusal to allow inspections of its nuclear plants.
Mr.
Christopher and other officials spent much of the day seeking support in the United Nations for a resolution that will criticize North Korea and point indirectly to economic sanctions.


Former Head Of a Utility Is Indicted
The former chief executive of the gas and electric company serving Orange and Rockland Counties was indicted today on charges that he spent $30,000 of utility money on personal expenses like rental vans for his son's film company, invitations for his children's engagement parties and a surprise birthday party for his wife.
In bringing the indictment, Kenneth Gribetz, the Rockland District Attorney, charged that New York State utilities were poorly monitored and often waste the money the state permits them to charge their customers.


TransTexas Gas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Market Place; The new chief at Spectrum and his recent management style.
EDWARD W. MASKALY, the financial man who signed on as chief executive of Spectrum Information Technologies on Monday, has his work cut out for him, what with a year's worth of controversy surrounding Spectrum and its management.
There has barely been a problem that has not landed on Spectrum's list.
Yesterday, the owner and four employees of an investment banking group that until recently was owned by Spectrum's president were arrested at the Manhasset, L.I., building that houses both Spectrum and the investment group.
Among those arrested was the son-in-law of Peter T. Caserta, president of Spectrum, to whom he sold the investment group in January.


E.P.A. Seeks Case Rehearing
The Environmental Protection Agency and the Treasury Department have told bankers that they want to overturn a Federal court ruling that said banks could be liable for costs of cleaning up pollution caused by their customers.
The decision last month by the United States Court of Appeals in Washington shocked bankers by overruling a 1992 regulation of the E.P.A. that placed strict limits on the liability of bankers for the cleanup costs.


No Headline
"Field goals are up, touchdowns are down. These rules will help solve that in some ways." DON SHULA, coach of the Miami Dolphins.  [ A1:3. ]


Dead-End Deal: Why a Merger Collapsed -- A special report.; A Cultural Clash Defeated Bell Atlantic and T.C.I.
They went their separate ways on a sleeting, wintry afternoon last month, walking out of the 44th-floor conference room of a midtown Manhattan office tower, after a final two-hour meeting that went nowhere.
It was the end of a sobering journey that began last summer in exhilaration and finished in frustration for Raymond W. Smith and John C. Malone, who tried to forge one of the biggest corporate mergers in history.


CHRONICLE
As Hollywood divas were getting dressed for the Academy Awards, putting on revealing movie-star gowns with plunging necklines, TAKAKO CHIBA was participating in another kind of ritualistic dressing up at the Japan Society in Manhattan.
Ms.
Chiba, a a public relations assistant at the society, was helping to demonstrate the art of junihitoe (jew-KNEE-shto-EH), an opulent, high-necked 12-layer costume, the type Crown Princess Masako wore on her wedding day last year.
As two emonja -- the women expert in the art of wearing the kimono -- layered 66 pounds of silk on her, Ms.
Chiba stood very still.
And when she walked, she moved very slowly.
Junihitoe dates from the 10th century of the Heian period, when women of the court began to wear layer upon layer of kimonos.


Isles Win in Overtime On Malakhov Goal, 5-4
Al Arbour knows what makes a playoff team. He also knows luck when he sees it.
"I hope and pray that they learned a lesson from this game," Arbour said, looking up at the ceiling, hands clasped.


A Bouquet of Her Floral Namesake


Accounts
*
AMP Inc., Harrisburg, Pa., to Griffin Bacal Inc., New York, as the first agency for the maker of computer and telecommunications wires and cables.
Griffin Bacal will create and introduce AMP's initial brand-identity campaign.
Billings were not disclosed. *
National Hockey League, New York, to DeWitt Media, New York, to handle media buying for N.H.L. telecasts, previously handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.
The Cox Group, New York, continues to handle the N.H.L.'s creative assignment.


First Product From Novell And A.T.&amp; T.
A.T.&amp; T. and Novell Inc., the leading provider of software for linking personal computers in networks, introduced the first product of their year-old alliance yesterday -- a way for businesses to link existing telephone systems and personal computer networks without additional wiring or expensive equipment.
Separately, Novell's stock plunged 15.8 percent in extremely heavy trading yesterday after the company announced on Monday that it would acquire the Wordperfect Corporation in a stock swap valued at $1.4 billion.


Why Junk the Old Car if You Can Recycle It?; The Trash Racket
To the Editor:
Although "Cleaning Up the Trash Racket" (editorial, March 14) correctly diagnoses corruption and constraint of trade in New York City's waste-carting industry, the presence of Browning-Ferris Industries is not certain to be, as you call it, a "healthy sign" for increased competition.


Walter Lantz, 93, the Creator Of Woody Woodpecker, Is Dead
Walter Lantz, an animator and producer who created the cartoon characters Woody Woodpecker and Andy Panda, died yesterday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Burbank, Calif.
He was 93 and lived in Beverly Hills.
The cause was heart disease, said Kenneth Thimmel, a friend.


Cinemark USA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


MEXICAN REJECTS RACE FOR TOP SPOT
After holding Mexicans in suspense for weeks with hints that he might break from the governing party and run for President, the Government's negotiator with peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas, Manuel Camacho Solis, said today that he would not seek election this year.
"Between pursuing a candidacy for the presidency of the republic and contributing what I can to the process of peace in Chiapas, I choose peace," Mr.
Camacho, 47, said at a news conference here.
"I take this decision putting the higher interests of the nation over my own aspirations."


In America; Pretty Words On Haiti
With most people, and especially with politicians, it is more instructive to watch the things they do than listen to what they say.
And so it is with President Clinton and the extreme split between his high-toned rhetoric and his Administration's shameful behavior regarding Haiti.
Mr.
Clinton has been unwavering in his spoken support for the restoration of democracy in Haiti and the return to power of its ousted President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
In a radio address to the Haitian people in January 1993 Mr.
Clinton, then President-elect, said: "Several years ago, I saw personally the beauty of your land. I felt the warmth of your people and ever since then I have wanted you to have freedom and democracy and economic opportunity."


Macy Said to Have Plan To End Its Bankruptcy
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company has put together an outline of a reorganization plan to present to its creditors today that will ultimately value the company at $4.1 billion, according to people involved in the retailer's bankruptcy case.
Under the plan, when Macy emerges from bankruptcy next January, its value would be roughly $3.5 billion.
Of that, slightly more than $3 billion in debt and equity would be allocated to secured creditors, whose claims are backed by real estate and other assets.
Unsecured creditors would receive less than $500 million of the company's total value.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday, about a computing contract awarded by the Xerox Corporation, misstated the business relationship of the losing bidders.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company was a joint bidder with a unit of the International Business Machines Corporation.
But the I.B.M. unit, the Integrated Systems Solutions Corporation, is not a joint venture with A.T.&amp; T.


Review/Film Festival; Glamour Amid Menace in the Shtetl
"Ivan and Abraham," Yolande Zauberman's lushly beautiful black-and-white film about the friendship between two boys in pre-World War II Poland, is full of visual surprises.
The setting is a shtetl near the eastern border of Poland (the film was shot in a real shtetl in Ukraine), but the imagery has a peculiar and incongruous glamour.
Life is languid and slow.
Characters are voluptuous, even when the realities of their existence are ominous and harsh.
In this atmosphere, a wife responds amorously when her husband embraces her, even though she happens to be busy scrubbing the floor.
Ms.
Zauberman uses this intoxicating manner to tell the story of Abraham (Roma Aleksandrovitch), his family and his neighbors, who reflect varying political changes that are in the offing.
Nachman (Rolan Bykov), Abraham's grandfather, is the estate manager for a brooding, world-weary Prince (Oleg Iankovski) who presides over the region until his money runs out.
Rachel (Maria Lipkina), Abraham's sister, is in love with Aaron (Vladimir Machkov), who is a member of the illegal Communist party.


Mysterious Black Hole in Chicago Is Gobbling Up Everybody's Mail
This city has had a lot of practice coping with hardships, man-made and otherwise, from crooked politicians to wicked winter winds.
But there are some things that can push even Chicagoans too far, and the United States Postal Service has done it with mail: mail delivered weeks late, decades late; mail that is burnt to a crisp in a vacant lot and never delivered at all.
In Postal Service surveys, more than one-third of Chicago households have reported problems with their mail, an inexcusably high number, says Marvin Runyon, the Postmaster General.
Along Mr.
Runyon's national postal route, the city ranks dead last in customer satisfaction.
A local alderman even says he will hold hearings next month to assess the mail system's effect on Chicago's economy.


A 2d Homeland Is Taken Over By South Africa
South Africa took command of another riotous black homeland today and closed in on the last and most explosive bastion of resistance, the Zulu homeland ruled by Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi.
Ten days after ousting the ruler of Bophuthatswana, the multiparty authority that presides over the South African transition sent representatives tonight to replace the president of Ciskei, an apartheid homeland designated for the Xhosa people, after a mutiny by homeland policemen and soldiers.


Critic's Notebook; Minus Suspense Factor, Oscars Cut to the Chase
This year's Academy Awards telecast promised so little suspense that as the big night approached, the statuette's Sphinx-like features began to look even stonier than usual.
Would Oscar be watching?
Would he be sleeping?
Would he even have a pulse?
After all, most of the evening's winners were pre-ordained.
There was no prospect of Billy Crystal to enliven the proceedings with inspired wisecracks.
And the dominant film, "Schindler's List," was no laughing matter.
Clearly, the show faced an uphill battle.
The rumors of its demise, noted in a Variety story citing flagging audience interest and competition from other awards shows, did not sound exaggerated.


U.S. Defense Chief Satisfied With Ukraine's Disarmament
Despite complaints by Ukraine that Russia is not living up to its end of the deal, Defense Secretary William J. Perry said tonight that he was satisfied that the agreement to remove all of Ukraine's nuclear weapons is on track.
A Ukrainian official said Monday that Moscow had not delivered any fuel in return for 120 nuclear warheads Ukraine had sent back to Russia.
Defense Minister Vitaly Radetsky said that if Russia does not provide the fuel, Ukraine "will reconsider the timetable" for shipping the remaining 1,600 warheads.


John J. Buckley; Crusading Sheriff, 64
John J. Buckley, who crusaded against handguns during his 10 years as Sheriff of Middlesex County, Mass., died on Sunday at his home in Belmont, Mass.
He was 64.
He died of brain cancer, said his wife, Judge Marie Buckley.


Compaq Will Make PC's in Brazil
Latin America's largest potential computer market opened a little wider today with the announcement that the Compaq Computer Corporation would start manufacturing personal computers in Brazil by September.
"Brazil is one of the world's great growth markets," Eckhard Pfeiffer, the president of Compaq, said at a news conference here.
"Our goal is a market share in Brazil and in Latin America."


Head of Museum Named
The American Museum of Natural History has named Anne Phipps Sidamon-Eristoff as chairwoman.
Mrs.
Sidamon-Eristoff, 61, a trustee of the museum since 1979 and a vice chairwoman since 1990, will succeed the current chairman, William T. Golden, on July 1.
Her appointment, made at a meeting of the board on Monday night, comes less than a year after the museum named Ellen V. Futter as its president.
Both Ms.
Futter and Mrs.
Sidamon-Eristoff are the first women to be named to the top posts at the museum, which is the largest natural history museum in the world, with 40 exhibition halls, a staff of some 200 scientists and a collection of more than 30 million specimens and artifacts. 'A Sense of Excitement'
"I look forward to the pleasure and inspiration of working with Ellen Futter," Mrs.
Sidamon-Eristoff said.
"I do feel a new sense of excitement and direction at the museum right now."


Topps Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Dow Slips by 2.30 as Rates Are Pushed Up
"Fed Tuesday" arrived on time, to the great relief of Wall Street professionals.
At last, the Federal Reserve did what the stock market had been apparently demanding for weeks: nudge up interest rates to choke an inflation that does not yet exist.
In a relatively quiet day, traders bid up shares following the Fed action, news of which ran on news services shortly before 2:30 P.M.
But the major indexes closed mixed, in part because of high-speed computer-guided trading that sold shares in the final seconds of the session to take advantage of rising prices.


Matriarch of Dancers Sews Clothing of Delight
COPIES of "Let's Live" and "Plus -- The Magazine for Positive Thinking" rest on Zelda Wynn's desk.
Like she needs pointers.


Hyeres Journal; Death on the Riviera, or, She Delved Too Deeply
She was an outsider in the murky politics of the Riviera.
But Yann Piat thought that as a member of Parliament it was safe for her to fight the extortion rackets, drug trafficking and milking of public funds that flourish on France's most glamorous and shady playground.
Then, one recent evening on a dark road near her home, two men on a motorcycle pulled close to her car.
Mrs.
Piat said to her driver, "What do they want from me?" Moments later, she was shot to death.


Surprising Journey For Abortion Drug
Aimee was propped up in her hospital bed wearing an oversize T-shirt that made her look younger than her 17 years.
She grimaced.
She had never known pain this bad, she said.
Her long black hair was moist with perspiration and her face looked pale and tired.
Taking the RU-486 pill for an abortion was worse than she had expected.
"I felt like I was dying," she said minutes after expelling the tiny sac that contained the one-eighth-inch-long fetus.
"It hurt so much. I had contractions coming so fast, and I was sick to my stomach and dry heaving. I couldn't stop trembling and I felt so hot."


An Einstein's Place Among the Aborigines
To the Editor:
As a professional anthropologist I was amused and touched by Saul Bellow's "Papuans and Zulus" (Op-Ed, March 10).
It reminded me of my student days when our teacher said that if Einstein had been a native Australian, he could not have become a physicist or arrived at E=mc  .
However, through observation he probably would have obtained the most information on the habits of the kangaroo, which he would have shared happily with his group.


For Ex-Speaker, Now It's the Capitol Corridors; After 2 Years and an Overturned Conviction, Miller Is Back in Albany --as a Lobbyist
The bold black letters on the door to Room 344 in the State Capitol, just outside the Assembly chamber, are underlined in red: "Lounge -- Members Only." But that did not stop one brazen lobbyist from slinging the door open and strutting in, as if he owned the place.
"You know, I was thinking about not doing it because it's only for members, but I really was desperate for a cup of coffee," explained Mel Miller.
"So it became a question of would I ask one of the members. And I suppose I had enough of a comfort level to realize that nobody was going to chase me out for a cup of coffee." Real-Estate Profits at Issue
Mr.
Miller, of course, did once own the place.
Until Dec. 13, 1991, he was Speaker of the Assembly, the supreme ruler of his house and one of the three most powerful men in state government.
That day, his career and reputation crumbled when a Federal jury convicted him of cheating law clients out of profits from a real-estate deal.


Bread as Food for Body And Soul
THE breads baked in the Jesuit community were the first clue that Lent, a time of abstention, was winding down.
"They began to jazz things up by putting stuff like raisins in the bread," said Brother Rick Curry, remembering his training many years ago at St.
Isaac Jogues' in Wernersville, Pa.
Brother Curry, a strapping 50-year-old with a doctorate in theater, a flair for storytelling and a gift for irony, lives in Manhattan, where he has run the National Theater Workshop for the Handicapped since 1977.
He founded the group to provide jobs in the arts for people with physical handicaps.


Ad Council to Test Interactive Television
The Advertising Council has announced new initiatives in two areas, agreeing to test the potential benefits of having public service campaigns appear on interactive television and joining with the Promotion Marketing Association of America to explore promotional versions of its campaigns.
The council said yesterday that it had signed an agreement with Interactive Network Inc. in Sunnyvale, Calif., to become a pro bono member of the company's charter advertiser consortium.
The consortium now has two members, the Chrysler Corporation and American Airlines.
The council, the advertising industry's nonprofit organization for public service work, will experiment in areas like measuring viewers' opinions on social issues.


Elinor Rice Hays, 92, Biographer of Women
Elinor Rice Hays, a biographer and novelist, died on Monday at St.
Luke's Hospital.
She was 92 and lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
The cause was complications from a stroke she suffered several months ago, Prof.
Harvey J. Goldschmid, a family friend, said.


Jones and Johnson: Spit for Spat
Dallas Cowboys coach JIMMY JOHNSON left the National Football League's annual spring meetings yesterday saying he was considering quitting after learning owner JERRY JONES repeatedly threatened to fire him, The Dallas Morning News reported.
In today's editions, the newspaper quoted Johnson as saying that numerous reliable sources told him that Jones was in a bar in the early hours of the morning, "and said he was going to fire me at least eight or nine times."


Prices Plummet, Life Turns Normal And Sarajevans Rush to Sell Goods
Panic selling of everything from canned fish to coffee is sweeping Sarajevo's street markets in expectation that scarcities will be eased with Wednesday's scheduled opening of the first overland routes into the city in almost two years.
When prices peaked in late January, 22 months after Sarajevo was placed under siege by Serbian nationalist forces, gasoline was selling for about $60 a gallon, and was rarely available at any price.
Ground meat was $27 a pound; coffee, $40.


Recycling Failure at the Board of Ed
When it comes to recycling, New York is all talk and little action.
The City Council passed one of the most ambitious recycling laws in the nation more than four years ago, but the city has failed to comply with it.
One of the worst offenders is the Board of Education, which has been in violation of the law for more than three years and is only now in the process of issuing regulations to guide schools in their recycling efforts.
There is no excuse for the board not to have set a better example, for schoolchildren and for other agencies in the city.
The Council passed a law in 1989 that requires 25 percent of the city's average daily waste stream to be recycled.
Mandatory recycling by city agencies was instituted in 1990.
An audit that year estimated that the city's 1,069 schools generate 120,000 tons of waste annually, or about 3 percent of its non-residential garbage.
Of the total waste produced by the schools, the auditors concluded, 33,000 tons could have been recycled.
That would be a sizable addition to the city's current recycling load of 500,000 tons a year.


You, Too, Can Dig Into Whitewater!
As if the public hasn't heard enough about dirt on the Whitewater affair, two owners of Whitewater land are offering souvenir soil from the failed Arkansas resort.
The Clintons' partner in Whitewater, James B. McDougal, and the venture's real estate broker, Chris Wade, are planning to sell dirt from three acres of Whitewater -- one cubic foot for $19.95.


El Salvador's Messed-Up Elections
Sunday's elections in El Salvador, supposedly the culmination of a United Nations-sponsored peace process, have been officially declared "acceptable." The charitable view is that they were clearly marred by incompetence.
Many observers believe there were significant instances of fraud.
The most flagrant example of bureaucratic bungling was the fact that 340,000 voting cards were never sent to voters who were approved and on the electoral rolls; they were not allowed to vote.
Many other eligible voters did not even make it onto the rolls, while numerous dead people did.
Former President Jose Napoleon Duarte and former Constituent Assembly President Roberto D'Aubuisson -- both dead -- were on the rolls.
Some of the deceased were marked off as having voted.


Time to Stretch Hands Across the Pacific
To the Editor:
Both "The Failure of Our Success" (Op-Ed, March 14) by George F. Kennan and Anthony Lewis's column the same day point to the need for the United States to reflect on its failures and successes, and develop foreign policies in response to the emerging political and economic geographies of Asia, Australia and a transformed Europe.
Mr.
Lewis finds a new sense of selfhood and acceptance of diversity in Australian public life and suggests that a new basis is needed for Australian-American relations.


Jury Hears HBO Evidence of Exchange
The HBO videotape of the Ray Mercer-Jesse Ferguson fight was played in State Supreme Court yesterday, but the hard-to-discern audio portion did little to reveal whether Mercer actually made repeated bribe offers of $100,000 for Ferguson to throw the bout.
Based on the largely inaudible tape, it appears that the prosecution's case will probably rest on the testimony of Ferguson, who is scheduled to appear today.
He has told a grand jury that during their Feb. 6, 1993 bout in Madison Square Garden, Mercer made several offers to him to throw their fight.


Congress Considers Smoking Ban in Schools
Congress is on the verge of outlawing smoking in most of the nation's schools, except in areas that are closed off to children and have outside ventilation.
The sweeping provision was made public today by House and Senate negotiators and is part of an education bill that is set for passage later this week.


Good Food in a City Not Known for Good Taste
AS a taxi approaches the neon gantlet called the Strip, the first billboard a visitor notices screams "Lobster and Steak Dinner -- $4.95!" That is the old Las Vegas, and it lives on.
The new Las Vegas beckons visitors who have more urbane tastes: a smoked salmon napoleon appetizer ($10.95) at the Buccaneer Bay Club, roasted Chinese-style duck with grapefruit sauce and Oriental crepes ($22) at Spago and pumpkin-seed-encrusted salmon with red chili and basil oils ($20) at Coyote Cafe.


5 With Spectrum Ties Are Charged
The owner and four present or former employees of an investment banking company headed until recently by Peter T. Caserta, the president of Spectrum Information Technologies Inc., were arrested yesterday and charged with bilking companies out of fees for arranging financing that was rarely procured.
One of the former employees who was arrested is currently employed by Spectrum.


Polonia Is Campaigning For Yanks' Leadoff Job
Luis Polonia hitting leadoff and Wade Boggs hitting behind him.
It is the beginning of a Yankee lineup that makes sense and might annoying opponents.
So why has Manager Buck Showalter been reluctant to christen them atop the batting order?
Polonia does not know the answer, Boggs does not care and Showalter, as usual, wants to use all the hours he can before making the decision.
But if Showalter employs a one-two combination other than Polonia and Boggs, it would be an upset.
It might upset Polonia, too.


U.S. to Try a Conciliatory Tack With China
In an effort to deal with the looming crisis over its China policy, the White House has begun a campaign to mend rifts within the Administration and to find ways to persuade China to improve its human rights performance through conciliation rather than confrontation, senior Administration officials said today.
In a closed meeting of senior national security and economic advisers at the White House today, the Administration took stock of its strategy in light of Secretary of State Warren Christopher's trip to Beijing, and decided unanimously to continue the current policy that links progress on human rights to renewal of China's low-tariff trade status when it comes up for renewal in June, the officials said.


Review/Opera; Met's 'Otello' Fuses the Old and New
"There's magic in the web of it," Shakespeare's Othello tells Desdemona of the fateful handkerchief that Iago uses to destroy them both.
On Monday night at the Metropolitan Opera, I felt like echoing Othello's words, not about the handkerchief, but about Verdi's operatic version of the tragedy, and finally about the performance itself.


Federal Inquiry Doesn't Undercut Findings on Lead Exposure
To the Editor:
"The scientist who first demonstrated that low levels of lead exposure might cause mental impairment in children has been cleared of misconduct in his research by Federal investigators" (news article, March 11).
Your article conveys the content of some of the Office of Research Integrity report on my work, but misses the mark in important areas.
The report found no evidence of scientific misconduct in the four issues raised by my critics.


ISRAEL AND P.L.O. FOCUS ON SECURITY
Palestinian and Israeli negotiators are to open talks in Cairo on Wednesday on new security arrangements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip after making some progress on the issue of international observers, officials said today.
A senior official of the Palestine Liberation Organization described the Cairo talks as a "step toward resuming formal talks" with Israel, which were interrupted after the massacre of Muslim worshipers by a Jewish settler in Hebron on Feb. 25.


Book Notes
Partners in Interpretation
Authors who know what it's like to be ridiculed, pummeled, skewered and hung out to dry in print probably couldn't help feeling twinges of glee when a Federal appeals court ruled recently that an aggrieved writer could sue The New York Times over a negative book review.
The unexpected ruling last month, by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, shocked and frightened newspaper and magazine lawyers around the country, who worried that it might well be extrapolated to apply to reviews not only of books but also of films, art and restaurants.
On Monday, The Times filed an appeal, which was to be expected; the unexpected thing was that a brief supporting The Times was filed by two writers' groups, the Association of American Publishers and the PEN American Center.
"Personal interpretation of literary works is the essence of readership and of literary criticism," the brief said.


Study Finds Hope in Immune Therapy for Cancer
An experimental cancer treatment that recruits the immune system to destroy malignant cells has been shown to help a small percentage of patients, according to a study being published today.
But experts cautioned that the rate of response was very low and that the treatment was very toxic.
Many of those who were not helped suffered severe side effects, and some died.


Funeral for Greek Orthodox Priests Killed in Crash


Foodarama Supermarkets Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Jan 29


Philip Morris
Shares of the Philip Morris Companies, the world's largest cigarette maker, dropped yesterday after the important House Ways and Means health subcommittee voted 6 to 5 to raise the Federal cigarette tax to $1.49 from 24 cents to help finance President Clinton's health care reform plan.


Ragnar Naess, Economist, 93, And Counselor
Ragnar Dekke Naess, an economist and investment counselor to individuals and institutions, died on March 15 at his retirement home in Essex, Conn.
He was 93 and had moved there from Manhattan in 1989.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


The N.F.L. Rewrites Its Rules and Reeves Asks 'Why?'
Free agency hit the National Football League with much thunder in only the last few months, and teams are still struggling with how to neatly fit their entire rosters under the new salary cap.
Now come a set of new offensive rules for coaches, primarily the 2-point conversion.


Oracle Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Less Foot, More Offense for Pro Football
The National Football League, concerned that it needed to create a more entertaining product for its fans, adopted the most sweeping rules changes in 20 years today in an effort to encourage teams to go for touchdowns rather than field goals and make the games more exciting.
The new rules -- including the 2-point conversion after touchdowns that is currently used in college football -- are designed to enhance offensive output.
The 1993 season produced a 50-year low in touchdowns per game, 4.04, while the number of field goals has increased steadily over the last decade.


Lots of Questions for Mets But Only a Few Answers
For the first month of spring training, Manager Dallas Green chuckled when asked who would hit leadoff on the Mets.
That has not changed.
For the first month, Green answered questions about his possible starter at first base and his possible infield reserves and his possible fourth and fifth starting pitchers with more uncertainty.
That hasn't changed either.
The Mets are still carrying 36 players -- 17 of them pitchers -- and do not plan to make cuts until at least Sunday.
But with less than two weeks remaining until opening day, on April 4 in Chicago, this is how the competition stacks up: Pitching
Without trades, the roster should consist of Dwight Gooden, Bret Saberhagen, Pete Smith, Mike Maddux, John Franco, Eric Hillman, Anthony Young, Pete Schourek and Bobby Jones, with the final spot still available.
Gooden, Saberhagen, Smith, Young and either Hillman or Jones should be the starters.


Price/Costco Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 13


SOUTH ASIAN LANDS PRESSED ON ARMS
Worried about an arms race between Pakistan and India, the Clinton Administration is proposing a series of agreements to stop the production of nuclear weapons in South Asia and the deployment of ballistic missiles, Administration officials said today.
Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott plans to press the arms-control efforts when he visits India and Pakistan next month, the officials said.


Review/ Film; A Young Man Torn by Good and Bad
When you'd like to make a film featuring fast, furious basketball sequences, Tom Priestley Jr. is clearly the man to see.
Mr.
Priestley shot "Blue Chips," and he is also the cinematographer on "Above the Rim," which is set in Harlem and revolves around a fiercely competitive playground game.
Presiding over this action is a grinning gangster named Birdie (Tupac Shakur), who stands to make money on the game.
Birdie hopes he can improve his odds by forcing Kyle-Lee Watson (Duane Martin) to play for his team.
Kyle is a familiar character, the young man torn between good intentions and bad influences.
If Birdie is the latter, the film's positive role model is Shep (Leon), who was once a local basketball star in his own right and now works as a security guard in Kyle's school.
Matters are complicated by the fact that Shep attracts the interest of Mailika (Tonya Pinkins), a pretty, vivacious woman who happens to be Kyle's mother.
Kyle and Mailika argue heatedly about which one of them has the right to ground the other.


Wasserstein Hires Salomon Official
Seeking to restore its image as one of Wall Street's hottest boutiques, Wasserstein Perella Inc. said yesterday that it had hired Frederick Seegal, until recently the co-head of corporate finance at Salomon Brothers, to become the firm's co-president.
Mr.
Seegal's decision to leave Salomon came as a surprise to many at the firm, if only because in recent years Wasserstein Perella, which was founded in the late 1980's by merger specialists Bruce Wasserstein and Joseph Perella, had lost both business and key people as the pace of merger activity slowed.


Democrats Overcome the Butterflies
It took an indefensibly partisan blunder by Representative Henry Gonzalez to jolt it into action, but the House has finally decided to emulate the Senate and call for hearings on the financial maze known as Whitewater.
The timing and scope of the hearings must still be decided by House leaders, and some Democrats may seek to restrict them to recent allegations of White House interference with Federal investigators.
But yesterday's House resolution orders a broad inquiry covering Madison Guaranty, a failed Arkansas savings and loan, and the Whitewater Development Company, partly owned by Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton.


The Job for Tyson
To the Editor:
Your March 18 editorial commending the self-learning and self-education of Mike Tyson while he is in prison makes stimulating and good reading.


Export Fall Broadens Trade Gap
A record plunge in exports vastly widened the nation's overall trade deficit in January even as the imbalance with Japan narrowed, Government figures showed today.
For the first time, the monthly tabulation counts services, an area that includes such things as tourism in which the United States has traditionally racked up surpluses that have significantly offset deficits in goods.


Siena Tops Tulane to Gain Quarterfinal
Siena 89, Tulane 79
Doremus Bennerman scored 33 points for the second straight game, leading Siena to an 89-79 victory last night over Tulane in the second round of the National Invitation Tournament at Albany.


Change Threatens a Legendary Street Bazaar
On Sunday mornings, a magical, seedy circus of possibilities rises from the broken streets west of the Loop, a ragtag market thick with the smell of grilled onions, the crackle of blues from cheap speakers and hagglers hunting for dried peppers or toilet seats.
For 120 years, the Maxwell Street Market has been the mall of the dispossessed, from the Jewish pushcart peddlers selling fruit at the turn of the century to the black vendors of gospel tapes and toggle bolts, the Hispanic tortilla makers and Korean gym-shoe salesmen who all inherited the market from the Jews.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALITALIA S.P.A., the Italian national airline, said it was close to signing a cooperation agreement with Continental Airlines, Houston.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., plans to increase production of a polyurethane foam insulating product at its plant in El Segundo, Calif., by 20 percent.


Harold Meriam Jr., 73, Partner in Law Firm
Harold A. Meriam Jr., a lawyer with the Brooklyn firm of Cullen &amp; Dykman for 40 years, died on Sunday at Martin Memorial Hospital in Stuart, Fla.
Mr.
Meriam, who had a winter home in nearby Jensen Beach, Fla., lived in Massapequa, L.I.
He was 73.
The cause was cancer, said John J. Bishar Jr., a partner in Cullen &amp; Dykman.


Newcomers Play Role Of Rescue Rangers
Stephane Matteau and Glenn Anderson, two of the four Rangers acquired on Monday, scored key goals tonight as New York tied the Calgary Flames, 4-4, at the Saddledome.
Matteau, acquired in a deal that sent Tony Amonte to Chicago, tied it with 14 seconds left in regulation by putting a backhanded rebound past Mike Vernon after the Rangers had pulled their goalie for an extra attacker.


Adweek Says BBDO Is Agency of Year
BBDO Worldwide in New York has been named 1993 national agency of the year by Adweek, the trade publication.
Without "the tortured self-examination or cliched reinvention that other big agencies indulge in," an Adweek article said this week, BBDO proved that "bigger can be better." Adweek declared that "what really set BBDO apart from the Madison Avenue pack last year was its unparalleled new business record," adding that the agency's network "added nearly $400 million in billings -- more than any other U.S. agency gained -- for a hefty increase of 25 percent."


Russia vs. Ukraine: A Case of the Crimean Jitters
If there is a nightmare ahead in Russia's relations with Ukraine, it is likely to feature Crimea, a peninsula of barren steppe and lush coastline that juts into the Black Sea.
In January that nightmare seemed to inch closer with the election of a Russian nationalist as the first President of Crimea, a region that was part of Russia until Khrushchev gave it to Ukraine -- then a Soviet republic -- 40 years ago.


Los Angeles Lakers Hire Magic Johnson To Be Head Coach
Magic Johnson will return to the National Basketball Association today, as coach of the Los Angeles Lakers, the team confirmed last night.
Johnson, 34, will replace Randy Pfund, who compiled a 108-119 record in two full seasons plus 63 games this season.
The Lakers (27-37) are in a rebuilding mode and are headed toward their first season not in the playoffs since the 1975-76 season.


An Einstein's Place Among the Aborigines
To the Editor:
Saul Bellow (Op-Ed, March 10) makes a leap I don't follow.
Upset by the negative response his characterization of Papuans and Zulus elicited, he cries "censorship." Cringing before the "thought-police," he equates his own plight with that of the poet in Stalinist Russia who was jailed and put to death for his views.
To my knowledge, Mr.
Bellow has been neither imprisoned nor censored.


Telemundo Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Inquiry to Cover Loan Accusation Against Clinton
After securing a guilty plea from an Arkansas businessman involving the operation of his federally backed lending company, the special prosecutor investigating the Whitewater real estate venture said he would now vigorously pursue the man's accusations that Bill Clinton had pressured him to make a questionable bank loan to Mr.
Clinton's partner in the deal.
"This will allow us a full investigation of everything he knows," the special prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr., told Judge Stephen M. Reasoner of Federal District Court in Little Rock, Ark.


As Usual at City Hall, It's the Details That Count


Norman Beamer, 80, U.S. Geological Aide
Norman Howard Beamer, a former chief of the Pennsylvania District of the United States Geological Survey, died on Monday at his home in Harrisburg, Pa.
He was 80.
He had suffered a long illness, his family said.


FEDERAL RESERVE MOVES ONCE AGAIN TO RAISE KEY RATE
Federal eserve officials voted today to nudge short-term interest rates higher for the second time in less than seven weeks.
The move set off a steep fall in long-term interest rates as the central bank appeared to succeed in convincing investors that it is committed to heading off inflation.


AT LUNCH WITH: Joe Queenan; Next, Auteur of the Bad Movie
TARRYTOWN, N.Y., is certainly picturesque, but it's not normally thought of as a town that ought to be in pictures.
But here in Bella's Restaurant, where it takes work to run a check for two into double digits, Joe Queenan is sizing up the local talent.
First and foremost, there is his own: nil.
Mr.
Queenan freely admits to knowing absolutely nothing about how to make a movie.
That is why he is determined to make one, and to make it right here.
Mr.
Queenan is the self-appointed mad dog of movie criticism, specializing in gratuitous wisecracks, ad hominem insults and exhibitionistic practical jokes.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CRACKDOWN IN SOUTH AFRICA  South Africa took command of Ciskei, another riotous black homeland, and closed in on the last and most explosive bastion of resistance, the Zulu homeland ruled by Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi.
A1  CRUCIAL LOAN GRANTED TO RUSSIA  After months of testy negotiations, the International Monetary Fund agreed to provide Russia with a $1.5 billion loan in exchange for a promise of new taxes and strict curbs on Government spending.
A1


Review/Theater; The Riddles Of Race, Circa '68
A cacophony of sirens, raised voices and gunshots pervades "The Day the Bronx Died," Michael Henry Brown's cleanly delineated anatomy of racial and class tensions in an integrated neighborhood in the late 1960's; there are vicious shouted epithets and piercing cries for mercy.
But the play's most affecting moment is a quiet one.
Three teen-age boys of disparate social backgrounds have just witnessed a murder.
And the bold adult postures they have been trying to maintain, in emulation of both baseball heroes and James Bond villains, have slipped off like oversize jackets.
Their silence and their hunched, embryonic postures are resonant with fear and a sense of futility.
Adolescent fantasies have dissolved in the face of the realization that their world is indeed a dangerous one in which death, as another character puts it, "comes fast and natural."


Black Caucus Urges Tougher Haiti Policy
The Congressional Black Caucus has sent President Clinton a blunt letter saying the Administration's Haiti policy "must be scrapped" in favor of far tougher efforts to restore the nation's exiled President to power.
The letter says the Administration has worked in a halfhearted manner to reinstate Haiti's first democratically elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Barbra Streisand Plans Her First Concert Tour
Barbra Streisand is to embark on her first concert tour on April 20, with four nights at Wembley Arena in London, it was announced yesterday.
The other dates are April 25, 27 and 29.
The London appearances are to be followed by 12 American dates, with the tour to conclude in New York City in late June.


A Lawyer Is Disbarred For Lapses Of Ethics
A prominent Manhattan lawyer was ordered disbarred yesterday for unethical conduct that included making false statements after a Federal judge accused him of improperly slipping a piece of evidence to the jury, then trying to blame his co-counsel when the judge found out.
A panel of five judges from the New York State Supreme Court's Appellate Division based its decision to disbar the lawyer, Theodore H. Friedman, on what it identified as 13 instances of unethical conduct growing out of two personal injury cases.
The panel decided the instances "were not simply inadvertent or solitary peccadillos" but "consisted of a pattern of professional misconduct."


Russia Promises Budget Curb To Win a Loan of $1.5 Billion
After months of testy negotiations, the International Monetary Fund agreed tonight to provide Russia with a crucial $1.5 billion loan in exchange for a promise of new taxes and strict curbs on Government spending.
The agreement, signed by Michel Camdessus, managing director of the I.M.F., and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, is essential to further economic support from Western governments and private businesses.
Mr.
Chernomyrdin has moved to impress foreign bankers as being much more willing to carry out tough economic measures.


Manischewitz Only Sweet? Not Anymore
From time immemorial, Manischewitz has meant sweet and inexpensive kosher wines.
Catskill entertainers recall that Moses uncorked a $2.79 Cream White Concord from upstate New York to celebrate the Jews' exodus from Egypt.
But Jews who pour sweet Manischewitz wines at Passover seders, which begin Saturday night, will this fall be able to uncork dry Manischewitz wines for the first time on Rosh ha-Shanah, to toast the new year.


Former Gulf and Western Building To Be a Luxury Apartment Tower
The former Gulf and Western Building -- which has stood for 24 years like an oversized, silver-and-black gatepost at the southwest corner of Central Park -- would be emptied of office tenants, stripped to its steel skeleton and turned into an extravagant apartment tower under plans announced yesterday.
From 200 to 300 apartments would be created in the upper part of the 44-story skyscraper, with the lower floors serving perhaps as a hotel or as offices, said Donald J. Trump, a member of the redevelopment team.
The plaza, notable for the yawning circular pit that leads to the Columbus Circle subway station, would also be rebuilt.


Off the Menu
Normandy in New York
Eric Vannier, the owner of La Mere Poulard on Mont-St.-Michel, the rocky outcropping off the coast of Normandy, yesterday opened a New York outpost at 109 East 56th Street, with Leslie Revsin in charge of the kitchen.
He has transformed what was Laurent into a suggestion of the original La Mere Poulard by installing an open fireplace (fueled by gas, not wood), where chefs make souffleed omelets in copper pans.


Premier Industrial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ammirati &amp; Puris Leaps Into Burger King's Flame
The order of the day at Burger King yesterday was -- one more time -- an advertising account, to go.
The fast feeder, notorious for continually changing its agencies, said yesterday that it would hire Ammirati &amp; Puris, a New York agency with a reputation for deft creativity.
Effective immediately, Ammirati will handle the national creative portion of Burger King's account, with billings estimated at $160 million to $180 million; the company's total annual marketing budget is about $250 million.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Amonte Scores, but Wings Win  Red Wings 3, Blackhawks 1: Tony Amonte, acquired Monday from the Rangers, took just 1 minute 51 seconds to score his first goal for Chicago, beating Chris Osgood on the power play, but after that Chicago stalled.
Nicklas Lidstrom and Vyacheslav Kozlov put Detroit ahead on first-period goals and Osgood made 19 saves to lead the Red Wings to victory at home last night.
Detroit moved back into a tie with Toronto atop both the Central Division and the Western Conference. (AP)


Oneok Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Interest Rates Tumble After Fed Acts Again
Interest rates plunged sharply yesterday, after the Federal Reserve broke precedent for the second time in two months and announced its intention to raise short-term interest rates.
In a short statement released in the afternoon, the Fed's chairman, Alan Greenspan, said the Federal Open Market Committee -- the central bank's policy-setting arm -- had "decided to increase slightly the degree of pressure on reserve positions." He added, "This action is expected to be associated with a small increase in short-term interest rates."


Forest City Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Burson-Marsteller Shifts Executives
Burson-Marsteller, the public relations unit of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., announced a series of top-level executive changes yesterday.
James H. Dowling, 62, who has been chairman since January 1992, is "stepping down," said Larry Snoddon, the president and chief executive, but will continue with the agency in an undisclosed capacity that involves working with clients.


Estelle Sommers, 74, A Patron of the Arts And Capezio Owner
Estelle Sommers, the administrator and joint owner of the nationwide Capezio Dance-Theater Shops and an arts patron who advised many important dance groups, died on Monday in her apartment in Manhattan.
She was 74.
The cause was cancer, said her daughter Gayle Miller.


Rick Barnes Heads to Clemson
Clemson hired the Providence basketball coach, RICK BARNES, yesterday, offering him a seven-year contract.
Barnes replaces CLIFF ELLIS, who has taken the Tigers to the National Invitation Tournament but said in January this would be his last season after 10 years at the school.


Youths Are Arrested After 12 Muggings
Five teen-agers were arrested yesterday and charged with attacking and robbing elderly women in Canarsie, Brooklyn, over a three-week period, breaking one 70-year-old's skull and hip, the police said.
Lieut.
Thomas Sbordone, a spokesman for the housing police, said the muggings began on Feb. 24 and quickly escalated in brutality.
"What started as pushing and shoving grew to punching and choking," he said.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


A Droll Tale
To the Editor:
"Ban English? French Bicker on Barricades" (front page, March 15) and "Plus Ca Change . . ." (editorial, March 17), regarding attempts by the French to preserve the ethnic purity of their language, remind me of an apochryphal story on the origin of the French noun for the overhead door casement, or transom -- "vasistas."


A Fiery Protest by a Kurd in Germany


Executive Director Named For Brooklyn Philharmonic
Joseph Horowitz, the artistic adviser to the Brooklyn Philharmonic, has been named executive director of the orchestra.
The appointment was announced yesterday by Harvey Lichtenstein, the executive producer of both the orchestra and the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
As artistic adviser for the last two seasons, Mr.
Horowitz has been involved in planning programs with Mr.
Lichtenstein and the orchestra's principal conductor, Dennis Russell Davies.
His new position will combine those duties with those of the executive director, which include overseeing budgets, marketing and the day-to-day running of the orchestra.
He takes up his new duties on April 4.


Cortines, Upset, Moves Student AIDS Center
Prompted by the distribution of explicit literature on gay sex at a student conference, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines is reorganizing an AIDS clearinghouse for high school students and placing it more directly under his control.
The Board of Education's H.I.V.-AIDS Resource Center was among more than a dozen sponsors of a Feb. 12 conference at New York University on ways to educate youths on safe sex and preventing the spread of AIDS.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Goaltenders
It has long been said and often proven that any team can win a tournament provided its goalie reaches exalted heights, meaning he must play above his demonstrated skills.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Federal Reserve officials voted to raise short-term interest rates for the second time in less than seven weeks, setting off a fall in long-term rates as the move seemed to convince investors that the Fed is intent on heading off inflation.  [ Page A1. ]


Gooden Bids for a New Deal
Joe McIlvaine met with Jim Neader, Dwight Gooden's agent, for one hour in the general manager's office at Thomas J. White Stadium this afternoon as discussions opened on a new contract for Gooden.
Although the two sides apparently remain quite far apart when it comes to dollar amounts, both McIlvaine and Neader termed the talks amicable.
Gooden, a Met since 1984, is in the final year of three-year contract that averages $5.15 million a season, the sixth-highest among pitchers this season, as determined by average salary.


Panel Supports $1.25 Increase For Cigarettes
Going far beyond President Clinton's request, a Congressional subcommittee voted today to increase the Federal tax on cigarettes by $1.25 a pack as part of a comprehensive bill to guarantee health insurance for all Americans.
The same panel, the Health Subcommittee of the Ways and Means Committee, also voted to impose a new payroll tax on all employers.
The tax would be eight-tenths of 1 percent of payroll.
Most of the new revenue would be used to help low-income people and small businesses buy health insurance.


Market Place; The art market is getting livelier and Sotheby's shares are rising.
IN this era, when companies come into this world in a flash and often have a half-life of a few years, it is reassuring to note that Sotheby's Holdings, the world's largest auction house, has been in business since 1744.
Despite this 250-year lineage, however, Sotheby's stock has been trading lately with all the madness of an initial public offering.
The stock jumped from $16 a share a month ago to a high of $19.50 last week, a 22 percent surge.
It closed yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange at $18.50, down 12.5 cents, still a heady 50 times earnings.
It's as though the same fever that people catch at Sotheby's auctions is now affecting share buyers.


16 Paratroopers Die In Crash's Aftermath
Sixteen Army paratroopers were killed and 82 were injured after a fighter jet collided with a cargo plane over Pope Air Force Base, North Carolina.
Burning debris ignited a transport plane on the ground where the paratroopers were gathering.
Article, page A16.


Gunfire Kills Two Students After Fight at a Bronx Park
A dispute at a sandlot softball game in the Bronx ended in a fusillade of bullets yesterday when a young gunman fired a semiautomatic pistol at a group of high school students, killing a 20-year-old woman and a 17-year-old boy and wounding another student, the police said.
The shooting took place at 11:30 A.M. outside a park at 166th Street and Tinton Avenue, two blocks from Morris High School.
The victims were students at the school and were supposed to be in class at the time of the shooting, school officials said.


Revisiting Property Rights, Court Still Seems on Fence
The clash between private property rights and government land-use regulation is a fixture on the Supreme Court's docket, and the real question as the two sides met today to make their familiar arguments in the latest such dispute was whether this would be the case that would definitively push the Court into the property-rights camp.
The answer, after the hourlong argument, appeared to be no.


Seagram Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Milford A. Vieser; Executive, 91
Milford A. Vieser, a retired mortgage and real-estate finance executive who lived in Short Hills, N.J., died yesterday at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
He was 91.
The cause was pneumonia, said his wife, Vera.


Review/Film Festival; Undead Again: A Suave Vampire
For proof that the vampire film is resoundingly undead, consider "Cronos," a very stylish and sophisticated Mexican variation on some age-old themes.
With the very names of his principal characters (Jesus Gris and Angel de la Guardia), Guillermo del Toro, the writer and director, signals the mordant playfulness of his film.
Not every vampire has a granddaughter named Aurora, either.
In terms of its essential subject matter, "Cronos" has not discovered much that's new under (or out of) the sun.
But this film's reflective, even stately style elevates it from the ranks of ordinary stake-through-the-heart vampire dramaturgy, turning it into something much more exotic.
Suffused with clever ambiguities and staged with unexpected grace, "Cronos" finds its originality in unlikely ways.
This must be the only vampire film in which an impeccably dressed, white-haired gentleman has ever felt compelled to lie down and lick a bathroom floor.


The Police and Fire Sanctuaries
The message from the head of New York City's Municipal Assistance Corporation to Mayor Rudolph Giuliani could not be much plainer: In a city with limited resources, it is only fair and practical that everyone share the pain of budget cuts.
As Eugene Keilin, chairman of the M.A.C., expressed it, that means no "sanctuaries" -- no exemptions -- from the difficult effort to improve productivity and efficiency without destroying city services.
Mr.
Keilin, whose agency monitors the city's fiscal strength, is focusing on a serious problem in Mayor Giuliani's preliminary budget plan.
It exempts the police and fire departments from significant budget cuts.
How can Mr.
Giuliani expect sacrifice from everyone else if he protects some city agencies?


S. W. Dunwell, 80, Engineer at I.B.M.; Designed Computers
Stephen W. Dunwell, an engineer who guided the development of the I.B.M. supercomputer of the 1960's and designed the AUL computer language in the 1980's, died on Monday at his home in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
He was 80.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Essay; My Wei
"We put Wei Jingsheng behind bars, didn't we?" sneered Deng Xiaoping in 1979, when an aide suggested a crackdown on dissidents might not be in China's interests.
"Did that damage China's reputation?"
The paramount leader was mistaken.
The jailing of Wei, the young editor of an unauthorized magazine who led the abortive "Democracy Wall" movement, severely damaged China's reputation -- and the incarceration did not stop the protest in Tiananmen Square a decade later.


One by One, Marquees Light Up As Spring Comes to Broadway
It's almost April, and as sure a sign of spring as any is that old bear Broadway, lumbering out from under its snow blanket and blinking itself awake just in time for the Tony Award nominations.
Winter, always the sleepiest time of the Broadway season, has been especially so this year, with the biggest news -- "Show Boat" ushers in the $75 ticket!
Glenn Close replaces Patti LuPone in "Sunset Boulevard"! -- concerning shows not due until fall.
And as has been the pattern the last several years, the season's final month will be its busiest, with 12 shows opening before the Tony deadline on May 11, beginning tonight with "Carousel" at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center.
Up to now, what kind of season has it been?
Well, not too good.
The consensus, in the words of Alan Wasser, the general manager of three Broadway musicals, is "it's been slow, no question, both in terms of production and in terms of attendance." As in the last few seasons, he said, "you reach March and nothing much has happened, and then there's a handful of things coming in that everyone pins their hopes on." Signs of Hope
Nonetheless, there are some positive notes.
All but 2 of Broadway's 35 theaters have had or will have a booking this season.
And despite the worst winter weather in memory, compared to the situation last year at this time, the number of total productions is up (to 24 from 19), attendance is about even (right around 6 million) and total receipts, more than $266 million, are up slightly.


A.A. and Religion
To The Home Section:


CHRONICLE
Dr.
RICHARD LEAKEY resigned as head of the Kenya Wildlife Service on Wednesday to protest new Government policies.
Dr.
Leakey said at a news conference in Nairobi that Government-ordered changes in the wildlife service's operation and a "campaign of vilification" against him made it impossible for him to continue there, The Associated Press reported.


AN AFTERNOON WITH: Masters and Johnson; Divorced, Yes, But Not Split
PROFESSIONALLY, they were the most renowned couple engaged in the study of human sexuality.
To the world at large they were, quite simply, the sex experts.
All of which made the news of their separation in 1992, after 21 years of marriage, and their divorce last year, a major surprise.
Dr.
William H. Masters, 78, and Virginia E. Johnson, 69, have always been full of surprises.
They have been lambasted and lauded, lightning rods for controversy and criticism, for almost three decades.
When these voluble and strong-willed partners published a physiology textbook in 1966, they suddenly became public creatures.
The book, "Human Sexual Response," dealing with the science of human sexuality, became a huge popular success, and their names were inextricably linked.
Their marriage, in 1971, officially sealed the pairing.


FEDERAL ARCHIVES TO TAKE IN E-MAIL
The National Archives today released new rules that would require the preservation of the most important of the millions of electronic mail messages sent daily by computer in agencies throughout the Government.
The rules were developed in response to a court ruling last year that put computer files on a par with paper documents.
But while that court case concerned electronic mail in the White House in the Reagan and Bush Administrations, the rules released today create a mechanism for saving and eventually making available to researchers computer messages in all Federal agencies.
The guidelines, now subject to public comment, should be in place within five months.


Huge Gas Pipeline Explosion Rocks Northeast New Jersey
A huge natural gas explosion rocked Edison, N.J., late last night, lighting a fierce orange blaze that destroyed several nearby apartment buildings and turned night into day for miles around.
At least 10 people were reported injured.
The source of the inferno was a natural gas pipeline owned by Texas Eastern Transmission Corporation of Houston, company officials said.
Richard Lemke, the Edison fire chief, said the heat from the blast, which occurred shortly before midnight, touched off fires in the Durham Woods neighborhood and the area was evacuated.


'Intelligent Oil' From Quaker State
The Quaker State Corporation, the producer of Pennsylvania motor oil, plans to introduce a campaign for "intelligent oil for longer engine life" on the CBS broadcast tonight of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's men's basketball tournament.
The campaign, the first produced by Chiat/Day, Los Angeles, since that agency won the Quaker State account from Grey Advertising, New York, in January, consists of one 60-second and four 30-second spots, which tout the ability of Quaker State oil to adapt itself to the existing engine or environmental conditions.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
American Telephone and Telegraph Co., New York, is selling $400 million of 6 3/4 percent notes due in 2004 priced at 99.265 to yield 6.853 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable issue is rated Aa-3 by Moody's, AA by S.&amp; P. and AA+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Nigerians Spared Deportation
A Federal immigration judge ruled today that a Nigerian woman living illegally in the United States would not be deported to her native country because her two young daughters would probably face genital mutilation if they accompanied her.
The woman, Lydia Oluloro, 32, clutched her daughters and choked back tears when Judge Kendall Warren, presiding in Seattle, ruled that a pending deportation order be suspended.
The ruling paved the way for Mrs.
Oluloro to apply for an extended work visa and remain indefinitely in the United States.


People
*
Mark Smelzer has been named national advertising manager by Buzz magazine, in Los Angeles, succeeding Jo Campbell-Brand, who was named liquor advertising manager at New York magazine.
Mr.
Smelzer had been an account manager at Premiere magazine, Los Angeles.


Abstract Art's White House Debut
American Presidents have had many talents, but an eye for art is not foremost among them.
Imperfect taste, it seems, is a bipartisan affliction.
Theodore Roosevelt's idea of sculpture was stuffed moose heads, and he displayed an array in the State Dining Room.
Harry S. Truman was unimpressed by his contemporary Jackson Pollock, likening the artist's drip paintings to "scrambled eggs."
The question of what art should hang in the White House has never been too prominent on the national agenda.
In a country that prides itself on its down-to-earth pragmatism and views high art as elitist, it's not even clear that having taste is a political asset.
America likes its Presidents to be virile, better at splitting wood than at discerning the fine points of a Monet haystack.


New York Asks Court's Tax Aid
In an unusual election-year appearance, the New York State Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, went to the Supreme Court today to argue for New York's efforts to collect perhaps $100 million a year in lost revenues by cracking down on the sale of tax-exempt cigarettes to non-Indians on reservations around the state.
"There's a huge amount of evasion going on," Mr.
Koppell told the justices, noting that a past survey showed that if cigarettes sold in Indian smoke shops were smoked only by tribe members, every Indian man, woman and child in the state would have to smoke 15 packs a day.


Review/Dance; When 'Modern' Didn't Necessarily Mean 'Frantic'
Something surprising happened at the Joyce Theater at approximately 8:05 on Tuesday night.
The curtain rose on a modern-dance concert, and a stage full of prettiness.
Clearly defined men and women moved through glowing light, dressed in simple clothes that would clearly never pass muster with any self-respecting high-fashion designer.
Lilting Chopin issued from a piano to the left of the stage, accompanying the performers through dances from Jose Limon's lyrical "Mazurkas."
There were reassuring doses of angst and rigorous abstraction to come.
Limon, who died in 1972, had his feet firmly planted on the ground and his eyes turned upward.
But this first program of the Limon Dance Company's two-week season at the Joyce opened a door -- through "Mazurkas" and an eloquent performance of the Limon classic "The Moor's Pavane" -- onto a different world than that of the brainy, stylish, hyperactive modern dance of the 1990's.


Macy Plan Draws Fire From a Large Creditor
After days of closed-door negotiations of the board, R. H. Macy &amp; Company took the wraps off its proposed plan of reorganization yesterday, revealing a complex compromise that seeks to appease all creditors but that is contingent in some part on what happens to the retailer in the future.
But hours after the company disclosed its proposal, Fidelity Investments, the giant mutual fund company that is one of Macy's most powerful senior creditors, made it clear that it would fight Macy's plan.


Book Says Britain Bluffed About Its H-Bomb
In the darkest days of the cold war, Britain bluffed about its development of the hydrogen bomb and in fact was so unsure of its work that it turned to the United States to obtain hydrogen-bomb plans, parts and weapons, nuclear historians have asserted.
The episode shows the great pressures nations and politicians faced during the East-West conflict and shows that nuclear prowess was sometimes more illusory than real.


CHRONICLE
What makes this Sunday's Grateful Dead concert different from all other Grateful Dead concerts?
Bitter herbs (albeit legal ones) are part of the answer.
The venerable hippie band will be holding a seder backstage at the Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, L.I., on Sunday, the second night of Passover, after taking Saturday off from performing.


U.S. May Ease Rights Goals With Beijing
The Clinton Administration, in an effort to resolve the crisis in relations with China, has been quietly signaling Beijing that if it met Washington's minimum human rights demands, the United States would consider ending the annual threat of trade sanctions to change Chinese behavior.
Administration officials said today that there was already a consensus within President Clinton's economic team, which is now spreading to the White House and even parts of the State Department, that the annual rite of threatening China with a withdrawal of its beneficial trade status if it does not meet certain human rights conditions is outmoded and should be replaced.


Mixing Modern With a Bit of Grandeur


Mastercard the Card of Cup
Ending a bitter fight between credit cards, a Federal judge ruled yesterday that Mastercard is the only official credit card for the 1994 World Cup.
Mastercard International, a World Cup sponsor, had sued World Cup USA 1994 and Sprint Telecommunications, a partner for the American organizers, after Sprint sent out telephone calling cards with a World Cup logo.
Sprint argued that World Cup USA had sold it the right to be the exclusive calling card.
But Mastercard asserted that such a card was not distinctly different from its product.


World League Revival in '95
The Fox Network joined the National Football League yesterday as a partner in the once-failed World League, which will be revived in 1995 as a six-team European entity.
Fox's payment for its 49 percent stake was not disclosed.


Wild for Animals
THERE is a school of thought that holds that animals should be seen and not heard.
But some people love animals so much they not only have pets -- squawks, yelps and all -- but also collect animal paintings or other art works.
Menagerie, an antiques shop devoted to animal themes, is for lovers of the inanimate animal.
It is also a store within a store, having opened in January at Vernay &amp; Jussel, a shop at 625 Madison Avenue (59th Street) that specializes in 18th-century English furniture.


Italy's Knight in Teflon: Tycoon Repulses Charges
The candidate had been touching the bases -- the soccer set in Milan, the disco set in Rome, the homemakers, the aristocrats, the Chief Rabbi.
Then, last weekend, he traveled to Palermo to take on the mob, his message relayed by television hookup to piazzas across Italy.
But before he threw down his gauntlet to the Mafia, Silvio Berlusconi, the most packaged and most talked about of the candidates for Italy's watershed election this weekend -- and some would say its most likely winner -- wanted to tell his audience what they wanted to hear after years as Italy's economic orphans.


UConn Coach Is Hoping Youth Will Be Served
Geno Auriemma became 40 years old today.
He knows just what he would like for a birthday present: the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship for his women's basketball team at Connecticut.
"I know how good we are and how bad we are," Auriemma said after today's 90-minute practice here.
"We're good, as good as anybody in the country. Hopefully, we will prove that in the next few days. But I wouldn't be surprised if we lost. We have a lot of young kids."


China's Leaders Will Sooner Listen to Friends; What Diplomacy Means
To the Editor:
Your March 14 front-page analysis is headlined "Chinese Puzzle," but then you proceed to fit the pieces together.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher was urged by Chinese leaders to postpone his visit, with the National People's Congress opening one day after his arrival, and some American officials have conceded that the visit was ill timed.


Buttafuoco Released After 129 Days


North West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Hydro-Quebec reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Not the Last of This Tribe; Mohegans, Granted U.S. Recognition, Want a Casino
Through this village runs the road to riches, a state highway that speeds cars across the Thames River toward the Mashantucket Pequot casino in nearby Ledyard, where gamblers spend almost $2 million a day.
But this side of the river is also Indian territory.
The Mohegans, descendants of the great sachem Uncas, have lived here on Mohegan Hill for centuries.
Now that the Federal Government in a ruling this month finally, officially determined that yes, this group "does exist as an Indian tribe," the road to riches may soon lead to a Mohegan casino, too.


Bentt Collapses Again
MICHAEL BENTT, who was hospitalized when he blacked out after losing his World Boxing Organization heavyweight crown Saturday night in London, collapsed on the flight home to New York on Tuesday, his manager, STAN HOFFMAN, said yesterday.
But Hoffman said the fighter may be suffering from low blood sugar and not a neurological injury.
He said Bentt, who was at his mother's home in Cambria Heights, Queens, would undergo tests today or tomorrow for hypoglycemia.


Germany Plays Like Defending Champion Against Italy
True, Roberto Baggio, the world's best soccer player, with or without a ponytail, was not in the Italian lineup.
True, the World Cup finals are nearly three months away.
But the Germans still had plenty to be pleased about tonight after their first international outing of the new year.
Their 2-1 victory over Europe's other current team of reference, Italy, left little doubt that Captain Lothar Matthaus and his familiar supporting cast remain quite capable of winning more significant matches in the United States this summer.


For Lubavitch Hasidim, Caravan of 'Mitzvah Tanks' Honors Rebbe
The bedraggled panhandler wearily jingling a cupful of coins wanted money.
The woman handing out fliers wanted to persuade passers-by that Mrs.
Miller, a psychic, could solve all their problems.
Guaranteed.


Man in Bulletproof Vest Slain by Officers
A 29-year-old Brooklyn man wearing a bulletproof vest was shot and killed during a struggle with two police officers over a gun he was carrying and allegedly had pointed at them, the police said.
Two street-crime-unit officers in plain clothes assigned to the new gun-apprehension team were on patrol in a marked blue and white police car in East New York about 12:25 A.M. when a livery-cab driver told them he had seen one of two men waving a gun on the street, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnes.


Pitt-DesMoines Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Clinton on TV
The following television networks have scheduled live broadcasts of the President's news conference tonight at 7:30: CBS (channel 2), NBC (channel 4), ABC (channel 7), FOX 5 (channel 5), PBS, CNN and C-SPAN.


Magic Is Back: Returns to Coach Lakers
From one Los Angeles Laker legend to another, it was not the warmest of receptions that Jerry West extended Magic Johnson yesterday.
In announcing Johnson as the team's new head coach, the Lakers' general manager said it was Jerry Buss's idea, not his.
What the owner and Magic wanted, the owner and Magic got.


King Damage Suit Goes To Court in Los Angeles
First it was about police brutality.
Then it was about the fairness of the justice system.
Now it is about money.
A third trial involving Rodney G. King is beginning this week as Mr.
King seeks millions of dollars in civil damages almost exactly three years after he was beaten and kicked by Los Angeles police officers on March 3, 1991.


Clinton Rejects Clemency Request Of American Who Spied for Israel
President Clinton today rejected a clemency request for Jonathan J. Pollard, the American convicted of spying for Israel in 1987.
Mr.
Clinton agreed with the recommendation forwarded by Attorney General Janet Reno shortly after reviewing it this afternoon.
His decision, which had been expected, was in accordance with the unanimous recommendations of the Justice and Defense Departments and the Central Intelligence Agency.


Honors
*
Verba DDB Needham has been elected as agency of the year for 1993, by the Pubblicita Italia Group.


Administration Takes Fed's Action in Stride
Clinton Administration officials refrained from criticizing the Federal Reserve today, even as big commercial banks began raising their prime lending rates slightly late this afternoon to follow the central bank's decision on Tuesday to nudge up short-term interest rates.
Gene Sperling, a senior official on the President's National Economic Council, said tonight of the prime rate increase, "This was a predictable consequence of yesterday's Fed action, and it is not inconsistent with our view that economic growth is strong and inflation is under control."


Accounts
*
Grow Consumer Products, Havre de Grace, Md., to Eisner &amp; Associates, Baltimore, for advertising and public relations, after a competition that included Gray Kirk/Van Sant, Baltimore and the Weightman Group, Philadelphia.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Winston-Salem, N.C. to G S D &amp; M, Austin, Tex., as agency of record, after a review that included Pike &amp; Cassels, Winston-Salem, the incumbent.
Billings are estimated at $1 million.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE 6.00 6.00 6.00
DISCOUNT RATE 3.00 3.00 3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS* 3.43 3.44 2.92
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS 3.45 3.50 2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS 3.77 3.79 3.00
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES 6.48 6.42 5.96
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS 6.89 6.84 6.82
TELEPHONE BONDS 7.73 7.72 7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS** 5.97 5.99 5.98
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
While Deadheads are famous for their devotion, some fans of MORRISSEY, the literate English rock-and-roll cult figure, are just as zealous.
A dozen of them were already camped out in front of Carnegie Hall yesterday morning , waiting to buy tickets that go on sale today at 11 A.M. for his concerts on April 11 and 12.
VICTORIA SCHWANER, 24, from Upper Marlboro, Md., arrived at Carnegie Hall yesterday at 3:30 A.M., along with two friends with whom she publishes a fanzine called Wild About Morrissey.
They plan to follow the singer around for the next three months as he tours the United States.


Giulietta Masina, Italian Actress Who Inspired Fellini, Dies at 73
Giulietta Masina, the waiflike actress who became one of Italy's best-known movie stars, died today in a Rome hospital less than five months after the death of her husband, the director Federico Fellini.
She was 73.
The cause was cancer, said Prof.
Paolo Pola, who had treated Miss Masina in the Columbus Clinic in Rome.


Gas Explosion Lights the Sky Over New Jersey


Frank Joseph Kenny; Trucking Executive, 88
Frank Joseph Kenny, who led one of New York City's oldest trucking companies, died on Saturday at Riverview Medical Center in Red Bank, N.J.
He was 88 and lived in Little Silver, N.J.
Mr.
Kenny, a native of Brooklyn, retired in 1974 as president of the Monroe Express Company, founded by his father, Thomas.
He was with the company for 48 years.


Childhood Memories
To The Home Section:
Regarding "Perils of a Nice Jewish Girl in a Colonial Bedroom" (Feb. 17).
Elaine Reichek, I'm sorry your childhood memories were so harsh and wanting.
I too grew up in the 50's and 60's in New York, and found plenty of opportunities to enjoy the spirit of Judaism without being overly religious.
What's the matter, you couldn't create a menorah out of construction paper and bring it home from school like the rest of us did?
Or buy some chocolate coins (Hanukkah gelt) from Barricini's candy store to share with your friends?


Haiti's Death Mask
A spasm of terror is convulsing Haiti, terror that recalls the Duvalier dynasty's monstrous Tontons Macoute.
It is intended to quash forever any hope for the return of Haiti's elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
In February, the U.N.
Civilian Mission to Haiti, a human rights monitoring team, investigated 40 to 50 killings, 20 disappearances and nearly a dozen rapes in the capital of Port-au-Prince alone.
For March, the team has already recorded more than 20 deaths.


Top Presidential Candidate Is Assassinated in Mexico
Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta, the candidate who was considered likely to extend the governing party's 65-year control of Mexico's presidency, was assassinated early this evening as he walked through a crowd of supporters in a poor neighborhood in the border city of Tijuana.
Mr.
Colosio, 44, was reportedly shot twice with a .38 caliber pistol, a presumably fatal wound in the head and another in the chest or stomach.
Eyewitnesses said Mr.
Colosio, his forehead covered with blood, was carried by campaign workers across a footbridge and taken in a campaign car to Tijuana General Hospital, about two miles away over rough ground.


Richard L. Harris; Shipping Executive, 74
Richard L. Harris, an amateur sportsman and retired shipping executive, died last Saturday at his home in Southampton, L.I.
He was 74.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Jean.


Rochester Community Savings Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Japan's Economy Grows at Slowest Pace Since '74
Prospects for Japan's recovery from its worst recession in the postwar era look uncertain after the Government reported on Tuesday that the economy grew last year at its slowest rate in nearly two decades.
With a surge in the value of the yen and a sharp decline in corporate investment, the Japanese economy in 1993 grew only one-tenth of a percent when adjusted for inflation.


Mr. Perry's Backward Nuclear Policy
Under former Defense Secretary Les Aspin's leadership, the Pentagon put a high priority on curbing the spread of nuclear arms to other nations -- and on reducing the role played by nuclear arms in Washington's own strategy.
That policy made sense because the proliferation of nuclear weapons potentially poses a direct danger to the United States and its allies and because the Pentagon, with its overwhelming superiority in conventional arms, has no need to rely heavily on a nuclear arsenal that will only encourage other nations to emulate it.


Review/Theater: Twilight -- Los Angeles, 1992; A One-Woman Riot Conjures Character Amid the Chaos
Anna Deavere Smith is the ultimate impressionist: she does people's souls.
She is so good at the task that to describe "Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992" as a one-woman show is patently ridiculous.
Probing the riots that erupted in April of that year, after the first Rodney King trial, she gives an epic accounting of neighborhoods in chaos, a city in anguish and a country deeply disturbed by the violent images, live and in color, coming over the nightly airwaves.


Bombay Journal; As India's Economy Fattens, Feeding Is Frenzied
In Paras Jhaveri's line of work, it pays to be agile.
Blind-side tackles, headlocks, even tag-team matches are part of the daily routine.
But never mind, Mr.
Jhaveri says.
Although a relative flyweight at 5 feet 3 inches and 130 pounds, he considers himself a match for whatever comes along.


Schools' Woes With Asbestos Linked to Zeal
Federal prosecutors investigating the flawed 1989 asbestos inspections of New York City schools have concluded that an overzealous desire to comply with deadlines for Federal paper work, not bribery or profiteering, led to the falsification of inspection reports, according to law-enforcement officials.
The city could have simply sought an extension.
Across the nation, thousands of other school districts had not filed their asbestos-inspection paper work as late as two years after the deadline.


Big Banks Are Raising Prime Rate For Lending by 1/4 Point, to 6 1/4%
Citibank, Chase Manhattan, Chemical and a host of other banks increased their prime rates yesterday to 6 1/4 percent from 6 percent after the Federal Reserve's decision on Tuesday to raise short-term interest rates to fend off inflation.
The prime-rate increase will mean higher interest for millions of consumers and businesses as the rates on many mortgages, credit cards and small-business loans are linked to the prime.


Pep Boys-Manny, Moe &amp; Jack reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Two Indicted In the Killing Of an Officer
A Bronx grand jury indicted two men yesterday in the killing of Police Officer Sean McDonald, a rookie patrolman slain last week on a Bronx street after he tried to halt a robbery at a small clothing store.
The grand jury brought a basic felony murder charge, known in New York State as second-degree murder, against each suspect, but not the special charge of killing a police officer, known as first-degree murder.


Accused Serial Killer on L.I. Called a Suspect in 1989 Slaying of a Woman
Five years ago, a golfer made a grisly discovery after hooking a shot into the woods at a golf course in Hopewell Township, N.J. -- the severed head of a young woman.
Today the police are still trying to learn the woman's identity, but they have a suspect in her slaying: Joel Rifkin, the Long Island man who has confessed to killing 17 women, most of them prostitutes he picked up in Manhattan.


ICH Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


At Last, a Sneak Preview of Big Blue's Strategy
Remember Lou Gerstner's "vision" thing?
He created quite a stir last July when, as the new payroll-slashing chairman of I.B.M., Louis V. Gerstner Jr. said, "The last thing I.B.M. needs right now is a vision."


Bonilla's Injury Worries Green
For a week, Bobby Bonilla has been quietly expressing concern about the status of his injured right rib cage.
Today, Manager Dallas Green of the Mets seconded Bonilla's feelings when he admitted that he was very concerned about the recovery of one of his key veteran players.
While team doctors continue to reassure both player and manager that a magnetic resonance imaging exam is not necessary, Green has decided to shut Bonilla down completely for the next few days.
He's not allowed to pick up a bat or take infield practice.


Sharpe Has Toe Surgery
Green Bay Packers wide receiver STERLING SHARPE, bothered much of last season by a turf-toe injury, underwent surgery yesterday and should recover in time for next season.
The trainer PEPPER BURRUSS said Sharpe would have a cast and would be on crutches for up to six weeks.
Sharpe injured the big toe on his left foot in a game at Kansas City on Nov. 8.
He played the rest of the season but could not practice because of pain from the injury. (AP)


Chrysler's Luxury-Sedan Sales Lag
Dealers' inventories of two luxury models of the Chrysler Corporation's LH sedans are running far above average for the automobile industry, an indication that the cars are not selling as fast as the company had hoped.
The cars have piled up on dealers' lots because Chrysler has not offered lease deals that are as attractive as those of its competitors in the luxury market, said Jack Kirnan, an auto industry analyst with Salomon Brothers.


China's Leaders Will Sooner Listen to Friends; Tibet Obscured
To the Editor:
President Clinton has demanded "preservation of Tibet's 'unique' cultural heritage" as a condition for future renewal of China's most favored nation status.
That is a conveniently ambiguous condition.


High School Player of Year Decides to Attend St. John's
St.
John's University may not have a nickname at the moment, but yesterday the school landed the biggest name in high school basketball.
Felipe Lopez, the 6-foot-5-inch swingman from Rice High School in Harlem, and the consensus national player of the year, ended months of speculation by announcing at a news conference at the Gauchos Gym in the South Bronx that he would attend the school in Queens.


Novell Acquisitions Hinge On Stock Price Fluctuation
Shares in Novell Inc. continued their decline today as wary investors expressed discomfort with the networking giant's planned acquisition of both the Wordperfect Corporation and the Quattro Pro spreadsheet business of Borland International Inc.
Some analysts suggested the merger could fall through if Novell's share price fell too low.
Novell shares closed today at $19, down $1, on extremely heavy volume of 21.8 million shares in Nasdaq trading.
Novell shares fell $3.75 on Tuesday on still heavier volume, after Monday's announcement that the company would swap 59 million shares, then worth about $1.4 billion, for privately held Wordperfect, and pay $145 million in cash for Quattro Pro.


Nationwide Cellular Service Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Miami Gets Interim Owner
H.
Wayne Huizenga's purchase of the Miami Dolphins was approved on an interim basis and divisional realignment concepts were presented by the National Football League owners today at their annual spring meeting.
Huizenga -- a billionaire who owns among other entities Blockbuster Video, the Florida Marlins of the National League and the Florida Panthers of the National Hockey League, was granted approval of his purchase of the Dolphins from the family of the team founder, Joe Robbie, who died on Jan. 7, 1990, despite the league's current rules that prohibit corporations or individuals who own other professional sports teams from owning N.F.L. teams.


Reinventing Antiques
PARISH-HADLEY, the New York interior design firm of choice for Astors, Rockefellers and Whitneys, is introducing adaptations of their collection of antiques from the 17th through the 19th centuries.
Soon, even common folk will be able to perch on curvaceous Parish-Hadley black-lacquer armchairs, both views at right, or set a cup of coffee on a side table, below, with concave legs and a faux stone top.
The pieces are to go on sale at stores nationwide in October. (The firm's two previous lines -- one of painted furniture, the other of rugs -- are sold only to the trade.)


White House Aide Who Failed to Pay A Tax Is Punished
A senior White House lawyer, William H. Kennedy 3d, was stripped tonight of his job overseeing background checks of Administration appointees after lapses that suggested that he himself had sought to conceal embarrassing information.
The announcement, in a terse White House statement, followed an intensive review by top Clinton aides of Mr.
Kennedy's conduct, including his failure until three weeks ago to pay 1991 Social Security taxes for a nanny employed by him and his wife.


Goldwater Defending Clinton; Conservatives Feeling Faint
When he said Government had no business trying to outlaw abortion, some people told him to retire from politics.
When he spoke out in favor of a new Phoenix ordinance protecting homosexuals from discrimination, and said they should be able to serve in the military, that got him in more trouble.


Reviews/Dance; Stormily, Harlem Troupe's Tribute to Ginastera
The repertory of Dance Theater of Harlem includes three works to music by Alberto Ginastera.
By presenting all three on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater, the company paid tribute to this Argentine composer, who lived from 1916 to 1983.
The scores tended to be episodic in nature, offering many opportunities for theatrical variety and contrast.
At the same time, these compositions occasionally became traps in which choreographers got themselves bogged down in disconnected incidents not joined by a unifying idea.
Yet Ginastera's rhythmic propulsiveness and his tart, dissonant, but never grating harmonies made it understandable why his music should be used for ballets.


Adversity No Problem In Perfect Month
Unlikely as it may seem, in a month in which they lost John Starks for the rest of the regular season and then saw Charles Smith grounded by a day-to-day sore knee, the reserve-dominated Knicks have not lost a game.
With each new setback, the Knicks have found a way to meet the challenge, a trend that can be seen by studying Hubert Davis's record for the month.
In his first four games as a starter beginning March 1, the 23-year-old Davis, a second-year shooting guard, scored in the single digits as Starks took up the slack in reserve.


A Populist From Texas Who Bows to No One
Lawmakers were utterly appalled this week when Representative Henry B. Gonzalez dispatched a paint-peeling letter to his colleague Jim Leach, calling the Iowa Republican obdurate, obstinate, premeditated, willfully disobedient and, by clear implication, irresponsible.
That is not to say anyone was particularly surprised.


Giants' Young Seems Headed For Retirement
George Young, one of the most respected and cherished executives in the National Football League, might retire as the Giants' general manager at the end of the coming season because of health problems, according to several league officials and people close to the situation.
Young, who built two Super Bowl teams and was recently named N.F.L. executive of the year by The Sporting News, said he had not spoken to anyone at the league office about his plans.


Bebeto's Two Goals Lead Brazil Past Argentina
Restoring the art to Brazilian soccer, Brazil danced around a heavy-footed Argentine team tonight and won, 2-0, with the star striker Bebeto scoring both goals.
In a foretaste of the style that will make its World Cup debut in the United States on June 20, the Brazilians outdribbled, out-tricked, and outran an Argentine team that seemed as adrift as its aging leader, Diego Maradona, who sat the game out.


Panel Endorses Alternative To President's Health Plan
After voting against President Clinton's original proposal to overhaul the nation's health care system, a Congressional subcommittee today approved an alternative plan to achieve his goal of universal insurance coverage but supply a more modest package of medical benefits.
The subcommittee voted 6 to 5 to approve the alternative and send it to the full House Ways and Means Committee for further action.


Margery Beukema Leonard; Seattle Civic Leader, 77
Margery Beukema Leonard, who was a civic leader and charity volunteer in Seattle, died on Monday in Fort Belvoir, Va., at the Fairfax Retirement Community's health care center.
She was 77 and had moved to Fort Belvoir in 1989 after 24 years in Seattle.
She died of cancer, her family said.


Ferguson Describes Offer Of Bribe From Ray Mercer
In sometimes witty, sometimes addled testimony, Jesse Ferguson said publicly for the first time yesterday that Ray Mercer made several $100,000 bribe offers during their fight last year.
"We participated in a boxing match, and during the match I was offered $100,000 to go down," he told the jury hearing Mercer's bribery trial in State Supreme Court.


Group Sets Oil Project For Russia
A consortium of Western companies and the Russian Government have agreed to develop a major deposit of oil and gas off the island of Sakhalin in a project that could bring about $10 billion of investment to the battered Russian oil industry, a spokesman for the Marathon Oil Company said yesterday.
William P. Ryder, the Marathon spokesman, said that the consortium members and their Russian counterparts had agreed on terms to develop the field.
The consortium also includes the Royal Dutch/Shell Group, McDermott International Inc., Mitsui &amp; Company and the Mitsubishi Corporation.


Cuomo's Plan for Medicaid Seems Doomed in Albany
When New York City's new Republican Mayor joined Republican county executives recently in endorsing a plan to transfer crushing Medicaid costs from local governments to the state, many thought the long-stalled proposal finally had a shot of winning approval from its toughest critics: the Republicans who control the State Senate.
But as the clock winds down on negotiations, there is a growing belief in Albany that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal for a full Medicaid takeover cannot be salvaged, largely because of continuing opposition from Republicans who say it gives too much money to New York City and does not control costs.


What Death Penalty Can Pass Bias Test?
To the Editor:
With the House of Representatives considering reform of the Federal death penalty, it is not surprising that we are again subjected to the creative logic of those who oppose capital punishment.
"Another Biased Death Penalty" (editorial, March 17) is exemplary in this regard.


Aqueduct Cut Sought
After a severe winter that scattered the race-horse population in the East, the New York Racing Association said yesterday that it had asked the state to reduce racing at Aqueduct from six days a week to five for three weeks in April.
The cutback would put racing at Aqueduct on a five-day basis for the last three weeks in the month, with dark days on Mondays and Tuesdays, starting on April 11 and 12.
When Belmont Park reopens on May 3, racing would return to the customary six-day format, with Monday the dark day, as usual.


Miscellany
*
Rick Ender and Lisa Smith have formed Ender Smith Advertising, Atlanta.
Mr.
Ender will be managing partner and creative director; Ms.
Smith, managing partner and strategic director.
Mr.
Ender had been senior vice president and deputy creative director at McCann-Erickson Worldwide, New York.
Ms.
Smith had been a vice president and management supervisor at BBDO/South.


Moorco Int'l reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Abbott Stresses Process Over Result
In squandering a 6-0 lead the Yankees had staked him to in the top of the first inning, Jim Abbott surrendered 10 runs, 11 hits and 3 walks in 4 innings today against the Los Angeles Dodgers.
Then he spent 15 minutes signing autographs and looked beyond the trauma of the moment to see a silver lining.


Kidd, Cal Point Guard, To Enter N.B.A. Draft
JASON KIDD, California's dazzling point guard, announced yesterday that he would forgo his final two years of college eligibility and enter the National Basketball Association draft.
Kidd, who announced the decision on his 21st birthday, is projected to be taken as high as No. 2 in the June 29 draft.
The 6-foot-4-inch sophomore all-American is the first collegiate underclassman to declare for the draft.


Youths Held In the Killing Of a Child, 4
Nicole Edmondson returned home earlier this month to find her 4-year-old son dangling from a doorknob by a leather belt wrapped tightly around his neck.
Frantically untying him, she carried his lifeless body a few yards to Apartment 55 to call for help.
Now, the teen-ager who lives in Apartment 55 is being accused of hanging her son.


One Foundation's Aim: Spend Till the End
Irene Diamond has $60 million and less than three years to get rid of it.
Of course, everyone should have her problem.
Such charming circumstances make her limitlessly popular.
Scarcely a day goes by that supplicants don't write or call beseeching her for money.


Agency Rent-A-Car (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Parcells Seeks a Giant Look
Bill Parcells is not only trying to acquire current Giants players, he is also going after some former Giants as well.
One current Giant, Lewis Tillman, a free-agent running back, visited the New England Patriots yesterday and met with Parcells, according to his agent, Ben Wilson.
There were rumors that Parcells had offered Tillman a contract, but Wilson said the talk was untrue.
In addition to New England, Wilson said, Tillman is scheduled to visit Chicago and Tampa Bay next week.


Riley Welcomes New Colleague
So what does Pat Riley have to say about Magic Johnson, his former player, now that they will be coaching adversaries?
"I spoke with him briefly and welcomed him to the profession," Riley, the Knicks' coach, said yesterday before departing with his team for Minneapolis.
"I've been around players for a long time, and it don't think there probably was a player that I was ever around who was more of a coach on the floor than Earvin Johnson. So he has an understanding, I think, of that whole process."


RESULTS PLUS
N.I.T.
Villanova in Semifinals  Eric Eberz hit a jump shot with 25 seconds left and Kerry Kittles made two free throws with 5 seconds remaining as Villanova defeated visiting Xavier, 76-74, last night in a National Invitation Tournament quarterfinal game.
Jason Lawson, a freshman, had 17 points, a season-high 15 rebounds and 6 blocked shots to lead Villanova (18-12), which will play the winner of tonight's Bradley-Siena game at Madison Square Garden on Monday.
Xavier finished at 22-8. (AP) Vanderbilt 89, Clemson 74: Billy McCaffrey scored 27 points and Chris Lawson added 16 as Vanderbilt (19-11) downed Clemson (18-16) in the quarterfinal round in Nashville.
McCaffrey was perfect in the first half, hitting 8 of 8 from the field, including three 3-point shots and his only free throw attempt.
On Monday, Vanderbilt will play the winner of tonight's Fresno State-Kansas State game. (AP)


You Are What You Hang (Or Don't)
WHAT do Americans put on their walls or tables in the name of art?
Calm landscapes and family photographs.
Almost never a Warhol print.
"People like the idea of a tranquil country setting -- especially if they live in the city -- as an escape from the world of work and commute," said Dr.
David Halle, author of "Inside Culture: Art and Class in the American Home," recently published by the University of Chicago Press.


3 Companies in Landmark Accord On Lawsuits Over Breast Implants
In the largest settlement ever negotiated in a class-action lawsuit, officials of three companies gave final approval yesterday to an agreement to pay $3.7 billion over 30 years to women claiming they were injured by silicone breast implants.
In the highly complex settlement, the companies, the Dow Corning Corporation, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company and the Baxter Healthcare Corporation, will pay women specific amounts for injuries.


Executive Changes
BANKAMERICA, San Francisco, named Kathi Burke vice chairman.
She had been group executive vice president and director of corporate human resources.
CIRCUS CIRCUS ENTERPRISES INC., Las Vegas, Nev., a gaming company, appointed Daniel N. Copp executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Gunfire Kills 2 Students
A dispute at a softball game in the Bronx ended in a fusillade of bullets yesterday when a young gunman fired at a group of high school students, killing a 20-year-old woman and a 17-year-old boy and wounding another student, the police said.
B3.


No Headline
"This has nothing to do with 1968. In 1968, the young rejected the consumer society. Now it's the opposite. We don't reject society. We want to join it." -- RENAUD GARDAIRE, a student in Paris.  [ A3:1. ]


Heilig-Meyers reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  FOUNDATION'S AIM: SPEND TILL THE END Unlike most foundations, which seek to exist in perpetuity, the Aaron Diamond Foundation chose to have a constricted but lively life.
It was to give away all the money from the estate of Mr.
Diamond, the millionaire builder, within 10 years and then go out of business.
Irene Diamond has $60 million left and less than three years to get rid of it.
A1.
GIULIANI ORDERS LAYOFF LISTS PREPARED The Giuliani administration ordered commissioners of the city's agencies to select 10,000 workers who could be laid off quickly if the Mayor's budget proposals fall apart.
B2.


2.5% Decline For Orders Of Durables
Orders for long-lasting factory goods fell last month for the first time since last July, Government figures showed today, but economists found the report provided little more than a hint of slackening economic momentum.
The 2.5 percent decline in orders for durable goods followed an exceptionally strong January advance, which the Commerce Department revised today to 4.4 percent from an initial estimate of 3.7 percent.
Sharply lower orders for aircraft were the biggest drag on the February statistics.


Siege of Sarajevo Lifts Briefly as 83 Leave the City
Bosnian Serb forces further eased their two-year siege of Sarajevo today, allowing 83 people to travel into and out of this city under a limited freedom-of-movement agreement arranged last week by United Nations officials.
At 10 A.M., 15 Sarajevans in a tour bus crossed a hastily graded road over the grounds of the United Nations-controlled airport and continued on to the nearby suburb of Butmir.


Midwest Liberal Selected to Lead Spending Panel
Democrats today picked Representative David R. Obey, a 55-year-old combative liberal from Wisconsin, to head the House Appropriations Committee, the body that shapes the choices the House makes on Federal spending.
Mr.
Obey was chosen by the party caucus as the committee's acting chairman because its 84-year-old chairman, Representative William H. Natcher of Kentucky, has been hospitalized in critical condition for several weeks.
Theoretically, Mr.
Natcher could seek to reclaim the chairmanship if he returns to the House, but today's vote makes it likely that Mr.
Obey would win any future contest.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a meeting of owners of small businesses with President Clinton included one name erroneously.
Brian McCarthy actually stood outside the published scene, to the left.


An Early Spring Sun Warms More Than the Heart


Giuliani to Sign Rent-Rule Bill Lifting Some Controls for Rich
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that he would sign a bill that will extend most of the city's rent control and rent stabilization rules but lift controls from at least 1,500 apartments with relatively wealthy tenants over the next few years.
Mr.
Giuliani, who had originally supported a straight extension of the current rent regulations, said that because the regulations were to expire on April 1, he had little choice but to support the legislation that was forwarded to him by the City Council, which passed it on Monday.


2 Planes Collide Over Air Base, Killing 16 G.I.'s
A freak midair collision at Pope Air Force Base this afternoon rained fiery debris onto a parked plane, igniting a fire ball and killing 16 Army paratroopers.
More than 80 other paratroopers were injured, officials said.
It was one of the worst peacetime military accidents in terms of the number of casualties.


What Accord Would Mean For Women With Implants
For the tens of thousands of women who may be affected by the proposed $3.7 billion settlement with the manufacturers of silicone breast implants, many questions remain over who would qualify, how much money they would get and how soon they would be paid.
Moreover, each woman would have a difficult choice of whether they want to participate in the plan or to pursue their own court claim.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about an Administration review of a petition for clemency by Jonathan J. Pollard, the American convicted of spying for Israel, referred incorrectly to allegations made against him since he was sentenced to prison.
Mr.
Pollard has been accused of slipping secret information into his letters from prison, but the Government has not identified their intended recipients.


Iron Shows Its Flexibility
ASK Joel Schwartz what he does for a living and he'll reply succinctly: "I make house jewelry." Mr.
Schwartz, the owner of Schwartz's Forge and Metalworks in Deansboro, N.Y., near Utica, is a contemporary blacksmith.
After beginning his career fashioning real jewelry in silver and gold, he now forges decorative balustrades, staircases and other large ornamental pieces in iron and bronze.
House jewelry comes in all sizes and guises, from hooks and handles to furniture that combines iron with wood, stone and glass.
Some artisans also fabricate and repair exterior appointments, notably wrought-iron window rails, tree guards, fences and gates.


Strawbridge &amp; Clothier (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Selling a city to the people who live there: The Baltimore of tourists looks homeward and inward.
AROUND 5 P.M. in most American cities, the traffic generally flows one way.
Working-class people head home to the suburbs, where life is presumably safer, parking is abundant and diversions are plentiful.
Which is fine, except for the disconcerting notion that without people,cities decay.
Stores and restaurants close.
Civic projects die.
Empty streets loom dark and dangerous.


Congressman Towns and Tobacco
Today some members of Congress have a chance to help turn the ever-broadening patchwork of local anti-smoking regulations into one seamless safety blanket for the entire nation.
The House Subcommittee on Health and the Environment can say "yes" to the Smoke-Free Environment Act.
The act would ban smoking in all public buildings -- spaces entered by 10 or more people at least once a week -- except for designated, separately ventilated areas.
According to the Environmental Protection Agency and the Centers for Disease Control, secondhand smoke causes 3,000 deaths each year from lung cancer, 150,000 to 300,000 cases of bronchitis and pneumonia in youngsters and asthma attacks in more than twice that number.


Critic's Notebook; After American Dream, Waking Up Cranky
Headlines tell of job extinction becoming a familiar way of life in this country.
Sociologists speak of the spreading pain of unmet expectations.
Pundits examine the declining prospects for social mobility.
And prime-time television rushes to make movies about weepy figure skaters and children murdering their parents.
O.K., that's unfair.
The social and economic unease that drizzles over much of the nation does make itself felt in television entertainment but, more often than not, in the damnedest ways.


Cuomo Puts Pressure on G.O.P. for a Gay Rights Bill
As the Democratic-majority Assembly passed a gay rights bill for the second year in a row, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo joined gay and lesbian groups today in turning up the pressure on the Republican-controlled Senate to follow suit.
Last year, after the Assembly passed the bill for the first time, gay lobbyists waged an intensive, but deliberately polite, campaign in the Senate.
They asked Mr.
Cuomo, a Democrat, to mute his public enthusiasm for the bill so as not to create a partisan debate that might antagonize the Senate Republicans.


When What's Wrong Is What's Right
WHAT if Streisand had made the trade -- a small nose for a big one?
Or Lauren Hutton had closed the gap?
What if the Duke of Windsor had listened?
Or Columbus?
Things would be different.
Advice can be cheap, but some people won't buy it, at any price.
They don't play by the rules.
Somewhere, sometime, someone wore pearls with jeans, drank champagne with fried chicken -- and taught the world something new.


Journal; The Gridiron Follies
The only show that counts in this town is politics, which is why the hottest ticket short of an impeachment trial is still the annual Gridiron Club dinner, where deans of the press don funny costumes to roast the President.
In a year with enough political twists to feed a dozen revues, last weekend's Gridiron gala -- the club's 109th, my first -- promised to be a smash.
I pictured the rapidly dwindling partners of the Rose Law Firm shredding documents while telling the tale of "Sweeney Todd." Or Warren Christopher being brainwashed in the mysterious Far East of "M. Butterfly." Or if all else failed, Barbra Streisand singing a kittenish "I'm Just a Little Girl From Little Rock."


Suzy Shier reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


China's Leaders Will Sooner Listen to Friends
To the Editor:
Secretary of State Warren Christopher's visit to China ended with few concrete results.
Chinese leaders vow they will never accept the Western concept of human rights.
And they rebuke what they see as United States intervention in their domestic affairs.
But China has signed human rights conventions of the United Nations and is a member of its Human Rights Commission.
The Chinese Government dared criticize South Africa for human rights abuses.


ISRAELI ARMY KILLS 3 ARABS IN HEBRON
In the most serious violence in Hebron since the massacre last month of Muslim worshipers by a Jewish settler, Israeli troops have killed at least three Palestinian gunmen after an 18-hour battle in which a pregnant woman also died, an army official said today.
The army chief of staff, Lieut.
Gen.
Ehud Barak, told a commission investigating the Hebron massacre that troops had killed three and possibly four fugitives from the militant Islamic group, Hamas.


French Students Angry at Cut in Minimum Wage
They were long thought to be passive, indifferent to politics and resigned to their lot, but suddenly French students are back in the streets, battling the police, challenging the Government and demanding a voice in the country's affairs.
Born in Paris three weeks ago, the protests have spread quickly, with tens of thousands of students joining often violent demonstrations in a dozen other cities.
Today, youths paralyzed a Paris railroad station for more than two hours and protesters in Lyons fought the police with baseball bats.


Economic Scene; Some relatively obscure business schools shine in a new study.
LOOKING for a business school that really delivers the bacon?
Consider Stanford, Harvard, Wharton or Oklahoma State.
That's right: Oklahoma State.
A new study (by a pair of Ivy League economists, no less) offers the first ranking of M.B.A. programs that in the authors' words "does not use subjective responses from various constituent groups." And while the very top of their list looks like the top of everyone else's, a half-dozen relative unknowns end up in the top 20, ahead of some brand-name schools, including Yale, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Columbia, Carnegie-Mellon, New York University and Cornell.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Day Lilies Unlimited
Q.
I'm interested in day lilies but generally disappointed by the limited selection in most catalogues.
How do I find a better offering? -- Lucy V. Fleming, Montclair, N.J.


Corrections
An article on March 15 about proposed French legislation to restrict use of English words misspelled a French coinage for "to log on." It is "loguer," not "loger."


Dorel Indus reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


To Prod Russia, U.S. Backs Global Atom Control
In an effort to prod Russia to agree to international inspections of its nuclear weapons materials, the United States is putting some of its own surplus under international control, Clinton Administration officials said today.
Administration officials said about 7 of the 100 tons of plutonium the United States had produced for military purposes would be put in storage for inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency.


Plea Talks Begin in C.I.A. Mole Case
Federal prosecutors have begun negotiations with Aldrich H. Ames that they hope will lead to a plea agreement with the career intelligence officer and his wife, Rosario, who have been accused of spying for Moscow, Government officials said today.
At this stage, Federal prosecutors have agreed only to show defense lawyers portions of the cache of circumstantial evidence that investigators turned up in their electronic surveillance of the couple and in searches of Mr.
Ames's home, office and personal computer files.


Fussing and Feuding, Dallas Cowboys Style
The Jerry and Jimmy Show snatched center stage at the National Football League owners' meeting this afternoon, at a time when other league news such as divisional realignment and corporate ownership were supposed to be the order of the day.
So much for order.


A Nicer Wait
"NORMALLY, waiting rooms are fairly uniform: fluorescent lights and standardized seating," said Dr.
John Reinisch, a surgeon who is the head of the plastic and reconstructive surgery division at Children's Hospital Los Angeles.
But not the waiting room for Dr.
Reinisch's division, which is still in the process of being furnished.
It was designed to respect the sensitivities of those with physical deformities.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  MEXICAN CANDIDATE SHOT DEAD  The presidential candidate of Mexico's governing party, Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta, was slain during a campaign rally in Tijuana.
A1


Gunman Wounds Two in Robbery at an East Side Bridal Shop
The two well-dressed men rang the front-door bell, mumbling something about a wedding dress for a daughter.
Once inside the Vera Wang Bridal House in the Carlyle Hotel on Madison Avenue at 77th Street -- a chic salon run by the designer whose costumes Nancy Kerrigan wore to the Olympics and Holly Hunter, Marisa Tomei and Patti Scialfa wore to the Academy Awards -- the pair kept up the small talk with the receptionist behind an elegant, tasteful desk.
Soon they were following the receptionist to the curving staircase that leads to the main showroom on the second floor.
But the police say that on the way up, one of the two men reached in a pocket, pulled out a small-caliber revolver and shoved it into the receptionist's back.


INSIDE
Root of Asbestos Problems
Prosecutors have concluded that an overzealous desire to meet deadlines led to the flawed asbestos inspections at New York schools.
Page B1. 2 Students Killed in Bronx
A dispute over a softball game in the Bronx ended in a fusillade of bullets that left two high school students dead, the police said.
Page B3.
A Brief Respite for Sarajevo
Bosnian Serb forces further eased their siege, allowing 83 people to travel into and out of Sarajevo.
Page A12.
Plea Possible in Spy Case
Federal prosecutors have begun negotiations that could result in a guilty plea by the C.I.A. officer charged with spying for Moscow.
Page B11.
Character Amid Chaos
"Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992," Anna Deavere Smith's accounting of a city in anguish, opened.
David Richards's review appears on page C13.
Wage Cuts Anger French
French students have been demonstrating for two weeks now over a cut in the minimum wage.
Page A3.


Back to Hollywood's Bottom Rung, and Climbing
He was one of the top young directors of the 1960's, a craftsman who moved from television dramas to studio films that endure today, including "The Manchurian Candidate," "Birdman of Alcatraz," "Days of Wine and Roses," "Seven Days in May," "The Train" and "The Fixer."
Yet despite this formidable track record, John Frankenheimer, at 64, is now trying to pick up the pieces of a career that went awry.
"Do I miss doing the big Christmas picture for Paramount?" Mr.
Frankenheimer said quietly.
"Yes, of course I do. But television is a way of getting back to doing that. I have to rediscover myself, reinvent myself. And this is a way of doing that."


PARENT &amp; CHILD
WHILE the occasional schoolyard scuffle is seldom something to worry about, there are some young children who repeatedly express themselves with their fists.
Child psychiatrists and psychologists are paying closer attention to these school-age frequent fighters, for they have found that their aggressive behavior often leads to later trouble and may be a sign of seemingly unrelated problems.
"Don't just take it lightly and say, 'Boys will be boys,' " said Dr.
Eugene V. Beresin, an assistant professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School.
"It may not be something serious, but something's going on."


Lennar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Another Loss for Bruins
Still reeling from a season-ending knee injury to CAM NEELY, the Boston Bruins took another hit yesterday.
Defenseman RAY BOURQUE was diagnosed with a sprained medial collateral ligament in his right knee.
The good news: He is expected to return in time for the playoffs.
Bourque, a leading candidate for the Hart Trophy for the league's most valuable player, was injured Tuesday in a 5-3 loss at Quebec.
He was examined Wednesday by Dr.
BERTRAM ZARINS at Massachusetts General Hospital.


Sports of The Times; Magic Move: From Coach To Owner?
MAGIC JOHNSON's sleight of smile is still as smooth as his sleight of hand always was.
In his first address as the Lakers' new coach, he stutter-stepped on the dribble, faked to his right and went to his left, drove the lane and, with all his listeners expecting a pass, tossed up a scoop shot that is still spinning around the rim.
Nobody will know if the ball is in or out until after the Lakers' last game this season.


Cool Hand Runs Airline Under Fire
For an endorsement of his 37-year rise from baggage handler to chairman of the USAir Group, Seth E. Schofield could not have done much better than Warren E. Buffett's annual letter to shareholders last year.
Mr.
Buffett, who invested $358 million in USAir in 1989, wrote that amid the turmoil of the airline industry, Mr.
Schofield "has done a truly extraordinary job in repositioning the airline."


Guarding Robinson: Is It Mission Impossible
When Purdue Coach Gene Keady was asked last week what defenses were used this season against his star, Glenn (Big Dog) Robinson, he rolled his eyes skyward.
With the even cadence of a man listing his favorite deli sandwiches, he said: "One-three-one zone . . . two-three zone . . . one-two-two zone . . . box-in-one . . . triangle-and-two . . . press . . . triple-teaming him when he catches the ball, double-teaming him when he catches the ball. We've seen the whole format. He's seen it all and survived most of it pretty well."


Vandalism Isn't the Message of Graffiti
To the Editor:
"In a City of Graffiti, Gangs Turn to Violence to Protect Their Art" (news article, March 13) captures the exuberance young men experience as graffiti writers, or taggers, as those you describe in Los Angeles call themselves.
Rather than identify and guide this energy, adults see graffiti only as a vandalism issue.


Prices of Bonds Tumble Amid Investor Concerns
The Federal Reserve yesterday confirmed bond market expectations and officially moved its new short-term interest rate target up a quarter of a percentage point, to 3.50 percent.
The Fed announced its intention to raise its target for Federal funds, the interest charged on overnight loans between banks, on Tuesday after the meeting of its policy-making arm, the Federal Open Market Committee.


Miles Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Reviews/Dance; Stormily, Harlem Troupe's Tribute to Ginastera
The repertory of Dance Theater of Harlem includes three works to music by Alberto Ginastera.
By presenting all three on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater, the company paid tribute to this Argentine composer, who lived from 1916 to 1983.
The scores tended to be episodic in nature, offering many opportunities for theatrical variety and contrast.
At the same time, these compositions occasionally became traps in which choreographers got themselves bogged down in disconnected incidents not joined by a unifying idea.
Yet Ginastera's rhythmic propulsiveness and his tart, dissonant, but never grating harmonies made it understandable why his music should be used for ballets.


Spacecraft Photo Shows Asteroid Has a Moon
A spacecraft bound for Jupiter has returned a photograph and other data giving scientists the first conclusive evidence that at least some asteroids have tiny moons of their own.
The photo, released yesterday by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, shows the newly discovered natural satellite of the asteroid Ida.
The picture was one of several taken last Aug. 28 when the Galileo spacecraft flew close to Ida, one of the multitude of small rocky objects that populate the region known as the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter.


Paul A. Kerschner; Gerontologist, 52
Dr.
Paul A. Kerschner, an authority on aging, died on Monday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
He was 52 and lived in Washington.
He died of cancer, said Ed Howard, a friend.


Calendar: Flowers, Lectures
Blooms on Broadway  Macy's, Herald Square; (212) 494-4495.
The store's annual flower show, which starts Sunday and continues through April 9, features more than 6,000 plants and trees, including large floral arrangements on the main floor and garden landscapes in display windows, on ledges and tucked into corners.


Layoff Lists Are Ordered By Giuliani
Putting new pressure on New York City's municipal unions, the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday ordered commissioners of the city's agencies to select 10,000 workers who could be laid off quickly if the Mayor's carefully drafted budget proposals fall apart.
The layoffs could save about $300 million, officials said, if the Mayor does not win agreements with the unions on a severance plan to cut 7,600 jobs and on other concessions, including a requirement that employees pay part of their health benefits.


Alvaro del Portillo, 80, Leader Of the Catholic Group Opus Dei
Msgr.
Alvaro del Portillo, the head of Opus Dei, the conservative Roman Catholic movement, died in Rome today.
He was 80.
A spokesman for the organization said the cause was a heart attack.
News reports said Monsignor del Portillo, who was ordained a bishop by Pope John Paul II in 1991, had returned today from a weeklong trip to the Holy Land.


Merck
Shares of Merck &amp; Company, the pharmaceutical giant, fell for a second day amid analysts' predictions of a price war in the lucrative market for cholesterol-lowering drugs.
Earlier this week, Sandoz Ltd., a Merck rival, said it would sell its new drug at nearly 50 percent below the prices of existing products, including those of Merck.


Review/Music; Using Chinese Tools But Avoiding Exoticism
The most exciting work on the American Composers Orchestra program on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall was the closing piece, Ge Gan-Ru's gripping but blandly named "Chinese Rhapsody." Coming after colorful, well-built but conventionally neo-Romantic essays by Thea Musgrave, Ned Rorem and Henri Lazarof, Mr.
Ge's vivid manipulation of blocks of string, wind and percussion sound was an enlivening blast of fresh air.
The work was commissioned by the orchestra, and the performance was its world premiere.
Mr.
Ge was born in Shanghai in 1954 and began his training there, completing it at Columbia University.
Like Bright Sheng, Chen Yi and Tan Dun, composers with similar biographies, Mr.
Ge comes to Western instrumentation and compositional forms with fresh ears.
His rhapsody alludes to Chinese timbres, most notably in occasional sliding string figures and in passages for wood blocks.
Chinese propulsive techniques are used, too: in one particularly moving section, a solid, full-orchestra chord is repeated at an increasing tempo, an effect drawn from Chinese opera.


Let's Consider an Elected Board for CUNY
To the Editor:
I agree with "Neglect of the CUNY Board" (editorial, March 15), insofar as you criticize Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and former Mayor David N. Dinkins for having allowed the terms of almost all City University of New York trustees to lapse without reappointment or replacement.
CUNY students, and all New Yorkers, should remember this negligence in future elections.
It is political betrayal by self-proclaimed liberals.


Despite Halt in Talks, Israelis Prepare to Quit Gaza
At the headquarters of Israel's military government here, prefabricated houses that had been used as offices were hoisted onto long flatbed trucks this week and carted away.
As army maneuvers go, it was not much.
And the houses did not have far to travel, only a few miles to the crossing point between the Gaza Strip and Israel.


Microsoft and N.T.T. in Delivery Venture
The Microsoft Corporation, which recently failed to forge a strategic alliance with the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, has found a phone company partner after all.
Microsoft, the American software giant, said today that it had agreed in principle with the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation, Japan's main phone company, to jointly develop services for delivery of multimedia information and software over communications networks.


Military Harassment Deserves a Tribunal
To the editor:
"Women Warriors -- and Sexist Men" (editorial, March 12) commends the Navy's punishment by dismissal of 85 officers and sailors for sexual harassment since 1992.
Punishment, yes.
But it's unrealistic to expect the military to punish its own.
What's needed is an outside group.


Books of The Times; The Way We Were, Or Were We That Way?
Going Going Gone  Vanishing Americana  By Susan Jonas and Marilyn Nissenson  Illustrated. 175 pages.
Chronicle Books.
Paperback, $18.95.
The title by itself inspires a guessing game.
What things did Susan Jonas and Marilyn Nissenson have in mind when writing their engaging new book, "Going Going Gone: Vanishing Americana"?


Fathers and Stereotypes
To The Home Section:


SLM Int'l(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
Two important qualities in play at the highest level are concentration and a willingness to trust one's partner.
To the point is the diagramed deal played Friday in the final of the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship in Cincinnati.
It features a delicate application of suit-preference signaling.
Some players would open the East hand with one club, and some with one diamond.
Zia Mahmood chose one club, and South was able to enter the fray with a takeout double.
The bidding might have ended at three diamonds, but North invited with four diamonds, slightly optimistically, and South subsided.
On a very good day the North-South cards would make five diamonds, but this was not even an average day.


Review/Music; Debut of a Mezzo at Ease In Leaps and Florid Runs
Promising newcomers to the vocal scene rarely arrive unheralded.
In the case of Jennifer Larmore, a 35-year-old mezzo-soprano from Georgia, a handful of recordings and advance reports from Europe made her New York debut recital at the Walter Reade Theater on Monday evening one of the most anticipated vocal events of the season.
Previews at Carnegie Hall with both the Westminster Choir and the Opera Orchestra of New York confirmed that the excitement about her was well grounded.
She has won the 1994 Richard Tucker Award, and the Metropolitan Opera announced that she would make her debut as Rosina in Rossini's "Barbiere di Siviglia" next season.


Overdue Discipline for State Debt
Among its many distinctions, New York State has the worst credit rating in the country.
It was triple-A in the 1960's, but years of fishy borrowing and fishier budgets have made it an expensive embarrassment.
As cellar-dweller, New York pays higher interest than others do for every dollar it borrows -- and it has borrowed billions.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo is only the latest of several governors who let the situation drift.
Last year, at last, he proposed and the Legislature approved debt reform.
But it had glaring loopholes.
Now he and the State Comptroller, Carl McCall, have a better plan.
Two separate Legislatures -- the one now in session and the new one elected next November -- must approve the plan before it can go on the ballot for public ratification.


Giving Up Culinary Privilege, President Takes Part in Fast
Bill Clinton, who is well known for his ability to knock down pasta with foreign leaders, pizza with junior White House staff and rubber chicken with Democratic party officials, did not eat today, his aides said.
Not a pretzel or a sandwich, or even his weekly lunch with Vice President Al Gore.
Mr.
Gore, in fact, joined the President in his daylong fast.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BROWNING-FERRIS INDUSTRIES, Houston, a solid and industrial waste company, said it had acquired Pioneer Southern Inc., Suffolk, Va., a producer of mulch, compost and organic soils, for an undisclosed sum.
DOMTAR INC., Montreal, a maker of pulp and paper products, packaging products and construction materials, said it would spin off its ground-wood printing operations into a new company called Alliance Forest Products Inc.


Rangers' Graves Sets a Record of His Very Own
While Wayne Gretzky claimed a major record elsewhere, Adam Graves wrote a personal page in the Ranger history book tonight when he scored two goals in a 5-2 victory over the Edmonton Oilers at Northlands Coliseum.
When it was announced here that Gretzky scored in Los Angeles to break Gordie Howe's record of 801 goals in a National Hockey League career, the fans stood and gave the former Oiler great a long, loud ovation.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Theodore H. Friedman, a Manhattan lawyer who was ordered disbarred for unethical conduct, referred incorrectly in some editions to the post held by his wife, Eve Preminger.
She is a judge in Surrogate's Court in Manhattan, not a State Supreme Court justice.


The Pop Life
Source Awards for Rap
Rap music accounts for nearly 8 percent of the $10 billion music industry in the United States, or about $780 million a year.
That's a lot of money, and rap aficionados contend that music-industry award shows fail to show the proper respect for the genre or the hip-hop culture it represents.


Stocks End Mixed as Rates Are Increased
The stock market got what it wanted yesterday, the first full day of a rise in interest rates by the Federal Reserve Board.
But having gotten it, traders did not quite know what to make of it, leading to the second consecutive mixed session.
The market may not be so tentative today.
After the market closed yesterday, Citibank and several other major banks, raised their prime lending rates to 6 1/4 percent from 6 percent, affecting a variety of business and consumer loans, including mortgages and credit-card debt.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve's attempt to fend off inflation by raising interest rates hit home as big banks increased their prime rates, used to set the interest rates for home mortgages, credit cards and business loans, to 6.25 percent from 6 percent.  [ Page A1. ]  Administration officials held off from criticizing the Fed's move.  [ D16. ]
Orders for durable goods fell last month for the first time since July, but economists said the Government report gave little more than a hint of slackening economic momentum.  [ D1. ]


Accord Is Reported Near on Arab Force in Hebron
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators have reached an understanding on installing a Palestinian security force in the volatile city of Hebron, an official who closely monitors the talks said today.
The arrangement, which came during two days of negotiations in Tunis, has helped push the two sides closer to resuming formal talks on limited Palestinian self-rule, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity and would not give further details.


Quarrel Over Amendments Delays House Action on Crime Package
The long-anticipated crime legislation ran into turbulence today in the House of Representatives, dashing the hopes of members of Congress who had wanted to take tough new measures home to their districts this weekend.
House leaders had planned to debate a 13-bill package this week and to pass it before the spring recess, which begins this weekend.
But after just an hour of debate, communication between Democrats and Republicans broke down, leaving the two sides arguing over rules tonight while the legislation languished.


2 Years, 10 Murders and 1 Question
In a kinder world, 10 black women would not have been strangled to death over the last two years in this shiny Piedmont boom town.
In a simpler world, there would be a clear lesson about race and police neglect in the belated recognition that one man may have been behind it all.
But in the real world, more than a week after an arrest in the worst killing spree in Charlotte's history, nothing is quite so clear.


Art in Review
Joseph Grigely and Lee Gordon
White Columns  154 Christopher Street  Greenwich Village  Through April 17
White Columns' nooks and crannies are crammed with an uneven hodgepodge of art these days, but the main event is a strong one.
Joseph Grigely's front-room installation, titled "Conversations With the Hearing," consists largely of notes written by the artist, who is deaf, on paper napkins, envelopes, receipts and odd scraps of paper in the course of daily communication.


At Home Abroad; Decline and Fall
To many South Africans he is a political villain, the last significant holdout against the new constitutional system.
But Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi can also be seen as a tragic figure in the Greek sense: a man undone by his overweening pride.
Chief Buthelezi and his party, Inkatha, are boycotting the election to be held April 27-28.
Armed Inkatha toughs have blocked other parties' rallies in KwaZulu, of which he is Chief Minister.
The fear is that they will use violence to keep people from voting.


U.S. to Bolster Forces if U.N. Votes Korea Curbs
The Pentagon plans to strengthen American military forces in South Korea if the United Nations imposes economic sanctions against North Korea, Defense Secretary William J. Perry said today.
The United States has already decided to send Patriot air-defense missiles to South Korea and to proceed with joint military exercises there because of the North's refusal to allow international monitors to complete inspections of its nuclear sites.


Kantor Warns Japan on Trade Offer
The United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, urged today that Japan be as forthcoming as possible in a proposal that it is about to make to break the trade deadlock with Washington, because otherwise the United States would resort to more punitive sanctions to open Japanese markets.
"We have been encouraging them to come up with as bold and far-reaching a package as possible," Mr.
Kantor said in an interview today.
"I met with the Japanese press twice this week to convey that view. It cannot be the same old story. Otherwise, we will have disappointment here and a continuation of our approach of ratcheting up the pressure on Japan."


Review/Dance; A Lesson From the 1940's: Expression in Just a Few Bold Strokes
Today's experimental choreographers could learn a thing or two from the solos that Daniel Nagrin created in the 1940's.
Three are part of the Limon Dance Company's current season and the first two, revived on Wednesday night, are not to be missed.
The Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea) is a perfect frame for these corrosive miniatures.
In the first solo, "Strange Hero," Carl Flink's gangster protagonist retreats from a tough-guy swagger with flying diagonals across the entire stage.
In "Spanish Dance," Pamala Jones follows a more amplified and serpentine path.
Both pieces are performed with exceptional power, exceptional articulation.


Tiny Tulsa Prepares For First Sweet 16
In a National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament marked by surprising twists and turns, Tulsa has established itself as "the Little Engine" of college basketball.
With a stunningly easy victory over U.C.L.A. last Friday and an impressive victory over favored Oklahoma State on Sunday, Tulsa has hurtled into the Sweet 16 for the first time.


Parody Ruling Turns Deaf Ear to the Music
To the Editor:
You welcome the Supreme Court decision that allows 2 Live Crew's satirical remake of "Oh, Pretty Woman" to qualify for fair use of copyrighted material (editorial, March 9).
I find it troublesome that the Court left unaddressed an important distinction between song parodies and other forms of satire.


Review/Photography; Farewell Fashion, Hello Art
HAS there been an exhibition that generated more noise before it opened than the Richard Avedon show that is now at the Whitney Museum of American Art?
Not this season, anyway.
First came the collective groan after David A. Ross, newly installed as the museum's director, proposed it as one of the largest retrospectives ever contemplated at the Whitney.
Those who knew that Mr.
Ross had enjoyed successes with two previous Avedon exhibitions at museums he headed, in Berkeley, Calif., and Boston, weren't surprised.
But more than a few people were taken aback that his first move at an institution dogged by charges of trendiness was a gigantic display of the work of a master of fashion photography and celebrity portraiture.
Since then, despite being scaled back, the show has caused an alarming buzz around the museum, like an approaching V-1.


South African Panel Hints Crackdown on Zulu Region
The independent commission supervising the first non-racial elections in South Africa gave the signal tonight for a Government crackdown on the Zulu homeland, declaring that free and fair voting would not be possible because of the defiance of the homeland ruler, Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi.
The commission did not reveal what steps it may have recommended, but the possibilities range from choking off the finances of Chief Buthelezi to sending South African soldiers and taking direct control of the homeland.


Donald Swann, 70, A British Composer And Musical Comic
Donald Swann, a composer, pianist and entertainer who performed as half of the Flanders and Swann team, which brought quirky British wit to Broadway with "At the Drop of a Hat" in 1959, died on Wednesday in Trinity Hospice in London.
He was 70.
The cause was prostate cancer, said Lyn Smith, a friend.


People
*
Gary Armstrong was named creative director of promotion/marketing services at Details magazine, New York, where he had been art director. *
John Fales was named eastern advertising manager at Runner's World magazine, Emmaus, Pa., succeeding Don Hintze, who joined Major League Baseball, in New York.
Mr.
Fales had been an account manager at Men's Health magazine.


EXPLOSION IN EDISON: Losses; Crowding Into Shelters, Survivors Count the Toll
The Red Cross clothed Charles Jyamfi today at its relief center for victims of the gas explosion here, but he said he still felt naked.
All his proof of his 40 years of life -- his birth certificate, driver's license, credit cards, bank cards, passport, immigration papers, diplomas, photographs and records -- was incinerated at the Durham Woods apartments.
It was as if the ferocious explosion had not only obliterated his home in Building 24, but had also stripped him of his identity and his means of survival.


Wells Rich Leaves Reckitt &amp; Colman
Wells Rich Greene BDDP resigned the Reckitt &amp; Colman air care business account, which billed an estimated $5 million to $6 million for its Botanicals and Air Wick brands.
Reckitt &amp; Colman had wanted one agency to handle its laundry, fabric and air care businesses.
Wells Rich Greene had a major conflict -- Proctor &amp; Gamble's Gain laundry detergent.
Reckitt &amp; Colman will move the two accounts to TBWA, which already has some of the company's brands, including Woolite and Neet depilatory cream.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  TEARS AND SHOCK IN MEXICO  As Mexican citizens grieved the loss of the man many expected to be their next President, the governing party began the delicate process of finding another candidate.
A1  Something else to mourn -- a chance for stability.
A6


The Other Victim
With the killing of Luis Donaldo Colosio, the governing party's presidential candidate, a young assassin ripped at the frayed promise of political stability that has been at the source of the party's 65 years in power.
Almost from the start of his political career, Mr.
Colosio had been fashioned by his mentor, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, to represent a new Institutional Revolutionary Party, one that would keep its control over Mexico by modern means.


Review/Film; Trying (and Failing) to Be a Family
Early in "Under One Roof," Paulo Thiago's disjointed comic satire of life in contemporary Brazil, a little girl walking along a street has a loaf of bread snatched out of her hands by a thief.
It is the first of many images of a society in which everyone has gone a little batty and crime is so rampant that a knock on the door is as likely to signal an armed robbery as a neighborly visit.
The film, which opens today at the Quad Cinema, focuses on the tumultuous domestic life of three eccentric women who share an apartment in an unnamed port city.
Gertrudes (Norma Bengell), a strait-laced widow and piano teacher of 60, fancies herself a surrogate mother for her two troublesome boarders.
Sensual, defiantly free-spirited Madalena (Maria Zilda Bethlem), who works as a nurse in a mental hospital, enjoys embarrassing the prudish Gertrudes by parading bare-breasted in front of the window.
At night, she prowls the local cafes, picking up men and having quick, wild sex in odd places.


NOVELL SAYS WORDPERFECT DEAL WILL BE COMPLETED
Seeking to calm wary investors, Novell Inc. said yesterday that its planned acquisition of the Wordperfect Corporation had already been approved by Wordperfect's shareholders and would go through regardless of the decline in Novell's share price.
Some analysts had speculated that if Novell's stock price fell too low, it might jeopardize the deal.
"There are four shareholders at Wordperfect, and they have all approved the deal," said Peter Troop, a Novell spokesman, adding that the terms of the acquisition do not include any provision for a decline in the value of the shares.


LEADERS IN MEXICO BEGIN THEIR SEARCH FOR NEW CANDIDATE
Shocked by the murder of the man many assumed would be their next President, Mexicans today mourned the violent death of Luis Donaldo Colosio as the governing party began to choose a new candidate who can keep the party's long hold on power and bind the country's wounds.
Though Mexicans were left stunned and grieving by the assassination on Wednesday evening, there were signs that the contest for the future leadership of the Institutional Revolutionary Party, and very likely the country, would begin immediately, and would prove to be divisive and contentious.


G.I. Death Toll at 20 in Air Base Crash
The death toll rose to 20 today and is expected to go higher in the aftermath of a midair collision between two planes at Pope Air Force Base on Wednesday that sent a fighter jet skidding into hundreds of paratroopers preparing for a training flight.
A day after the accident, which also left more than 90 soldiers injured -- many of them with critical burns over most of their bodies -- military officials had no explanation for the collision of a F-16D fighter plane and a C-130 Hercules transport plane, both of which were apparently trying to land at the same time on the same runway.
The planes collided in midair less than 300 feet above the ground, sending the fighter caroming into the paratroopers and the C-141 transport they were preparing to board.


Home Video
On Wednesday, MPI of Oak Forest, Ill., a video distributor that specializes in documentaries and television shows, is to release "The Honeymooners' Funniest Moments." With about 60 Honeymooners videos already on the market, another one is hardly news.
This title, however, is not a tape but a CD-ROM, which is significant for a format beginning to make inroads in video stores.
"It's entertainment, and that fits perfectly with us," said Michael van der Kieft, the director of business development for Blockbuster Entertainment.


CHRONICLE
"After Us," which opened last night at the Circle Rep Theater, at 99 Seventh Avenue South, near Christopher Street, will serve as a memorial for its cast.
The seven women in the cast are drug and alcohol abusers in various stages of recovery.
They are also H.I.V. positive or have AIDS.
They are joined by five of their children, who range in age from 6 to 14, all of whom have tested negative for H.I.V.


Dean Foods Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


French Students Fight On


MDS Health reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


For Children


Cabletron Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Business Districts Finding Cleanliness Is Next to Higher Profits


Art in Review
Joseph Raffael
Nancy Hoffman Gallery  429 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through April 13
Joseph Raffael has been painting pretty much the same picture for many years, but it's a lovely one and it has seldom looked better than in this show.
Mr.
Raffael's favored medium is watercolor, used on a scale ordinarily reserved for oil paintings.
His reiterated subject is nature viewed close up, in the form of huge flowers or water reflecting and shattering light.


TVWeekend; Corporate Chiefs Grapple With the Corporate Ethic
The role-playing on tonight's edition of "Socratic Seminars" comes naturally.
Present and past corporation chiefs like Robert L. Crandall (American Airlines); Irving S. Shapiro, (DuPont); Stanley C. Gault (Goodyear Tire and Rubber), and David T. Kearns (Xerox) have no trouble pretending to be executives of MAX Inc., a fictional company that has been losing money and markets to global competition.
MAX's problems are laid out by Prof.
Arthur R. Miller of the Harvard University Law School, who does some fast footwork as he jabs at the collected biggies from business, labor, government and elsewhere without spilling a drop from his coffee cup; maybe it's just a prop.


I.B.M. Chairman Lays Out Catch-Up Plan
In what he called a "glimpse at our playbook," I.B.M.'s chairman, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., said yesterday that the company's strategy would focus on gaining ground in the fast-growing corporate market for smaller computers linked in networks.
He also said I.B.M. would try to increase the business payoff from the company's research programs.
The two goals led a six-point list of strategic objectives that Mr.
Gerstner outlined during a luncheon with reporters and a presentation to securities analysts in Manhattan.


U.S. Opens Cup Play
A little like the novice big-game hunter heading off on safari with his favorite golf club instead of a gun, the United States Davis Cup team sallied forth this week to its first-round date with India equipped not only with a store of its favorite bottled water but with its own private chef.
Whether the team remembered to take its forehands and backhands to New Delhi in the midst of all the worrying about keeping its palate pure won't be evident until this afternoon when the matches begin.


Mtel to Join Microsoft In Data Deal
The Microsoft Corporation and the Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Corporation said yesterday that they would jointly develop a nationwide wireless network for sending and receiving data from a variety of electronic devices, including laptop computers.
Shares of Mobile Telecommunications Technologies, which is known as Mtel, soared yesterday on the news to close at $20.50, up $4.625, in Nasdaq trading.
Shares of Microsoft rose $1, to $87.25.


Transcript of President's News Conference on the Whitewater Affair
Following is a transcript of President Clinton's news conference at the White House last night, as recorded by The New York Times:
PRESIDENT CLINTON Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.
Yesterday we were reminded that protecting our democracy and expanding its promise around the world can be costly and dangerous.
Here at home, we mourn the loss of the servicemen in the tragic aircraft accident at Pope Air Force Base, and we pray for a speedy recovery for those who were injured.
This tragedy reminds us that the men and women who serve in the military put their lives at risk in the service of our nation.


Unstoppable Force, Robinson, Makes Kansas Movable Object
Purdue's star forward, Glenn Robinson, knew all eyes would be on him tonight in the Southeast Regional semifinal against Kansas.
He expected to draw most of the attention from the Jayhawk defense.
Know what?
It didn't matter.
Robinson was stupendous.
Robinson scored a game-high 44 points and forward Cuonzo Martin added 29 points to power top-seeded Purdue (29-4) past Kansas, 83-78, and into the regional final on Saturday against Duke, which defeated Marquette, 59-49, earlier tonight, also by having the best player on the floor, Grant Hill.


UConn Takes Sizable Step Forward
For the Connecticut women's basketball team, the dream is bigger and better than ever.
The Huskies are three victories away from the national championship.
Tonight, after an erratic start, they whipped unheralded, aggressive Southern Mississippi, 78-64, in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's East Regional semifinals.
In the first game at Rutgers University's Louis Brown Athletic Center, North Carolina came back for a 73-69 upset of Vanderbilt.


Luis Colosio: A Party Man For 2 Decades
Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta, who rose through Mexican politics as a protege of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and became Mr.
Salinas's choice to succeed him, was assassinated Wednesday in Tijuana.
He was 44.
Mr.
Colosio was the candidate of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party, known by its Spanish acronym, PRI.
After coming from a vigil at the party's Mexico City headquarters, where Mr.
Colosio's body was taken yesterday, Mr.
Salinas said, "Mexico has lost a great man, and I a great friend."


CHRONICLE
DREW BARRYMORE, the 19-year-old actress who has appeared in movies like "E.T. -- The Extra-Terrestrial" and "The Amy Fisher Story," was married secretly last weekend in Los Angeles.
Ms.
Barrymore, whose grandfather John and great-uncle Lionel were legendary actors, married JEREMY THOMAS, a 31-year-old Briton who owns a club in Los Angeles called the Room.


UConn's Travel Call Is a Wake-Up Whistle
There are difficult choices to be made during the national collegiate basketball tournament, but this was not one of them.
With its campus closed for spring break, an East Regional semifinal game approaching in Miami and a state filled with people wanting to know what was wrong, the Connecticut Huskies had their choice.
They could spend this week in a hotel near home, or they could make a stop on the way here -- say, in Orlando.
You stay in Willimantic. They went to see the Mice.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day yesterday about the Mallinckrodt Group Inc. referred to it incorrectly.
It was formerly known as Imcera Group Inc.; it is not a unit of Imcera.


Wild Cards Are Approved for the Playoffs
Major league baseball is adding a wild-card team from each league to its post-season playoffs next October, but the wild-card teams will not have so-called home-field advantage in the division and league rounds of the playoffs.
In their agreement released yesterday, the clubs and players did not address the World Series, meaning a wild-card team could wind up with home-field advantage--the extra game if the Series goes the full seven games -- in the championship round.


Mexican Securities Fall After Candidate's Killing
The assassination of the Mexican presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio jolted investors around the world yesterday, sending the price of Mexican stocks and bonds down sharply.
Silver prices jumped to a four-year high, reflecting Mexico's role as a leading silver producer.
Yet, the killing Wednesday evening of Mr.
Colosio, the chosen candidate of the long-governing Institutional Revolutionary Party, was not expected to change Mexico's commitment to economic reform, or to the North American Free Trade Agreement with the United States and Canada.


FEDERATED IS ASKED TO WAIT ON PLAN FOR MACY
Federated Department Stores Inc. said yesterday that Cyrus R. Vance, the court-appointed mediator for R. H. Macy &amp; Company's bankruptcy case, has asked it not to submit a proposal for a reorganization plan for Macy until after he completes discussions with Macy's creditors.
Federated, which has sought to use its power as a Macy creditor to bring about a merger with its rival, said the mediator planned to meet with creditors starting on April 11.
After those meetings, Federated said, Mr.
Vance "would provide direction" about its wishes to discuss its own plan with other creditors.


EXPLOSION IN EDISON: The Overview; New Jersey Pipeline Explosion Sets Off Panic, Chaos and Fear
A natural gas pipeline explosion that awestruck witnesses compared to a blinding, scorching nuclear blast turned a neighborhood in the central New Jersey town of Edison early yesterday into a war zone of flames, panic and chaos.
Scores of residents were hurt, one death was reported and dozens who fled had not been located by last night, though they were presumed to be alive.
Officials said an earthen-wall shield between the blast and a nearby apartment complex, and a gap of 7 to 10 precious minutes before flames reached the complex, averted a disaster that might have cost many lives.


Myth: Small Business as Job Engine
For years, small business has been portrayed as the source of virtually all new jobs, a notion furthered by the litany of layoffs in recent months by corporate giants like I.B.M., Westinghouse, Johnson &amp; Johnson, General Motors and A.T.&amp; T.
The notion has been invoked again and again, by everyone from President Clinton in his first State of the Union Message to Senator Bob Dole to officials of the Small Business Administration -- and echoed widely by journalists.


EXPLOSION IN EDISON: The Scene; Everyone Had One Thought: Run, Fast, in All Directions
They ran. In every direction, as fast as they could, they ran.
In pajamas, underwear or nothing at all, some sped for the woods.
Some chose the path through the creek.
Some danced their way down the railroad tracks.
And some, in cars and on foot, converged along the skinny road that was the only way out of the housing development.
Some people had grabbed coats, but they didn't need them.
Behind them a tower of gas burned at 1,000 degrees.
Some had grabbed flashlights, but they didn't need them, either.
The blinding light was brighter than anything they knew.
It was day when it should have been night.


President Is Criticized For Delays at E.E.O.C.
Representative Major R. Owens, Democrat of Brooklyn, today criticized the Clinton Administration for its failure to name a new head of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
"The E.E.O.C. needs a well-qualified person with experience," Mr.
Owens said.
"It should not be a political appointee. Someone with experience needs to go there and straighten that agency out."


Books of The Times; Behind Flaubert, What? Heroic Feminist? Victim?
Rage and Fire
A Life of Louise Colet, Pioneer Feminist, Literary Star, Flaubert's Muse
By Francine du Plessix Gray
Illustrated. 432 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50
An artist should be like God, Flaubert once declared, "present everywhere, yet visible nowhere." In recent years, this credo of modernist detachment has been increasingly abandoned, not only by novelists but by biographers and historians as well.
Indeed, Francine du Plessix Gray's new book about Flaubert's mistress Louise Colet stands out as a particularly injudicious model of this subjective tendency.
"Rage and Fire" is not a biography in any conventional sense; rather, it is a highly emotional work of advocacy, a willful effort to turn Louise Colet into a feminist symbol, "the model of a woman driven to near hysteria by her society's dual prejudices against her sex and her vocation."


Blockbuster's Chief Viewed As Wary on Viacom Deal
In a sign of increasing tension over the sale of the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation to Viacom Inc., Blockbuster's chairman, H. Wayne Huizenga, said yesterday that he was not happy with the current value his shareholders would receive in Viacom stock, according to several people who heard him speak at a retailing conference.
The conference, closed to the press, was held by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company at the Pierre Hotel in Manhattan.


COMPANY BRIEFS
OHM CORP., Findlay, Ohio, a hazardous-waste cleanup and treatment company, was awarded an environmental remediation contract worth up to $250 million over five years from the Navy.


EXPLOSION IN EDISON: The Pipeline; 7 Feet Underground, a Silent Superhighway Carries Enormous Energy
Buried seven feet in the dirt next to an apartment complex in Edison, N.J., was the energy equivalent of a superhighway, a pipeline three feet across and filled with gas at a pressure of 900 pounds a square inch, sufficient to serve 10 million homes.
To move that much energy by rail would take a carload of coal about every 30 seconds.
The 33-year-old pipeline was supposed to be invisible forever, and it was at least unobtrusive.
Survivors of the blast said yesterday that they never knew the pipeline was there, until they heard the blast or, in a few cases, heard a whooshing noise just before the explosion.


3 Are Arrested In the Slayings Of 2 Students
Three 16-year-olds were arrested yesterday in the killings of two Bronx high school students after what the police said was an argument over a neighborhood spongeball game.
The police said that two of the suspects, Luis Polanco of 214 St.
Ann's Avenue and Carlos Paniagua of 789 East 166th Street, attended the same high school, Morris, as the victims.


Peter Lawrence Dies; Arts Executive Was 74
Peter Lawrence, an arts administrator and theater producer, died on Monday in Washington.
He was 74 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son Michael, of Washington.


Davis Fills Knicks' Void, and Then Some
Hubert Davis was the only true shooting guard the Knicks had tonight.
He was the only shooting guard they needed.


Offering Help To Victims
Radio station WKXW-FM is seeking donations of food, clothing and other items.
Donations can be taken to: Freehold Raceway Mall, Freehold; Bridgewater Commons Mall, Bridgewater; Quakerbridge Mall, Lawrenceville; Brunswick Square Mall, East Brunswick, and Menlo Park Mall, Edison.
The Home News and The Asbury Park Press, newspapers operated by the station's parent company, will deliver collected items to the South Plainfield Rescue Squad: (908) 549-1900.


Critic's Notebook; The Bells Of Riverside And Beyond
AS pep bands go, it was an odd one, no question.
But then, this was a peculiar game of touch football, played most Saturday afternoons through the 1970's on a forlorn, balding scrap of ground in upper Riverside Park in Manhattan and dominated by musicians.
After a nasty collision or a nastier dropped pass in the end zone, some Juilliard-trained ear might cock to identify a soothing Bach chorale, wafting on the howling wind from the tower of Riverside Church, up the hill at Riverside Drive and 122d Street.
Undoubtedly, the sounds of the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial Carillon struck other hearers differently, providing solace, inspiration or quite possibly unwanted distraction.
And "struck" is used advisedly, for the carillon is one of the few musical experiences -- or was, before the advent of megawatt rock amplification and boom boxes -- that is inflicted, unbidden, on whole neighborhoods.


Review/Art; Geometry With Echoes Of Universal Mysteries
When it comes to "art as idea" -- Ad Reinhardt's famous phrase -- few artists filled the bill as completely and vibrantly as the maverick geometric painter Alfred Jensen.
Jensen, who died in 1981 at the age of 78, painted pure thought much of the time, using such esoterica as numbers theory, the Mayan calendar, astrology, the I Ching, mathematical formulas, molecular physics and the precession of the equinoxes to determine his compositions.
In many ways his work is as cerebral as the most attenuated forms of Conceptual Art.
But Jensen also gave body to thought, obsessively translating his elaborate systems into an irresistible painting style distinguished by radiant colors, pulsating patterns and thick, palette-knifed surfaces that narrow the gap between art and cake icing.
His art is inherently, exuberantly conflicted: as arcane as it is accessible, as difficult as it is seductive.


Why Medicinal Marijuana, Not Capsules
To the Editor:
In "Try Capsules, Not Medicinal Marijuana" (letter, March 18), Donald P. Tashkin advocates medicinal use of dronabinol, a synthetic cannabinoid in capsule form, instead of smoked cannabis.
Most patients who have compared smoked cannabis with dronabinol say that smoking is always more effective.
Variations in the absorption of oral cannabis from the digestive tract make it difficult to control the dose.
Also, people who suffer from nausea and vomiting find it difficult to take cannabis orally.
Dr.
Tashkin reviews some concerns about the long-term effects of cannabis smoking on the lungs.
After studying cannabis more than 25 years, I have come to believe, largely due to Dr.
Tashkin's work, that pulmonary effects are the only well-documented harm from long-term cannabis use.
I believe his letter exaggerates this, but it has little to do with use of cannabis as a medicine.
I would share Dr.
Tashkin's concern if medical cannabis users had to smoke many cigarettes a day.
But most people who use cannabis as a medicine (for multiple sclerosis, AIDS weight loss syndrome, migraine headaches, epilepsy, menstrual tension, nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy) need a few puffs to relieve symptoms.
Patients who use some of the newer, more potent strains of marijuana need to inhale even less noxious smoke.
Dr.
David B. Busch of the Department of Environmental and Toxicologic Pathology has demonstrated, examining lung cells, that sinsemilla, a potent form, has fewer of the pulmonary effects Dr.
Tashkin describes than standard varieties.
Water pipes can also filter carcinogen substances in marijuana, a practice the Government unfortunately discourages.
When marijuana becomes available as a medicine, we should see even more efficient ways to separate noxious from useful constituents of the smoke.
Dr.
Tashkin's cautions should be taken seriously in some contexts, but they have little relevance to the use of smoked cannabis as a medicine.
LESTER GRINSPOON, M.D.
Boston, March 18, 1994 The writer is on the faculty of the Harvard Medical School and co-author of "Marihuana, the Forbidden Medicine" (New Haven, 1993).


Devils Strike Lightning
The Devils rarely took any offensive risks against the last-place Tampa Bay Lightning tonight, and as a result they mustered only two goals.
But that was still enough for a narrow 2-1 victory that guaranteed New Jersey a spot in the National Hockey League playoffs next month.
It also moved the Devils back within 2 points of the Rangers in the run for the best record in the league.
Both teams have 10 games to play in the regular season.


On My Mind; The Client Is Lenin
After a meeting with the Prime Minister of Communist China, the Prime Minister of Japan had this to say:
"I told him that it is not proper to force a Western or European-type democracy onto others."


Clinton's Account of Deal Is Questioned
As the Whitewater case was developing last month, Federal banking officials tried to persuade a criminal investigator to state that Bill and Hillary Clinton had not benefited from a failed Arkansas savings and loan, notes made by the investigator that were released today indicate.
But in the notes, the investigator said she had responded that money from the savings and loan, Madison Guaranty, had been used to pay some of the mortgage on a real estate investment by the Clintons in the 1980's and that they must have known so.
The investigator made the notes after a conversation she had on Feb. 2 in Kansas City with a bank regulator from Washington.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with a review of Harlem Dance Theater's program at the New York State Theater misidentified a dancer performing with Augustus Van Heerden.
She was Tai Jimenez, not Felicity de Jager.


Robin (Graves) and Batman? Batman (Messier) and Robin?
Through their three seasons as linemates in Gotham, Mark Messier and Adam Graves of the Rangers have been a Batman-and-Robin tandem, laying down law and order to Penguins and other jokers in the mean streets of the National Hockey League.
Although old for a boy wonder at age 25, Graves is a late bloomer, the junior partner of the duo, and until this season, much less of a famous name.
While the 33-year-old Messier wears the captain's "C," Graves wears the alternate's "A" the way Robin wore his "R."


CLINTON STRESSES CHINA RIGHTS GOAL
President Clinton reiterated his support tonight for holding China to strict standards on improving its human rights performance in remarks that were widely viewed as an expression of support for Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
Mr.
Christopher was sharply rebuffed by Chinese officials when he pressed the American position on a visit to Beijing nearly two weeks ago.
He has since come under attack within the Administration for adopting what his critics regarded as too confrontational an approach.


Lili Damita, Actress From France Who Starred in Hollywood, Dies
Lili Damita, a French-born actress who became one of Hollywood's most glamorous celebrities in the early years of talking pictures, died on Monday in Good Samaritan Medical Center in Palm Beach, Fla.
She was thought to be about 90, and she lived in Palm Beach.
She had Alzheimer's disease, The Associated Press reported.


Fears Send Markets Plunging
Only two days after the Federal Reserve moved to calm the financial markets, they were thrown into turmoil yesterday by a jarring confluence of global troubles.
Only gold, often the last refuge of investors fleeing other markets, rose sharply.
The stock, bond and dollar markets all fell yesterday on a run of bad news or tenacious anxieties.
These ranged from the assassination of Mexico's leading presidential candidate, worries that the Whitewater affair may damage the Clinton Administration and a drop in European stock and bond markets, which in turn hurt American stocks and bonds later in the day.


Global Liquor Market Tightens With Merger of Two Big Distillers


Pippen Is Next For Brown
It has been a tough week for the Nets' small forward, P. J. Brown, and it is not over yet.
After holding Dominique Wilkins of the Los Angeles Clippers to 33 points on 13-for-30 shooting in the 105-102 Nets victory over Los Angeles on Tuesday, Brown next draws the assignment of guarding Scottie Pippen when Chicago visits the Meadowlands on Friday night.


Review/Art; The Joys of Childhood Re-examined
Sometimes the Drawing Center's twice-a-year showcase of younger and underknown artists has a real cohesive impact, and "Selections Spring '94" is such an occasion.
Work for work, it's one of the liveliest offerings in a slow month in SoHo, though not one recommended for the fainthearted.
Enough to say that the children are probably safer checking out Lucian Freud's beached, PG-rated nudes at the Metropolitan Museum of Art than some of the audacious cartoon-style material here.
The show's subtitle, "The Sick Rose," is lifted from William Blake's "Songs of Innocence and of Experience" (1789) and goes right to the heart of ideas underlying not only this exhibition, but also a good amount of the art of this decade.


Market Place; Chiron investors pay a price for the biotech company's success.
IN the fuzzy logic of biotechnology investing, success can be a dangerous thing.
Just look at the Chiron Corporation.
Chiron marked 1993 by becoming one of the handful of biotech companies with a net income.
It gained Food and Drug Administration approval for the first drug to treat multiple sclerosis.
And it paved the way for future success with the broadest product-development pipeline in the industry.


Excerpts From Congressman's Documents on Investigation of Whitewater
Representative Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa, yesterday released documents in connection with his investigation of Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan, a failed Arkansas institution owned by James B. McDougal, and Whitewater Development Company, a failed real-estate venture whose investors included Mr.
McDougal, his wife, Susan, and Bill and Hillary Clinton.
--------------------
Following is a transcript of notes by L. Jean Lewis, a senior criminal investigator for the Resolution Trust Corporation, which oversees the disposal of failed savings and loans, of her conversation with April Breslaw, a lawyer with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
According to the notes, the conversation occurred on Feb. 2, 1994, from approximately 3:50 P.M. until 4:35 P.M.:


The Spoken Word
"THE NILE AND MODERN EGYPT: LIFE AND DEATH ON A RIVER," New York University, Kevorkian Center, 50 Washington Square South, at Sullivan Street, Greenwich Village.
Dr.
Rushdi Said, a former head of the Egyptian Geological Survey and an adjunct professor of geology at Southern Methodist University in Dallas, is to discuss the effects of an increasing population and a series of droughts on the river.
Tonight at 6:30.
Free.
Information: (212) 998-8890.


Districts To Improve Business Proliferate
On the south side of West 40th Street at Eighth Avenue, a man in a white uniform and broom was busily sweeping one morning earlier this week.
On the north side, a man dressed in cherry red was doing the same.
Each man worked for a different business improvement district, those increasingly ubiquitous organizations dedicated to sanitation, security, sales promotion and other tasks that property owners have decided to pay for themselves.
There are now 31 such groups, called B.I.D.'s, in New York City, and as many as 15 others are being formed.


6 Whalers Plead Guilty
Six Hartford Whalers must do 20 hours of community service during the off season for getting into a fight yesterday at a nightclub in Buffalo that is owned by Bills quarterback JIM KELLY.
Arrested were team captain PAT VERBEEK, GEOFFREY SANDERSON, MARC POTVIN, CHRIS PRONGER, MARK JANSSEN and TODD HARKINS, along with the assistant coach KEVIN McCARTHY.


With the Weather Warming, Recess Moves Outdoors


Art in Review
169th Annual Exhibition  National Academy of Design  1083 Fifth Avenue (near 89th Street) Through April 3
The National Academy of Design's annual exhibition, the oldest juried show in the United States, always provides a sobering glimpse of the parallel universes that constitute the art world.
This is especially the case in even-numbered years, when anyone in the country can submit work. (Odd-numbered years are for members only.)


METRO DIGEST
EXPLOSION IN EDISON: 1 DEAD, THOUSANDS AWESTRUCK
A natural gas pipeline explosion and fire that roared out of control for hours in the central New Jersey city of Edison sent 1,500 nearby residents fleeing in terror, leveled eight apartment buildings and damaged a half-dozen others, melted cars and lighted the night sky from New York to Pennsylvania.
A1.
EVERYONE HAD ONE THOUGHT: RUN
When the explosion brought a sense of Armageddon to the sprawling Durham Woods Apartments shortly before midnight, the 1,500 residents did not know what evil had visited them.
They imagined that it was a tornado, a plane crash, an alien ship from outer space, a hydrogen bomb or the final revenge of global warming.
But they all had the same feeling: run.
A1.


Jamesway Corp. reports earnings for 13wks to Jan 29


Diner's Journal
Revamped in SoHo
When the husband and son of the country's first female Vice Presidential candidate open a restaurant, there is something wonderfully fitting about it.
Which is why Cascabel, a year-old SoHo restaurant, has been more famous for its proprietors than for its food.
But the Zaccaros, John Jr. and Sr., were not happy with the situation, so they invited Tom Valenti to be their chef and partner.
The restaurant reopened just 10 days ago, and it is already clear that Mr.
Valenti, the former chef of Alison on Dominick Street in the South Village, has reordered the priorities; when food is this good, it does not really matter who owns the place.


Observing a Rite of Spring: Easter Music
This is a sampling of the musical presentations planned for the holiday season at churches and concert halls in New York City.
All are free unless otherwise noted.
This selection, compiled by Alex Ross, represents what caught this critic's eye and excited his expectation.
Today
CHURCH OF OUR LADY OF POMPEI (Roman Catholic), 25 Carmine Street, Greenwich Village.
Dupre's Chemin de la Croix and readings of works by Paul Claudel, the French poet and diplomat; Frederick A. Tripodi, organist; Andrew Brizzolara, reader. 7 P.M.
Information: (212) 989-6805.


Given a Push, Maryland Alters Its Death Penalty
John Thanos will go to his grave with an unusual distinction for a three-time murderer: he changed Maryland law, or at least he certainly hastened the change.
Mr.
Thanos, who was convicted in 1992 of killing three teen-age boys in the course of robberies, is one of the newer arrivals on Maryland's death row.
Late last year he dismissed his lawyers, dropped his appeals and, as a consequence, leaped to the head of the queue of prisoners awaiting execution.
Most unusual of all, he agreed to have his own death videotaped, in support of an appeal planned by another condemned prisoner that would challenge the state's method of execution as unconstitutionally cruel.


Inter-City Products reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Man Who Shot Colosio Recalled as a Loner Who Said Little
The young self-proclaimed pacifist who assassinated a leading politician on Monday remained as much a mystery to officials today as to his puzzled neighbors in a slum not far from the United States border.
No evidence emerged here, either at Government briefings or among his neighbors on dusty Mexicali Street, to suggest that the 23-year-old gunman, Mario Aburto Martinez, had any political connections or was tied in any way to the recent peasant uprising in Chiapas.


Logo-motifs
New Yorkers with $34.50 to spare can buy auto license plates with the logo of their favorite pro team, and for $63 they can choose the numbers and lettering too.
Sports plates were introduced last year, along with plates for the state's main tourist attractions, colleges and assorted organizations -- including the New York State Hypnotherapists Association.
It should come as no surprise that the Yankees are No. 1.
They may not be the Yankees of old, No. 1 on the field.
But they are still the money team, and close to 2,000 fans have forked over the extra cash to attest to their fandom.
Alas, the second-best seller is a New York squad in name only -- the football Giants, whose stadium sits across the Hudson River from New York City in New Jersey's Meadowlands.


George Gets Chance at a Fresh Start With Trade to Falcons
On draft day four years ago in Manhattan, a wide-eyed Jeff George spoke of how fortunate he was to be the No. 1 pick and of how thrilled he was to be playing for the Colts in his hometown of Indianapolis.
A blockbuster trade between the Colts and the Atlanta Falcons had made George's dream possible.
Over the last four seasons, however, George's dream became an ugly nightmare as he struggled on and off the field to live up to glowing expectations.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about a planned sale of 23.2 million common shares of Coltec Industries misstated the original cost of the shares to investors in 1988.
The investors acquired 25 million shares of the company for $200 million, not $660 million.


Kamieniecki No Longer Penciled In
In the puzzling and unsettled world of the Yankees, there are 15 pitchers remaining and only 11 jobs left.
The spring training results mean different things for different candidates and the time to make choices is vanishing.
What happened today during an 8-7 loss to the Atlanta Braves in 10 innings still did not provide definitive answers from Manager Buck Showalter.
But speculation about the status of Scott Kamieniecki and Jeff Reardon increased.
If the speculation proves correct, both pitchers could be destined for the bullpen.
Only Reardon would be thrilled.


A Violent Echo
Given the endemic political violence in Mexico in the early years of this century, the country has been remarkably free of political assassination at the presidential level from 1928 until Luis Donaldo Colosio was killed on Wednesday.
While earlier 19th-century dictators, such as Porfirio Diaz, were deposed and allowed to go into exile, the fate of many leaders who attempted to succeed him was to die in a hail of bullets.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Gianni Versace raises eyebrows, and hackles, in The New Yorker.
AS spring sprang the other day, so did Gianni Versace's latest fashions, across eight glossy pages in this week's issue of The New Yorker.
With Linda Evangelista featured in photographs by Richard Avedon, the 16 frames capture the eye as much for the model as the clothes.
Yet like other fashion collaborations, the collection of black and white photographs seems to provoke as part of the sales pitch, although it is not entirely clear whether provocation helps or hinders.
Mr.
Versace said in a telephone interview from Miami that the advertisement, which has run in other forms in international fashion magazines, has helped increase sales by 40 percent this season.


Uncovered Short Sales Increase 2.2% on Nasdaq
The number of investors expecting a sharp drop in the Nasdaq market continues to grow.
For the monthlong period that ended on March 15, short interest in Nasdaq stocks climbed 2.2 percent, to a record 717.3 million shares.
That was up from 701.8 million in the previous month, which was also a record, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.


All We Need Are More Manufacturing Jobs; The Overqualified Trap
To the Editor:
Two of the job seekers in "Low Pay and Closed Doors Greet Young in Job Market" conclude that to find more challenging jobs "they will have to go to graduate school" (front page, March 10).
Unless they choose a field of study in high demand, graduate school is not a simple solution.
Indeed, a graduate degree can lessen the chance of finding a job if one does not have substantial experience beforehand.
The experience trap is such that most positions that require a master's degree also require two years of experience.
Entry-level positions that would enable one to gain experience require only a bachelor's degree.
Thus companies are reluctant to consider applicants with advanced degrees because they are perceived as overqualified.
Times of structural shifts in the economy highlight the deficiency of a market economy in matching employees with employers.
From an economic standpoint, unemployment and underemployment reduce the productive potential of the economy.
From a human perspective, a spiral of rejection can lead to destruction of self-esteem.
Young people leave college with self-confidence, believing they can help change the world.
At the end of the humiliating job search they wonder if they can change a light bulb.
Other than through contacts and unethical insider information, the prime way people look for jobs is through newspaper want ads.
Many newspapers have yet to enter the computer age, except for a few like your Fast Track service.
It is time consuming for applicants to sift through the want ads and for businesses to go through hundreds of resumes.
Computerized searches using new software would greatly increase the efficiency of matching applicants with employers.
Therefore, Congress ought to speed approval of the computerized national jobs bank contained in the Clinton Administration's job retraining plan.
Putting jobs on line maximizes both economic efficiency and social justice, which cannot be said of too many things.
GREG MURRAY  Alexandria, Va., March 13, 1994 The writer, who received a master's degree in Russian and East European studies, is looking for work.


Yes, Women Are Competing, But Ever Rugged Is the Way
Susan Cahn and Mariah Burton Nelson are women's basketball junkies, so this is the best and worst of times.
The top of the game, the regional championships of the National Collegiate Basketball Association tournament, began last night and continue tomorrow.
But Cahn in California and Nelson in Virginia will be scrabbling for results.
"I love this tournament; it's like a religious holiday," said Cahn, from San Francisco.
"But so little is covered. It's just so hard to keep track, which is frustrating. I get such pleasure seeing assertive, strong, skilled women who are free with their bodies. You don't see that much of it in the society at large."


Accounts
*
Detroit Medical Center to W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Detroit.
The assignment, formerly handled by Ross Roy Communications, Detroit, includes creative, media and direct marketing.
Billings are estimated at $1.5 million. *
The Mark Hotel, New York, to Warren/Kremer/CMP Advertising, New York, for advertising and sales promotion.
Billings on the account were undisclosed.


Art in Review
Irving Penn
Pace/MacGill Gallery  32 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through April 16
It's hard not to see Irving Penn's show as a bit of counterprogramming in response to Richard Avedon's retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
Mr.
Penn presents samples from many of the important directions he has pursued in his work for fashion magazines and for himself, organized loosely around the theme of New York City.


Ex-Official Admits Ordering Bogus Asbestos Reports
On the eve of a 1989 deadline for completing a federally mandated asbestos survey of all New York City schools, the bureaucrat in charge assembled his staff at the Long Island City headquarters of the Board of Education's buildings management division.
As his staff sat around a table watching, the official signed more than 100 blank inspection forms, reports that should have been signed only after inspections and laboratory tests had been completed.
Then, he confessed in Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday, he issued an order that would ultimately cost millions of dollars to remedy and would keep a million children out of school for two weeks last fall.
Looking for a Promotion
"I directed my staff to complete the reports, even though the inspections had not been completed," Robert Pardi, who headed the board's asbestos task force, said as he entered guilty pleas to Federal conspiracy charges.
"I did this to qualify for a promotion and to save the Board of Education from incurring fines for missing the deadline."


PRESIDENT REBUTS NEW ACCUSATIONS OVER WHITEWATER
President Clinton tried once again tonight to stop the past from consuming his Presidency, as he defended himself against new Republican allegations in the Whitewater affair.
He urged Americans to let him move beyond the spiral of financial and ethical questions so that he could take advantage of a "rare moment" to pursue "real work."
Mr.
Clinton held the second prime-time news conference of his Presidency to try to recapture his present and future, listing a litany of accomplishments and saying of Whitewater: "None of this, in the light of history, will be as remotely important as the fact that by common consensus we had the most productive first year of a Presidency last year of anyone in a generation. That's what matters -- that we're changing people's lives."  [ Transcript, page A18. ] Accusations on House Floor
The President calmly delivered his defense only a few hours after Representative Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa, went to the House floor to offer documentation of ethical and financial misdeeds in connection with Whitewater and to accuse the Administration of an attempted cover-up that "flagrantly violated" the independence of regulatory agencies. [ page A17 ] .


Court Hears the Merrick Adoption Case
The theater producer David Merrick, once the most powerful man on Broadway, sat quietly today in the court spectators' gallery as his lawyer argued a case with a labyrinthine plot and an intriguing legal question: Can the 82-year-old Mr.
Merrick, severely disabled from a stroke, be forced to become a father?
In a case that adoption experts said was unusual and potentially precedent-setting, Mr.
Merrick was sued by his wife from whom he is estranged after he decided at the last minute in 1989 not to go through with adopting two young children.
His wife, Etan, 32 years younger than her husband, contends that he had gone too far in the adoption proceedings to back out.


Game of Misconduct
An Oklahoma City player was in fair condition yesterday at a Tulsa hospital after at least two off-duty police officers sprayed him with pepper gas and used a choke hold to subdue him during a Central Hockey League playoff game with Tulsa.
BRUCE SHOEBOTTOM, who plays for the Oklahoma City Blazers, was in St. Francis Hospital.


Review/Film Festival; At a Convenience Store, Coolness to Go
Have you ever wondered whether the contractors working on the Death Star didn't become innocent victims during the climactic battle of the "Star Wars" adventures?
No?
Well, it may take a certain kind of workaday atmosphere to bring such thoughts to mind.
Dante Hicks (Brian O'Halloran) and his friend Randal (Jeff Anderson) are seen experiencing that atmosphere to the fullest in Kevin Smith's "Clerks," a buoyant, bleakly funny comedy chronicling a day's worth of activity at two adjoining stores.
Though nominally situated in New Jersey, this convenience store and video rental place are in spirit somewhere very near the end of the world.
In this dismal setting, the customer who takes all the eggs out of their cartons until he assembles a perfectly matched dozen is enough to pique the clerks' imaginations.
"I'll bet you a million dollars he's a guidance counselor," says one, thinking the man may be suffering the ill effects of having "a meaningless job." Dante and Randal understand perfectly.
So does the 23-year-old Mr.
Smith, who has worked off and on at Quick Stop Groceries in Leonardo, N. J., since he was 19 and shot his extremely low-budget black-and-white film there.
The upshot, an exuberant display of film-student ingenuity, is a classic example of how to spin straw into gold.


Tests Fail to Find the Source Of Virus That Killed Student
Tests on blood samples from more than 60 people and 100 rodents in two states have failed to turn up the source of the hantavirus that killed a 22-year-old college student from Roslyn Harbor, L.I., in January, health officials in New York said today.
Health Department officials said the findings suggested that the virus is rare and not a threat to the public.


Police See Pattern In Boutique Holdup
The police said yesterday that they believe the robbers who shot an out-of-town couple who were shopping at a bridal boutique carried out a series of jewelry robberies at gunpoint on the East Side.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, meanwhile, met with the victims' two daughters -- one of whom said after the shootings that she hated New York City -- and tried to dispel the notion that the city was not safe for visitors.
"I can understand the emotion and the feeling," he said.
But he noted that the family lives near Washington and observed that "Washington has very much the same problems that we have."


Carnival Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Sounds Around Town
Cecil Taylor
Cecil Taylor, Alice Tully Hall, (212) 721-6500.
At 65, Cecil Taylor is one of the wonders of American music.
He'll be playing unaccompanied, which is the best way to hear him, where his stunning virtuosity is on ample display.
His solo pieces, with their moments of almost unbearable lyricism, move from calm to fury.
It has been nearly 40 years since this pianist first recorded in a jazz context, and he has traveled a long way since then.
The show tomorrow is at 8 P.M.; tickets are $25.
PETER WATROUS Blues Album of the Week
R.
L.
Burnside, "Too Bad Jim" (Fat Possum Records).
Available for $14.98 from Roots and Rhythm, 6921 Stockton, El Cerrito, Calif. 94530; (510) 525-1494.
Over the last three years, Fat Possum Records, a small label in Mississippi, has been releasing documents of northern Mississippi blues, valuable for cultural reasons but even more so because the music is so good.
The northern Mississippi blues tradition is pretty obscure, and it's all about repetition and droning, about the subtle colorations of rhythm that trance music needs to be effective.
The 66-year-old guitarist R. L. Burnside plays a music surprisingly different from the standard Chicago blues that makes the fraternity-house-and-blues circuit.
For one, his tunes rarely stray beyond a chord or two.
More important, the performances are improvised rhythmically; songs could last all night, with no complaints from anyone.
There isn't music like this anywhere.
P.
W.


Accord For United Airlines Moves Closer to Completion
The on-again, off-again effort by the pilots' and machinists' unions of United Airlines to gain majority control of the carrier moved an important step closer to completion yesterday.
People familiar with details of the negotiations between the unions and the company said a number of disputes had been resolved.
Those differences resulted in the parties missing a self-imposed deadline earlier this month to sign the final paperwork for the $5 billion deal.


Sequa Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Film Festival; Baby Humans and Beasts
Among the many astonishing scenes in "Sirga" is one in which a small lion cub frolics with a baby just about its size.
It is a sweet, endearing episode, perfectly in tune with the characters played by these unlikely actors.
The baby is Oule, a boy from an African village who is magically in touch with the animal world.
The cub is his mystical twin sister, Sirga, a lion princess who protects the village from angry elephants who used to rule the territory.
While the baby Oule and Sirga act out every animal-loving child's fantasy, adults can pass the time wondering, "How did they film that?"
The animal sequences are the heart of "Sirga," which had a long run as a children's favorite in France and which will be shown tonight at 6 and tomorrow at 1 P.M. at the Museum of Modern Art as part of the New Directors/New Films series.
The film will also be shown at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center in its Movies for Kids program on April 2, 3, 9 and 10.
At the Walter Reade screenings, English translations will be available over headsets.
There isn't much dialogue in the film, and even smaller children should be able to follow the story that way if they are able to sit still for the headphones.


House Hardens Rule on Lobbyists; Bans Accepting Gifts From Them
The House surprised even itself today and voted lopsidedly, 315 to 110, to make virtually all lobbyists report how much they spend to influence Congress, and to ban altogether the meals and gifts they have long rained on lawmakers.
It was the most muscular attempt to curtail the influence of money on the lawmaking process since at least 1989, when Congress enacted broad ethics reforms, and the first overhaul of the rules governing lobbyists since 1946.
Despite some complaints that the measure did not go far enough, some Democrats who have crusaded in the last year to repair Congress's sorry public image proclaimed it a huge step forward.


Fresh Questions Making Whitewater An Affair That Is Difficult to Forget
Representative Jim Leach of Iowa dropped his blockbuster this afternoon, but whether it will inflict heavy political damage remains to be seen.
For weeks and months there have been allegations of irregularities, even skulduggery, in an Arkansas real estate deal involving Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary, 15 years ago.
But to most Americans it seemed like much ado about not very much, and the whole thing happened long ago and far away, anyway.


Referee Leaves Ferguson On the Ropes in Bribe Trial
Referee Wayne Kelly, the third man in the ring when Ray Mercer first fought Jesse Ferguson last year, testified yesterday that he not only failed to hear any bribe offer from Mercer to Ferguson, but that Ferguson was also doing most of the talking.
Kelly's testimony left Ferguson as the only witness who contended that Mercer made a $100,000 bribe offer, the charge on which Mercer is being tried in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
It is unclear from the often-muffled sound on the videotape that an offer was made, and even the transcript provided by the prosecution does not have Mercer uttering the words "money" or "100,000."


Sports of The Times; A Jolly Mood, Relatively, For Knight
SOMEBODY wanted to know if the Indiana players were afraid of Bobby Knight.
It seemed like a valid question, particularly when the three Indiana players kept glancing nervously at the back of the press conference.
There was no way of knowing when the terrible-tempered Coach Knight might emerge through the curtain, ready to butt heads, kick shins, toss chairs, stuff somebody in a garbage can, insult one group or another, or recite childish doggerel.


INSIDE
Anxieties Shake the Markets And Investors Sell on Fears
Financial markets were thrown into turmoil by the assassination in Mexico and the Whitewater affair.
The Dow Jones fell 48.37 points, while yield on the 30-year Treasury bond jumped to 6.95 percent.
Page D1.
Crash Toll Rises to 20
Four more paratroopers died in the aftermath of a midair collision over an Air Force Base, and more deaths were considered likely.
Page A14.
Crackdown on Kwazulu
As South African elections draw near, the Government has been authorized to take the reins of this homeland to protect voters' rights.
Page A10.
Guilty Plea in Asbestos Case
Saying he ordered the filing of false reports, an official pleaded guilty to charges from New York's flawed school asbestos inspections.
Page B1.


Japan's Top Banker Assails Nation's Banks
The governor of the Bank of Japan delivered a stern tongue-lashing today to Japan's battered commercial banks, criticizing in stark terms their pack mentality, their inability to evaluate financial risks and their unwillingness to innovate in spite of their huge size.
The governor, Yasushi Mieno, has periodically criticized Japanese banking practices since a plunge in the stock and real estate markets four years ago exposed a pattern of reckless lending and buried the banks under a mountain of bad debts.
Analysts say that the country's 21 largest banks hold at least $270 billion in bad loans and that the toll is mounting.


The Law as the Free Market's Rogue: Hostage to the Prisoner's Dilemma
KATE: For someone who has nothing nice to say about lawyers, you certainly have enough of them around.
GARFINKLE: You have to.
They're like nuclear warheads.
They have theirs, so you need yours, but . . . they're only good in their silos.
-- "Other People's Money,"  by Jerry Sterner


Getting Ready for Another Season at Coney Island


Allied-Lyons to Acquire Pedro Domecq Group
Despite a generally stagnant global market for liquor, Allied-Lyons Inc., already a giant in the industry, agreed yesterday to pay more than $1.1 billion to acquire the Pedro Domecq Group, whose alcoholic beverages sell particularly well in Spain and Latin America.
The deal would make Allied-Lyons, which also owns Dunkin' Donuts and Baskin-Robbins ice cream, the second-largest alcoholic beverages company, after International Distillers and Vintners, a subsidiary of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C.
Guinness P.L.C. would fall to No. 3.
The deal is subject to the approval of the European Union.


GE Capital Seeks 4 Kemper Board Seats
Making good on its promise to take its $2.2 billion hostile bid directly to the shareholders of the Kemper Corporation, the GE Capital Corporation notified the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday that it would seek four seats on Kemper's board.
Only four of Kemper's 11 directors are up for election at the annual meeting, which is scheduled for May 11, so even a victory would not assure GE Capital of a successful deal.


Alfred J. Jolson; Bishop of Reykjavik, 65
The Most Rev.
Alfred J. Jolson, S.J., the Roman Catholic Bishop of Reykjavik, Iceland, died Monday at Mercy Hospital in Pittsburgh while on a visit there.
He was 65.
The cause was complications after heart bypass surgery, his sister, Mary Kelly, said.


The Right Hands but the Wrong Result for Seton Women
When the game is on the line, the ball funnels to one spot in the Seton Hall Lady Pirates' offense: Jodi Brooks's hands.
That is where it was tonight with Seton Hall trailing by 2 points with 16 seconds left, but Brooks's short pull-up jumper -- and Rukaiyah Walker's equally short follow -- didn't even find iron.


Review/Theater; A 'Carousel' for the 90's Full of Grit and Passion
"CAROUSEL" will be 50 next year, but as of this morning it is the freshest, most innovative musical on Broadway.
It is also the most beautiful.
Time and again you will marvel at the way the British director Nicholas Hytner and his designers transform the curved stage of the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center, where the production opened last night.
Sculptors of space, they summon out of the star-flecked darkness breathtaking images of a 19th-century seacoast town in Maine.
In the scheme of things, this brawling little world is nothing, a mere speck in the cosmos, ignored by the indifferent moon overhead.
But it is so full of life and love struggling to make itself felt that it is everything.
Clearly, a rueful philosopher abides deep within the immensely gifted Mr.
Hytner.


With Judgeships Vacant, Crime Bill Rolls On
To the Editor:
Judge Maryanne Trump Barry is right, of course, to criticize the crime bill that is making its way through the Senate and House of Representatives ("Don't Make a Federal Case of It," Op-Ed, March 11).
Federal courts are swamped now, she argues, so federalizing more crimes only pours more water into an overflowing cup.


Paula Trueman, 96, Stage and Film Actress
Paula Trueman, an actress whose career in theater and films spanned more than six decades, died on Wednesday in New York Hospital.
She was 96 and lived in Manhattan.
Among Miss Trueman's many stage credits were featured roles in two comedies by George S. Kaufman and Moss Hart, "You Can't Take It With You" (1936) and "George Washington Slept Here" (1940).
She also appeared in "Gentlemen Prefer Blondes" with Carol Channing, "Mrs. McThing" with Helen Hayes and "The Solid Gold Cadillac" with Josephine Hull.


Review/Music; Concerts on Idealized Love Range Far Afield of the Theme
"The Immortal Beloved" is the title Kurt Masur gave his New York Philharmonic programs this week, naming them after the mysterious unidentified married woman Beethoven loved.
The concerts, which end tonight, are meant to celebrate idealized love.
Before each performance, Nancy Marchand and Paul Sparer read Romantic verse by such poets as Byron and Wordsworth.
And yet, on Wednesday night in Avery Fisher Hall, idealized love seemed quite far from the music's preoccupations.
Yes, Schoenberg's "Verklarte Nacht" (played in its 1917 orchestral version), has its programmatic origin in an eminently forgettable poem by Richard Dehmel about two lovers walking in the "bare cold woods"; the man finds out the woman is carrying another man's child but his love endures.
And yes, Berg's Violin Concerto is full of coded references to Berg's wife and his mistress as well as to the 18-year-old daughter of Alma Mahler.
And yes, according to the scholar Maynard Solomon, Beethoven's Eighth Symphony was written at the very time that the composer wrote his famed letter to Antonie Brentano, breaking off their romance.


Mexico: Shaken, but Strong
For Mexico this has been a year of trial by fire, and it is only March.
After the jolt of a January guerrilla uprising, Wednesday's assassination of the front-running presidential candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta, has profoundly shaken the confidence of what was long thought to be one of Latin America's most stable political systems.
On this side of the border, investors who welcomed Mexico's emergence as an open and modernizing economy are now reassessing their bets.
But panic would be exactly the wrong response in either country.
Without prettifying Mexico's still imperfect democracy, Washington should strongly reaffirm its confidence in and commitment to Mexico's underlying stability and its continuing reformist course.
And Mexico should continue buttressing its economic reforms with greater democracy, a cause Mr.
Colosio identified himself with.


Petrolina Journal; Brazil Waters a Desert. The Desert Is Still Smiling.
Arcing 1,690 miles through the dusty heart of Brazil's sun-baked northeast, the Sao Francisco River has often been called Brazil's Nile.
For centuries its waters flowed untapped through Brazil's poorest region, a parched landscape of sun-wizened cowboys, emaciated cattle, thorn bush and cactus.


Britain Battling Europe Over Voting
Prime Minister John Major said today that Britain was fighting a battle of principle in a bruising confrontation with most of the rest of Europe over how many votes will be needed to block decisions when the European Union expands from 12 countries to 16.
In speaking to the House of Commons over a stalemate that has stymied the European Union for weeks now, he said his Government was trying to check an undemocratic trend in which the populations of large countries had many fewer votes per capita that the populations of smaller countries.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Acquired Enrique Wilson, shortstop, from the Minnesota Twins to complete an earlier trade.


Affirmatively Wrong
To the Editor:
Shelby Steele's "How to Grow Extremists" (Op-Ed, March 13) fortifies an opinion I have held since the great idea of affirmative action (seek out the disadvantaged; train, hire and promote without discrimination) was changed to preference by race.


Telefonos De Mexico
Telefonos de Mexico, the largest stock on the Mexican Bolsa and a favorite among United States institutional investors, saw its American depository receipts fall sharply yesterday.
The assassination of Mexico's leading presidential candidate undermined investor confidence in that country.


Italian, Held in Scandal, Muses on Dante and Sin
Languishing in prison, Mario Zamorani couldn't help but think of Dante's "Inferno."
Through the third-floor window of his cell in Turin, Mr.
Zamorani said he could see the construction site for an extension of the prison building, a contract he himself had negotiated with the authorities before his arrest almost two years ago on charges of paying bribes to win contracts.


National Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Review/Film; More Quackery and Quixotism on the Ice
Any movie can inspire merchandising tie-ins like T-shirts and dolls.
The 1992 Disney hit "The Mighty Ducks" is the only film in history to have inspired the creation of an actual hockey team, the Disney-owned Anaheim Mighty Ducks of the National Hockey League.
It makes the head spin just to think about professional hockey players wearing their bright green jerseys with the cartoonish team logo inspired by a children's movie: a scowling duck in a goalie's mask with hockey sticks crossed behind him like a kiddie skull-and-crossbones.
Yeah, they're tough.
What makes the head spin even more is the message of the movie's sequel.
The point of "D2: The Mighty Ducks" is that commercialism in sports is bad.
Emilio Estevez returns as Gordon Bombay, who in the original was a high-powered lawyer arrested for drunken driving and forced to do community service by coaching a ragtag children's team.
Of course, he recaptured his boyhood love of the game.
In "D2," when the Ducks travel from Minnesota to Los Angeles to play in the Junior Goodwill Games, Bombay loses his sportsmanlike bearings.
The evidence of his distraction is that he becomes a peewee-league Pat Riley, with slicked-back hair, designer suits and many commercial endorsements.
Good luck to parents trying to explain this to children while standing in line to buy their Mighty Ducks hockey shirts.


Art in Review
Gene Bertoncini
Gene Bertoncini, Le Madeleine, 403 West 43d Street, Clinton, (212) 246-2993.
Gene Bertoncini, whose guitar playing is a mixture of jazz and classical influences which he keeps in complementary balance, has been playing unaccompanied concerts on Sunday nights since the middle of February in Le Madeleine, a restaurant in Clinton.
His blend of sources gives him a strong individuality that leads the listener easily through unfamiliar but warmly melodic lines.
He is best known for his duets with the bassist Michael Moore, with whom he has been playing off and on for 20 years; his Sunday nights at Le Madeleine show him in full freedom.
He starts at 7 P.M. and plays four 40-minute sets.
There is no music charge and no minimum.
Cyrus Chestnut
Cyrus Chestnut, Tavern on the Green, Central Park West, at 67th Street, (212) 873-3200.
In the last year Cyrus Chestnut has emerged as an outstanding member of the newest generation of jazz pianists.
Schooled at the Berklee College of Music in Boston, Mr.
Chestnut gained polish working as a sideman with Wynton Marsalis, Jon Hendricks, Terence Blanchard and Betty Carter.
Now he is moving ahead as leader of his own group in, appropriately, the Chestnut Room of the Tavern on the Green.
The trio, with Steve King on bass and Gene Jackson at the drums, is to play there tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and 11, for a music charge of $17.50 On Sunday, the shows are 8:30 and 10:30 P.M. and the music charge is $12.50.
J.
S.
W.
John Bunch Trio
John Bunch Trio, Zeno, 126 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 924-5182.
The trio in which John Bunch plays piano also includes the guitarist Bucky Pizzarelli and the bassist and singer Jay Leonhart, any one of whom is interchangeable with Mr.
Bunch in the role of leader, depending on who got the booking.
Mr.
Bunch is usually the leader when they play at Zeno, where he has been playing regularly for 11 years.
Their program includes selections from Benny Goodman's repertory like "Air Mail Special" and "A Smooth One," in recognition of the fact that both Mr.
Bunch and Mr.
Pizzarelli played in Benny Goodman's groups.
There are also songs by Rodgers and Hart, featured in their latest album, and such rarely heard tunes as Oscar Pettiford's "Tricrotism" and Cedar Walton's "Cedar's Blues." The music starts at 8 tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $5 music charge and a $15 minimum at the tables and a $10 minimum at the bar.
J.
S.
W.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.47
3.05
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.43
3.45
2.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.77
3.77
2.99
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.54
6.48
5.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.95
6.89
6.85
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.79
7.73
7.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.03
5.97
6.00
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Jury Recommends Death for Florida Killer of 5
A jury today recommended the death penalty for Danny Harold Rolling, the drifter who last month pleaded guilty to five gruesome sex murders that terrorized this college town four years ago.
Florida law requires a simple majority of seven jurors to recommend the death penalty, but all 12 in this case -- nine women and three men -- agreed that Mr.
Rolling should die in Florida's electric chair for the August 1990 stabbing deaths of four women and one man.


Cintas Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Buttafuocos' Fame: 10 Minutes Plus
It's the story that would not die.
When last we left Joey Buttafuoco, the auto body mechanic whose affair with a 16-year-old girl paved the way to stardom, he was being whisked away in handcuffs to serve a six-month sentence for the statutory rape of the girl, Amy Fisher.
The world's press dutifully recorded every moment, from Mr.
Buttafuoco's limo ride to court, to the very private grief of his wife, Mary Jo, captured on "A Current Affair" for a reported $500,000.


Maxwell Pleads Guilty
Houston Rockets guard VERNON MAXWELL pleaded guilty yesterday to a misdemeanor charge of illegally carrying a gun in his car.
Maxwell was sentenced to four days in jail and ordered to pay a $1,500 fine, but he will not have to serve any more time behind bars.
Harris County Criminal Court-at-Law Judge JIM BARKLEY credited Maxwell with two days for the six hours he was held earlier this month when he was arrested.


Erwin A. Stuebner; Investment Executive, 88
Erwin A. Stuebner, former national partner and president of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, died on Tuesday at Evanston Hospital, Evanston, Ill.
Mr.
Stuebner, who lived in Wilmette, Ill., was 88.
The cause was complications of Parkinson's disease, said his son James Stuebner.


Art in Review
Stephen Greene  Victoria Munroe Gallery 9 East 84th Street Manhattan  Through April 2
While not a highly original painter, Stephen Greene has never faltered in the cultivation of his particular garden, a form of non-expressionistic abstraction that has become increasingly loose and gestural over the last decade or so.
His latest solo exhibition, his 23d in New York since 1947, is especially convincing.
It reveals an artist working with the history of modern painting not so much in his head (to borrow from Robert Motherwell) as at his fingertips.


Black-Run Denny's Unit Taken Over
Nearly two years after Donald J. Bohana opened the first black-owned Denny's restaurant here, serving soul food to attract black customers, officials of the restaurant chain have seized control of the establishment.
The Flagstar Companies, Denny's parent, said in a statement that they had acquired the franchise from Mr.
Bohana because he was having difficulty meeting his financial obligations as a result of "current economic conditions in Southern California."


Treasury Prices Drop Amid Unsettling News
Long-term Treasury bond yields rose sharply yesterday and prices fell as traders and investors sold during a day when they were buffeted from all sides by continuing nagging concerns about inflation, developments in the Whitewater affair involving President Clinton and the the assassination of Mexico's leading presidential candidate.
While short-term rates managed to hold their ground, the rise in long-term rates wiped out all the gains made after the Federal Reserve announced Tuesday that it would push up its short-term interest rate target slightly.
David Munro, chief United States economist at High Frequency Economics, said that while most of yesterday's headlines were noneconomic, "they did revive the general anxiety of the market."


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of multi-step-up notes due in 1997 priced at 100 to yield 5 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The issue is callable in one year.
The coupon step up annually to 5.65 percent and 6.7 percent if not called.
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $130 million of notes due in 2004 priced at 100 to yield 6.75 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The issue is noncallable.


The Golf Club Survives
Senator Orrin Hatch has some good news.
Tennis, he announced in a recent letter to Congressional colleagues, has been added to the list of activities at the Utah Congressional Golf Challenge, an annual sporting event to which Mr.
Hatch plays host in his home state.
Like other such junkets taken in the guise of helping charity or Congressional business, this is a chance for lawmakers to enjoy an expenses-paid vacation at a luxury resort courtesy of big corporate sponsors, whose lobbyists and executives get to play right alongside the House and Senate members.
These corporations, of course, care less about golf and tennis than forging personal ties that can help with legislation.





Lyn Solotaroff, 64, A Translator, Is Dead
Lynn Solotaroff, a translator from Russian and a teacher, died on Monday at the Jewish Home &amp; Hospital in New York.
She was 64 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was lung cancer and emphysema, her family said.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about Catalog 1, a new cable shopping channel, misidentified Carol Helms.
She is a former creative director of Metropolitan Home magazine, not the current creative director.


Inside Art
The Lineup for Spring
Both Sotheby's and Christie's have just sealed deals on important property for their auctions of Impressionist and modern art in New York in May.
And not a moment too soon, since their catalogues are due at the printers this week.
On May 11, Sotheby's is to offer 12 paintings that belonged to Irving (Swifty) and Mary Lazar.
Mr.
Lazar, the celebrated literary and entertainment agent who lived in Los Angeles, died in December; Mrs.
Lazar died in January 1993.
The auction house estimates that their 12 paintings will bring a total of $1.8 million to $2.5 million.
Among them are Paul Delvaux's "Dream (The Garret)," a 1944 image of the artist asleep in his attic studio, worth an estimated $800,000 to $1 million, and Kees van Dongen's "Egyptienne-Hamida" (1913), a portrait of an Egyptian woman, expected to fetch $400,000 to $600,000.
Other works in the group are by Raoul Dufy, Edouard Vuillard and the German Expressionist Georg Tappert.


Israeli Army Faulted for Using Hospital in Gun Battle
The Israeli Army found itself on the defensive today, from angry Palestinians and at least one Israeli Cabinet minister, for having used a children's hospital as a firebase against a band of Palestinian fugitives in volatile Hebron.
Groups of Palestinian and Israeli doctors accused soldiers of "terrorizing patients and staff" at Mohtasseb Hospital when they used it and other buildings on Wednesday for what turned into an 18-hour battle against suspected gunmen of the militant Hamas group who were holed up in a nearby apartment house.


N.Y.P.D. Blues Praise TV Version; Ninth Precinct Counterparts Fault Sexism, but Like the Grit
Police work is gritty, but it also can be sentimental and even romantic.
Just Wednesday afternoon, outside the Ninth Precinct station house in the East Village, a portly detective handed a small gift-wrapped box to a pretty young assistant district attorney as a gift for her father.
She smiled sweetly, and caressed his tie.


Mr. Helms vs. the Education Bill
The Senate is poised to pass an important education bill as it approaches recess, but Jesse Helms is blocking the doorway.
The Republican Senator from North Carolina is trying to attach a prayer amendment to legislation that would set national standards for students and pour about $5 billion into school reform.
His efforts should be rejected.
Deciding what students should know and how to help them learn has become an integral part of the national school reform movement.
But since national goals were defined at an education conference in 1989, Congress has not approved legislation that would help states achieve them.


Restaurants
Eating in most museums is like eating on an airplane; you do it because you're hungry but it doesn't feel very good.
We all know it does not have to be this way, which is why there was such a surge of optimism when the Museum of Modern Art announced that an elegant new restaurant would soon be opening on the premises.
Were we about to enter a new era of museum dining?
No.


Giuliani Tells One Critic He's Off Hospitals Board
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has moved to force one of his critics off the board of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation, strengthening his hand against potential resistance to his plans to reorganize New York City's municipal hospital system.
In a letter on March 18, Mr.
Giuliani told the board member, Julio Bellber, that the city's Corporation Counsel had determined that his term on the board expired now, not in 1996.
The Mayor also informed another board member, Dr.
Calvin J. Simons, that his term would also expire earlier, though not until 1995.


Capote Trust Is Formed To Offer Literary Prizes
The creation of a new charitable institution, the Truman Capote Literary Trust, was announced yesterday by Alan U. Schwartz, a longtime friend of Capote's and his literary executor.
Through the Iowa Writers Workshop at the University of Iowa and the Creative Writing Program at Stanford University, the trust is to award prizes to writers and critics totaling $114,000 annually.
There will be a $100,000 prize every four years for lifetime achievement in criticism.
The Iowa workshop is to award four $8,000 Truman Capote Fellowships in creative writing each year, as well as a $50,000 cash prize, to be known as the Annual Truman Capote Award for Literary Criticism in Memory of Newton Arvin, for the best book of literary criticism written in English that year.
Arvin was a critic, much admired by Capote, who taught at Smith College but lost his job when his homosexuality became public knowledge.


Britain Can't Feel Proud of the Elgin Marbles
To the Editor:
You refer to the "obsessive effort" of the actress and politician Melina Mercouri to persuade the British Government through the 1980's that the sculptures of the Parthenon (the so-called Elgin Marbles) should be returned to Greece (obituary, March 7).
You state: "The sculptures were bought from the Turkish ruler of Greece in the early 1800's by a British ambassador, Lord Elgin, and later placed in the British Museum."


On Stage, and Off
In Black and White
It was early evening, two weeks ago Sunday, a rehearsal day at the American Jewish Theater for Michael Henry Brown's drama "The Day the Bronx Died," the first play by a black playwright ever presented by the 20-year-old theater.
The actors had just gone home, leaving the director, Gordon Edelstein, and the theater's artistic director, Stanley Brechner, in the cellarlike space on West 26th Street in Chelsea.
At about 6:30 P.M., four young black boys, not even teen-agers, walked in from the street and downstairs into the theater lobby.
They started shouting, making a disturbance, and then they left.
"We just figured, 'Kids,' " Mr.
Brechner said.


Moscow, March '94: Chaos and Hope
Those who suggest that because of its vast problems Russia should no longer be treated as a world power ignore an unpleasant but undeniable truth: Russia is the only nation in the world that can destroy the United States.
Therefore Russia remains our highest foreign policy priority.
The Russia I saw on this trip is a very different nation from the one I visited just one year ago.
Optimism about the future is being replaced by pessimism.
A strongly pro-American attitude has in many cases become disturbingly anti-American.
Boris Yeltsin is still a political heavyweight but he is no longer a superman.
When Russia was a dictatorship as part of the Soviet Union, a good relationship with the man at the top was all that was necessary.
This is no longer enough.


Grumman Agrees to Talks With Northrop on Rival Bid
The Grumman Corporation's board agreed today to begin merger discussions with the Northrop Corporation, which has made a hostile $2.04 billion bid to acquire the Long Island military contractor.
The Northrop offer of $60 a share is $5 higher than an earlier, friendly agreement between Grumman and the Martin Marietta Corporation.
The total value of Marietta offer is $1.93 billion.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "LUCIAN FREUD: RECENT WORK," an exhibition of 60 drawings, paintings and prints, and "ELEPHANT: THE ANIMAL AND ITS IVORY IN AFRICAN ART," an exhibition of sculpture, masks, headdresses, carvings and other items.
At the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
Both through Sunday.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Admission: $6; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Flyers Beat Back Panthers  Eric Lindros had a goal and two assists last night at the Spectrum, helping the Philadelphia Flyers to a 4-3 victory over the Florida Panthers.
Philadelphia got its second victory in its last six games (2-2-2) and moved to within 2 points of the Panthers for the eighth and final Eastern Conference playoff spot.
Florida's six-game unbeaten streak ended (3-0-3). (AP) N.B.A.
Lakers Await Magic  The Lakers didn't have Magic Johnson, but the Rockets had Hakeem Olajuwon.
Olajuwon scored 15 of his 37 points in the fourth quarter as the Rockets beat Los Angeles, 113-107, last night in Houston in the Lakers' final game before Johnson becomes their coach.
"We were playing one of the best teams with one of the best players having one of his best games," the Lakers' interim coach, Bill Bertka, said.
"Hakeem is so difficult to contain the entire game. The shots he hit you would have to call phenomenal except he has such a great touch, they're just normal for him." Bertka ended a two-game stretch as interim coach since Randy Pfund was relieved of the post.
Johnson will take over Sunday when the Lakers play Milwaukee at Inglewood, Calif. (AP) SuperSonics 116, Suns 106: Detlef Schrempf scored 5 of his season-high 27 points in the final 2 minutes 30 seconds as Seattle survived a late Phoenix rally.
Schrempf made 13 of 16 shots from the field, including 9 straight at one point.
Charles Barkley led the Suns with 25 points and 10 rebounds. (AP) N.I.T.
Siena Has a Date in Garden  In Glens Falls, N.Y., last night, Doremus Bennerman scored 34 points -- the third straight game in which he has broken 30 -- to lead Siena to a 75-62 victory over Bradley in the quarterfinals of the National Invitation Tournament.
Siena (24-7) will make its first trip to the N.I.T.
Final Four at Madison Square Garden on Monday night to play Villanova.
Bradley (23-8), which had all its losses come on the road, shot only 39.7 percent, including 4 of 19 from 3-point range.
Bennerman had 17 points from the foul line.
He scored 33 points in both the Saints' 76-68 first-round victory over Georgia Tech and in their 89-79 second-round victory over Tulane. (AP) SKIING  More Moe, More Medals  Tommy Moe of Palmer, Alaska, spurred by a lackluster performance a day earlier, won the men's super-giant slalom by an Olympian margin yesterday at the United States Alpine championships in Winter Park, Colo.
Shannon Nobis of Park City, Utah, won the women's Super-G.
Moe, who won a gold medal in the downhill and silver medal in the Super-G at the Olympics last month in Lillehammer, Norway, made up for a disappointing ninth-place finish in the downhill Wednesday.
Moe was timed in 1 minute 5.74 seconds -- more than a second faster than runner-up Roman Torn of Canada, who was timed in 1:06.88.
A J Kitt of Rochester was third in 1:06.90.
In the women's Super-G, Nobis and Picabo Street swapped positions from Wednesday.
Nobis, who was runner-up to Street in the downhill Wednesday, edged Street by two one-hundredths of a second in the Super-G. (AP) GOLF  Lopez Shares L.P.G.A.
Lead  Nancy Lopez, her game sharp despite a reduced schedule, shot a four-under-par 68 yesterday to share the first-round lead in the Dinah Shore tournament in Rancho Mirage, Calif., the Ladies Professional Golf Association's first major of the year.
Lopez, who won the event in 1981 before it was made a major, was tied with Alice Miller and Lisa Walters. (AP)


Young Sparkles, So Why Isn't He Wearing a Halo?
With the California Angels' manager publicly questioning his status and with Angels' scouts poised to evaluate his performance, Anthony Young finally took to the mound this afternoon and pitched two respectable innings in what may have been his final appearance as a member of the Mets.
Despite not feeling 100 percent healthy, Young pitched for the first time since March 13 and went two innings in relief of starter Dwight Gooden.
He faced eight batters, giving up one hit -- a single to center by Montreal's Curtis Pride -- and no runs.
And although he was not overwhelming on the mound, Young apparently performed well enough to satisfy Manager Buck Rodgers of California, who a day earlier had questioned what he termed Young's "mysterious" absence from action.


All We Need Are More Manufacturing Jobs
To the Editor:
"World's Big Economies Turn to the Jobs Issue," on the Group of Seven conference in Detroit (Business Day, March 14), refuses to confront the root cause of so much unemployment and so many low-paying jobs, particularly in the United States: the loss of manufacturing jobs.
No mention is made of the more than three million United States manufacturing jobs lost since 1979.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stocks fell on a run of bad news and assorted anxiety, ranging from the assassination of Mexico's leading presidential candidate to concern the Whitewater affair may damage the Clinton Administration, to a drop in European markets.
The Dow fell 48.37 points, to 3,821.09.  [ Page D1. ]  The killing of the Mexican candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, jolted investors around the world.  [ D5. ]


Philip Morris Accuses ABC of Libel
To fight the perception that cigarette manufacturers add nicotine to cigarettes to keep smokers addicted, the Philip Morris Companies sued the ABC television network yesterday, contending that several ABC News programs libeled the company by making false and reckless statements about how Philip Morris makes cigarettes.
The lawsuit, filed in a Virginia circuit court in Richmond, contends that Philip Morris suffered "massive harm" as a result of statements made on ABC's television magazine program "Day One" and on other ABC News programs that cigarette companies laced cigarettes with extra nicotine.
Philip Morris contended that the reports had produced a frenzied response in which the public and elected officials came to believe that tobacco companies manipulate the nicotine content to maintain sales.


EXPLOSION IN EDISON: The Search; Fears Turn To Caution, Then Hope At the Sites
All day long, the ominous question lingered -- had the debris and devastation from a natural gas fireball entombed scores of residents of the Durham Woods apartment complex?
In late morning, while firefighters were still spraying the debris so specially trained search dogs could begin sniffing the ruins for human remains, Mayor George Spadoro said that officials had heard from occupants of only 24 of the 128 destroyed apartments.
The Mayor said that only by a miracle could everyone have escaped the flames.


Measure on Flag-Burning Is Approved by Assembly
Four years after the fury over flag-burning seemed to fade from public consciousness, the State Assembly today gave final approval to a resolution urging Congress to propose a constitutional amendment that would prohibit the "wanton destruction" of the American flag.
The timing of today's nearly five-hour debate had less to do with any particular instance of desecration than with a recent change in the Assembly's leadership.


Unknown Factor in Gotham
New York finally joins the crowd on the road to the Kentucky Derby tomorrow when Aqueduct stages the $250,000 Gotham Stakes.
The early favorite at 3-1 is Popol's Gold, who won the Nashua Stakes by a nose in a snowstorm last fall at Aqueduct, but the interloper is the big horse from California named Irgun.
Irgun has raced only twice, but is already regarded as a wild-card candidate on the West Coast.
Unraced at the age of 2, he made a rousing debut in February when he shot home four lengths in front of the field in a six-and-a-half furlong sprint.
In his next start, he led all the way except at the end, when he was passed by half a length by Strodes Creek, the big horse in the barn of Charlie Whittingham.


Israelis to Accept Armed Foreign Force in Hebron
In a major concession during talks with the P.L.O., Israel on Thursday agreed in principle to allow the deployment of a lightly armed force of international observers in the tense city of Hebron, Palestinian and Western officials said.
Before Israeli and Palestinian negotiators ended a 14-hour session of negotiations today, they also agreed in principle on joint Israeli-Palestinian patrols in the West Bank town, where a Jewish settler massacred at least 29 Muslims in a mosque four weeks ago.


NASA's Big Plans and Smaller Purse Don't Add Up, Budget Agency Says
The space agency's efforts to reinvent itself and do more with less money are likely to fail, forcing it to make hard choices about canceling programs and reducing the scope of its mission, the Congressional Budget Office said today.
In a report issued by the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology, the budget office said the National Aeronautics and Space Administration would have to "narrow its objectives" in the face of continued budget cuts.


At the Bar; What do Arkansas lawyers say about the Rose firm? For starters, they're glad it isn't them.
Driving home to Minneapolis from Florida the other day, Louise Larson took a detour to inspect the Rose Law Firm, alma mater of Hillary Rodham Clinton and an unhappy epicenter of the Whitewater affair.
Arriving at the firm's red brick offices, Mrs.
Larson, an older woman who wore her white hair in a tight bun resembling a Q-Tip, walked up to the front door and handed her Instamatic to a newspaper photographer stalking Rose lawyers.
Just then a member of the firm poked his head out of a window above.
"What are we now, a tourist attraction?" he said. "We're turning into Graceland!"


No Headline
"Verbal violence and ideological violence of the kind that has been written and spoken since January are the antecedents of physical violence. That's exactly what we saw with the death of Colosio." OCTAVIO PAZ, Mexican poet.  [ A1:3. ]


THE WHITEWATER INQUIRY: Washington Talk; Great Lengths to Delay a Senate Vote, With Charity for None
In "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington," Jimmy Stewart reached for the most inspiring thoughts in American history when he filibustered against corruption by reading from the Declaration of Independence: "Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness -- That to secure these Rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just Powers from the Consent of the Governed. . . ."
In the real Senate early today, Republicans trying to delay an education bill were not so picky.
Apparently desperate for material, they made the clerk read from President Clinton's budget message: "The fiscal year 1995 budget, which I transmit to you with this message, builds on the strong foundation of deficit reduction, economic growth and jobs. . . ."


Norman's 63 Ties Course Record in the Players
When he is at his best, Greg Norman doesn't merely dominate a golf course.
He consumes it, swallows it whole, like some great predatory beast.
Today in the first round of the Players Championship, Norman was at his best, and the result was an almost effortless 63 to tie the course record and take a two-stroke lead over four other players.
This was the sort of lusty performance with which Norman has built his reputation, a swaggering sweep across the TPC Sawgrass Stadium Course during which every facet of his game was under control.
He drove the ball almost perfectly, hitting all but one fairway.
He missed only one green.
He needed only 27 putts.
During one stretch, he birdied seven of eight holes en route to the nine-under-par total that matches Fred Couples record 63 set in the third round of the 1992 tournament.


Oshawa Group Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 22


A Murder in Tijuana
The pistol shots fired Wednesday in a Tijuana slum ended two political lives and, perhaps, one political era.
Luis Donaldo Colosio, the presidential candidate of the Partido Revolucionario Institucional, or PRI, died a literal death.
Manuel Camacho Solis, the popular former Mayor of Mexico City, suffered an equally unexpected but merely political demise.
And the shooting may well mark the close of Mexico's epoch of modernization.
Had Mr.
Colosio been crushed by a streetcar or felled by a heart attack, Mr.
Camacho would have been the favorite to take his place.
As the Government's peace envoy to the rebels in Chiapas, he has won wide acclaim by giving voice to the rebels' complaints.
Two weeks ago, opinion polls showed that if he bolted the PRI and ran for president as an independent, Mr.
Camacho would be more popular than any declared contender.


Morris Nielson, Company Chairman, 89
Morris Nielson, the former president and chairman of the Babcock &amp; Wilcox Company, died on Monday at his home in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 89.
The cause was complications from heart disease said Everett F. Horgan, a friend.


Tyson Flunks Exam
MIKE TYSON has failed his high school equivalency exam at the Indiana Youth Center, where he is serving six years for rape.
Tyson, the former heavyweight champion, could have had three months taken off his sentence if he had passed, making him eligible for parole in February. (AP)


Schneider Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 19


Robert L. Biblo, 61; Executive Headed Group Health Plans
Robert L. Biblo, who headed two of the nation's largest group health plans, died yesterday at the home of his son, Lee, in Pepper Pike, Ohio.
He was 61.
The cause was non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, said his wife, Joan Biblo, of Overland Park, Kan.


Unrepresentative Mind
To the Editor:
Rabbi Shlomo Sternberg (letter, March 9) turns my March 2 Op-Ed views on their head, charging me with "a calculus of balancing atrocities" between Arabs and Jews.
It was precisely this practice that I wrote to argue against, as denigrating to the value of individual human life.


CHRONICLE
Fund-raising makes for strange bedfellows.
ISMAIL MERCHANT and MARTIN SCORSESE will host a traditional Indian dinner at Saks Fifth Avenue on Monday night to help promote Chopard Casmir, a new perfume.
In exchange, the maker, Parfums Chopard, will make donations to the Merchant &amp; Ivory Foundation, a nonprofit center that supports independent film making, in Claverack, N.Y., and to the Film Foundation, founded by Mr.
Scorsese and seven other directors to assist in film preservation.


German Synagogue Firebomb
A synagogue in the northern German city of Lubeck where Passover services were to be celebrated this weekend for the first time since 1938 was damaged by a firebomb on Thursday night.
The police said today that they suspected right-wing radicals, but that they had no suspects.
Seven people living in the four-story brick building escaped without injury.
The attackcaused widespread outrage.


National Arts Standard Sets Unrealistic Goals
To the Editor:
Re "U.S. Sets Voluntary Standard in Teaching the Arts" (news article, March 14): While those of us who care about arts education applaud a program of voluntary national standards, it is clear from your article that arts education is still a misunderstood concept.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4 LONG GOODBYE ENDS IN SOMALIA
The final 1,100 marines departed from Mogadishu, bringing the American expedition in Somalia to a close after 15 months.
With them went the contradictions of Operation Restore Hope, which for a time had lived up to its name in the anarchic, famine-stricken country.  1


Nissan Plans 80% Increase In Buying American Parts
Executives of the Nissan Motor Company said today that the company planned an 80 percent increase in its purchases of American-made automobile parts to $4.3 billion over the next five years.
Nissan is thus the first Japanese auto maker to announce goals for the purchases of American components to appease the United States.


Yields Jump; Long Bond Up to 7.01%
Investor concern that the economy is continuing to grow at a fast pace caused interest rates to surge yesterday, pushing the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond over 7 percent for the first time in 10 months.
The increased cost of borrowing is likely to be felt by consumers with credit cards and by those shopping for home mortgage loans, along with corporations venturing into the debt market to borrow cash.


Cut Down in Its Prime, a Tree Returns to Its Roots
In a city where humans are sometimes treated like animals and dogs have achieved the status of minor deities, New York officials held an elaborate state funeral yesterday for a tree.
There were dignitaries in trench coats and foresters in black armbands; printed programs; a quavering rendition of "Amazing Grace"; a freshly chiseled headstone; a eulogy, and the obligatory "Taps."


Strip Clubs Putting On a Suit and Tie
Inside a gleaming downtown restaurant, a sales executive in a power tie and Italian loafers dined on pasta salad and iced tea, a cellular phone resting on the table, as he luxuriated in the gentrified ambiance of one of the dozens of "gentlemen's clubs" thriving around the country: the regal decor, the dignified clientele, the bartenders wearing black ties and, of course, the women wearing almost nothing.
"This is a classy place," the 30-year-old sales executive, Dean B. Hale, said later, as he waited for a valet to fetch his car outside the Diamond Cabaret.
He had spent an hour or so on a Friday afternoon with business associates watching topless women and, he said, hashing out the details of "a high-dollar transaction," a business deal that must have taken a pause as women in slinky dresses snuggled on the laps of the men and blew in their ears.


Zoeller Licks His Lips And Zips Into Lead
After a slow-moving storm crept across the state, dumping rain on the already sodden Stadium Course at the TPC at Sawgrass and delaying play for nearly three hours, one of golf's fastest players nonchalantly whistled his way into the lead of the $2.5 million Players Championship.
Fuzzy Zoeller, 42, who has been playing like the Fuzzy of old rather than old Fuzzy, followed his opening round of 66 with a 67 today.
With half the field stranded on the course by darkness, Zoeller's total of 11-under-par 133 is four strokes better than the scores of Hale Irwin and Gary Hallberg.
Greg Norman, the first-round leader, was still on the course at 11 under with eight holes to play.
He will complete his second round Saturday morning.
Third-round play will begin immediately after that.


Werner Enterprises Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Labor Dept. Agency Proposes Ban On All Smoking in the Workplace
With a bill to ban smoking in virtually all buildings in the country except private homes stalled in Congress, the Labor Department seems prepared to do by regulation what the Congress has not done by law.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration has proposed a rule to ban smoking in the workplace, Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich announced today.
Of the more than 70 million Americans who work indoors, OSHA estimates that 21 million are exposed to poor indoor air and that millions of others are exposed to secondhand smoke.
Trying to Prevent Deaths
"OSHA has taken this action to prevent thousands of heart disease deaths, hundreds of lung cancer deaths, and the respiratory diseases and other ailments linked to these hazards," Mr.
Reich said.


New Hampshire Advances, Along With Wisconsin
New Hampshire and Wisconsin were the victors tonight at the East Regional of the National Collegiate Athletic Association hockey tournament.
The Wildcats of Hockey East shut out Rensselaer, 2-0, and the Badgers defeated Western Michigan, 6-3.
The results set up the quarterfinal pairings here on Saturday for Boston University and Harvard, both of whom had byes tonight.
The Terriers, ranked No. 1 in the nation, will take on the Badgers of the Western Association, and the Crimson will play New Hampshire.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
United Airlines and its unions signed the final agreement on a proposal to create the nation's largest employee-owned company, ending seven years of negotiations and setting the stage for a vote by shareholders to approve the $5 billion deal.  [ Page 1. ]


Review/Dance; Boston's Turn at a Kennedy Premiere
The Boston Ballet's current engagement at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts is not your usual visit by a major regional company.
The season is part of the Kennedy Center Ballet Commissioning Program, which initiates and supports premieres by leading choreographers.
Intended to match six American choreographers with as many ballet troupes, the project started in 1991 with an instant hit, Paul Taylor's "Company B" for the Houston Ballet.


Hill and Robinson Set For Game Within Game
There is an aura that surrounds Grant Hill, Duke's all-America senior forward, and Glenn (Big Dog) Robinson, Purdue's sensational junior forward.
Both are exceptional basketball players, arguably among the top two or three in the nation.
They can dominate a game.
And both are 6-foot-8-inch forwards with the versatility to play on the wing or in the post and create excitement whenever they touch the ball.


Last of the U.S. Troops Leave Somalia; What Began as a Mission of Mercy Closes With Little Ceremony
There was no official flag-lowering today, just a brief handshake between an American Marine officer and an Egyptian captain at the airport.
Then, shortly before noon, after a dozen Marine helicopters lifted off in a blizzard of sand, the remaining amphibious vehicles were driven single file into the ocean to waiting ships, and the American expedition in Somalia came to a close.
With the 1,100 marines went the frustrations and contradictions of a mission that the Government called Operation Restore Hope, which for a time lived up to its name.
When the first American troops waded ashore into the glare of television lights 15 months ago, they carried with them the hopes of a world appalled by anarchy and famine.
Initially they succeeded in restoring order and helping to end the widespread starvation brought on by civil war.
On that first day, Dec. 9, 1992, troops were greeted by cheering Somali crowds.
Scavenging What Remains
Today there were none.
Instead, there was scavenging and even looting at the American camps even as troops were packing.
Men, women and children sifted through mounds of garbage and searched empty huts, carrying away brooms, mattresses, prepackaged military meals.


White House Curbs Access To Security Council's Data
The Clinton Administration today extended to National Security Council documents the same broad protection from public scrutiny that is reserved for White House papers.
The action means that, effective immediately, the security council's records will no longer be subject to the Freedom of Information Act.
It also allows the council to share with the White House the right to decide without court oversight which records it will preserve for the National Archives.


To Get Legal Advice Without Overpaying, Handle Some of the Tasks Yourself
Whether you are buying a house, ending a marriage or drafting an estate plan, a lawyer's advice can be costly.
To keep a lid on legal fees, consider establishing a relationship with a general practitioner long before you need help, said Ralph Warner, a lawyer in Berkeley, Calif., and president of Nolo Press, a consumer information publisher.


Investigator Says She Taped Disputed Talk About S.&amp; L.
Representative Jim Leach says L. Jean Lewis taped the conversation.
Ms.
Lewis is the Federal investigator who maintains that a Government banking official from Washington visited her last month in Kansas City and tried unsuccessfully to persuade her to say that Bill and Hillary Clinton had gained no financial benefit from a failed Arkansas savings and loan.


Fruits and Vegetables to Flip For


Q. &amp; A.
I.R.A.
Contribution  Q. I want to make a contribution to my individual retirement account but do not have $2,000 right now.
Can I file my return, claim the deduction and contribute the $2,000 to an I.R.A. with my tax refund?
EVELYN MILLER, Manhattan  A. Unless you have already filed your return, you probably won't get a refund in time to make this work.


Graf Begs Out of Tourney
The top-ranked STEFFI GRAF, who has yet to lose a match this year, pulled out of next week's Family Circle Magazine Cup, the first big clay-court event on the women's tour.
Graf said yesterday that she sprained her left knee while preparing for the tournament, played in Hilton Head, S.C.


Triangle Shirtwaist Fire Victims Are Remembered


Proposal Links Fingerprint Plan and Albany's Medicaid Help
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the majority leader of the State Senate yesterday proposed breaking a long deadlock over a plan to have the state take over New York City's Medicaid costs by linking it with a plan to fingerprint welfare recipients.
Under the compromise, the Senate would approve the Medicaid takeover, which has been stymied for years by the Republican majority, while the Assembly would approve the fingerprinting measure, which is unpopular with the Assembly's majority Democrats.


Sports of The Times; Wanted: Celebrity To Coach
NOT only will Magic Johnson coach, but I would also like to take this opportunity to predict that Michael Jordan will, too.
And I do not mean from within the boxed lines wide of third base at Comiskey Park.
Long after he is finished this baseball fling, shot a few thousand mediocre rounds of golf and flirted with the idea of competing in the decathlon at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics, Jordan will need something rooted in reality to satiate his hunger for beating opponents' brains in.
Someone in the Chicago Bulls' front office will say, "Why not give coaching a shot. . . .?"


Bridge
Some of the most brilliant defensive plays in the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship in Cincinnati last week were provided by Sidney Lazard of New Orleans.
On the diagramed deal from the final he held the West cards against six diamonds.
North's Blackwood bid was slightly venturesome, since he could have landed in a slam missing two top club tricks, but even so, there might be an escape route if those tricks were not cashed.


COMPANY BRIEFS
JOHN H. HARLAND CO., Atlanta, a provider of products and services to the financial services industry, agreed to purchase the assets of Formation Technologies Inc., Denver, a financial services software concern, for an undisclosed amount of cash.
METROPOLITAN FINANCIAL CORP., Minneapolis, has completed the purchase of Rocky Mountain Financial Corp., Cheyenne, Wyo., for $64.2 million in cash.


Police Union Weapon Backfires


Lopez Puts on Mr. Basketball Show
The players from Martin Luther King High School said all week they wanted nationally ranked Rice and Felipe Lopez.
The Knights got all they asked for, and more, tonight.
Lopez, the national schoolboy player of the year, scored 30 points, on an assortment of dazzling moves and high-flying dunks as the Raiders, ranked fourth in the nation, toyed with the Public Schools Athletic League Division A champions in an 88-55 drubbing in the New York State Federation semifinals.


Knicks Win 12th Straight by Unanimous Decision
The Knicks' winning streak survived, but not without a fight.
Ignited by a fourth-quarter tussle between Greg Anthony and Haywoode Workman that resulted in ejections for both players, the Indiana Pacers mounted a furious rally, erasing a 15-point deficit in the final seven and a half minutes.
But thanks to a key basket by Derek Harper, two pressure free throws by Anthony Mason and several key defensive stands, New York hung on for its 12th consecutive victory, 85-82, tonight at Market Square Arena.


Synergistics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Grumman Takes No Stance on Bid by Northrop
The Grumman Corporation officially responded today to a $2.04 billion takeover bid by the Northrop Corporation, saying in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it "takes no position at this time" regarding Northrop's unfriendly offer.
Under the S.E.C.'s rules, Grumman's board had to respond to Northrop's offer of $60 a share by today.
Northrop, based in Los Angeles, began the hostile takeover bid this month, after Grumman, based in Bethpage, L.I., agreed to merge with the Martin Marietta Corporation for $55 a share.


A Clue Among Steel Shreds Eludes Searchers in Edison
Somewhere in a haystack of steel splinters -- all that remains of an 80-foot-long section of natural gas pipeline that blew up on Thursday in Edison, N.J. -- there is one that might explain it all, investigators say.
But they didn't find it yesterday.
"It is not going to be an easy thing to investigate," said John Lauber, one of five members of a National Transportation Safety Board team investigating the blast and fire that leveled eight apartment buildings.
"We have no idea how long it will take. Thus far, we haven't seen the golden nugget."


Election Aide May Succeed Slain Mexican
With their long-ruling party still anguishing over the murder of its presidential candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, Government officials said today that the American-trained economist who ran Mr.
Colosio's campaign had emerged as the favorite to succeed him.
The selection of the campaign manager, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, 42, would send a clear signal of continuity with the policies of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.


Merchants Cling to Their Dying Mall
The Hi Ho Center in downtown Bridgeport is a mall on its deathbed.
Most of the 70 stores closed years ago, and the power company plans to shut off the electricity on April 4 to allow for the mall's conversion to a downtown community college.


Japan Says Coke Owes More Taxes
Japanese tax authorities today accused the Coca-Cola Company of under-reporting its income in Japan and they demanded payment of more than $140 million in back taxes, interest and penalties.
Coca-Cola's Japanese subsidiary immediately said it would appeal.
"We pay our taxes in full," said Robert Harland, a spokesman.


Parading With Friends
To the Editor:
I disagree with "Parading the Wrong Message" (editorial, March 15), on the St.
Patrick's Day parade.
Freedom of association has no meaning if one cannot choose those one marches with.
Homosexual groups have picked on the Archdiocese of New York and John Cardinal O'Connor as an enemy of convenience.
Is there any evidence that the church is any more homophobic than any other religious group in New York?


New York Officer Indicted for Assault
A New York City police officer was indicted yesterday for assaulting and sexually abusing two women on separate occasions while he was off duty, a spokeswoman for the Brooklyn District Attorney's office said.
The officer, Ronald Murgo, 26 years old, was indicted on charges of first-degree sexual abuse and first- and second-degree assault, said the spokeswoman, Cathy Healy.


Exercise and Restraint In the Diet Still Work
To the Editor:
In "Before You Take the Vegetarian Vow" (letter, March 5), Sally W. Fallon and Mary G. Enig make a valid point: to consider vegetarianism a nutritional panacea for humans is a shaky interpretation of even shakier data.
However, support for their view does not come by observing longevity in meat- and fat-eating people from the Caucasus in Russia or the short life spans of vegetarians in southern India or the incidence of tooth decay and bone deformities in other racially distinct societies.


East Side School Board Dismisses Superintendent
William Ubinas, the outspoken superintendent of Community School Board One on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, was ousted early Thursday morning after a stormy five-hour school board meeting.
The board voted 5 to 4 not to extend his $107,000-a-year contract, with the majority saying that he had failed to improve academic performance, properly supervise principals and stem the flight of students to schools outside the district.


Bophuthatswana Created Nonracial State
To the Editor:
As two of the few Americans who have lived in Bophuthatswana, we find your characterization of the country in "A Homeland's Agony" (front page, March 13) as a "bastion of apartheid" and "apartheid homeland" as a gross distortion of reality.


William B. Gray, 52, Former U.S. Attorney
William B. Gray, a former United States Attorney in Vermont who had been an assistant United States Attorney in Manhattan, died on Tuesday at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
Mr.
Gray, who lived in Jericho, Vt., was 52.
The cause was complications from leukemia, said his wife, Sarah.


Classical Music in Review
Joyce Lindorff  Harpsichordist Weill Recital Hall


Shoney's Inc. reports earnings for 16wks to Feb 20


House of Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Tribal Bill Would Foster Injustice on Washington Reservation
To the Editor:
The Senate has passed a tribal self-governance bill that will allow violation of the Declaration of Independence, the Ordinance of 1787, the due process clause of the Constitution and the Laws of the State of Washington.


New Police for Hebron
Israeli officials said today that armed Palestinian police officers could begin patrols within as few as 10 days in the tinderbox West Bank town of Hebron.
In addition, the officials said it was likely that they and the P.L.O. would be able on Tuesday to resume their suspended negotiations on how to bring about the first stage of Palestinian self-rule and a companion Israeli withdrawal, starting in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.


Angels Spurn Young, Leaving Mets Vexed
To the Mets' surprise and disappointment, the California Angels backed out of the potential Anthony Young for J. T. Snow trade this morning, leaving New York with a hole at first base 10 days before the season opens.
The Mets had been eager to acquire Snow, whom they expected to provide excellent fielding at first and another powerful bat in the lineup, and as of Thursday night, it appeared that the deal would go through.
But California General Manager Bill Bavasi backed off after a conference call with other members of his organization this morning.


On-Line Romance; Office Workers Feel Cupid's Byte
Burke Stinson and Nancy J. Smith, husband-and-wife executives at A.T.&amp; T. in New Jersey, conducted a prolonged courtship through interoffice E-mail before their wedding last year, sending sometimes two or three notes and love letters a day in an outpouring that eventually totaled more than 400 pages of confessional, epistolary romance.
"It's such a thrill to bare one's soul right on the screen, see it, save it, re-reread it, then swallow hard and push the send button," Ms.
Smith said.
"A wonderful combination of old-fashioned courting and at the same time, up-to-the-minute technology."


A Seesaw for Mexican Market
Struggling to recover investor confidence and shake off signs of instability caused by the assassination of a presidential candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta, the Mexican stock exchange reopened today, plunging more than 100 points in early trading before recovering somewhat and closing the hectic day down 22.8 points, or 0.9 percent.
The peso weakened substantially against the dollar, bumping the ceiling imposed by the Bank of Mexico, while Mexican stocks in New York recovered slightly from yesterday's losses.


Parcells Signs DeOssie
The free agent linebacker STEVE DeOSSIE has signed with the New England Patriots, reuniting another former Giants player with Coach BILL PARCELLS.
DeOssie is the third unrestricted free agent to sign with the Patriots this year, joining his former Giants teammates BOB KRATCH and MYRON GUYTON. (AP)


5 Nassau Inmates Charged With Assault on Colin Ferguson
Five inmates at the Nassau County Jail were charged with second-degree assault today in the jailhouse beating of Colin Ferguson, who is accused of killing six and wounding 19 when he fired on Long Island Rail Road passengers in December.
The inmates' arraignment came as lawyers for Mr.
Ferguson continued to press for a wider investigation of the attack, which they say was racially motivated and carried out with the knowledge of some jail officials and guards.
Jail officials maintain that collusion by anyone on the staff is highly unlikely, but the Nassau County District Attorney's office says its inquiry remains open.


Chemical Bank to Cut 650 Jobs and 50 Offices
Chemical Bank is planning to close 50 of its 330 branches in the New York metropolitan area and eliminate 650 jobs in a move to cut costs.
In addition, Chemical said yesterday that it was doubling the minimum bank balance required for free checking accounts to $6,000 and sharply increasing the fees for customers who maintain smaller balances.


Accused Killer Said to Profess Pacifism and Links With Unidentified Groups
The man accused of killing the heir apparent to the Mexican presidency said he had planned for years to shoot a political figure to publicize his pacifist views and draw attention to certain unidentified groups, a lawyer who attended his interrogation said today.
The confessed gunman, Mario Aburto Martinez, refused to characterize the groups or to say whether he was working with anyone when he assassinated Luis Donaldo Colosio at a campaign rally on Wednesday, said the lawyer, Jose Luis Perez Canchola.
"His clear intention was to hurt the candidate in order to get media attention and express his pacifist ideas and to share some information about armed groups that work in several states around the country," Mr.
Perez said, summarizing Mr.
Aburto's statements under interrogation on the night of the killing.
"It's a contradiction, but that's what he said."


CHRONICLE
ELEANOR LAMBERT, the doyenne of fashion publicity, yesterday announced the 1994 Best-Dressed Women's list, which she has published since 1940.
"It's the dawn of the next era of elegance," said Miss Lambert, noting that this year's list has more young women than in previous years.
The 12 honorees include Sharon Stone, the actress; Viscountess Linley, the daughter-in-law of Princess Margaret; Harumi Klossowski de Rola, an actress and daughter of the painter Balthus Klossowski; Carolina Herrera, a daughter of the fashion designer of the same name; Veronica Hearst, the wife of Randolph A. Hearst, the chairman of the Hearst Corporation; Lily Safra, the wife of the banker Edmond Safra, and Joan Rivers, the comedian.
DAN SHAW


2 Teen-Agers Plead Guilty on Swastikas
Two teen-agers have pleaded guilty to painting swastikas on a high school track in Commack the night before before graduation in June.
Judge Arthur G. Pitts of Suffolk County Court set May 24 for sentencing.
An agreement between the judge and the defendants' lawyers treats them as youthful offenders, and they would serve 60 days in the county jail, perform four months of community service and remain on probation for five years.


Three New Offerings With Varied Aims
New funds keep popping up to satisfy investors' huge appetite for emerging markets.
From T. Rowe Price comes the Latin America Fund, which invests in small- and large-capitalization stocks primarily in Mexico, Brazil, Chile and Argentina.
The fund aims to benefit from privatization, political reform and debt restructuring in Latin America.
But it carries many risks; investors should plan to hold their shares for a long time and prepare for a bumpy ride.
The Nicholas Equity-Income Fund, the most conservative of the Nicholas offerings, invests in high-dividend-paying stocks -- both large and small -- plus bonds and cash.
Bonds will probably account for 20 to 25 percent of its portfolio.
The fund aims to yield more than the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index, now about 2.8 percent.
Because of the yield, the fund should perform better in falling markets than all-equity funds.
Its secondary aim is moderate long-term growth.


Review/Film Festival; A Boy and His Dad (With Bergman in the Background)
"My Great Big Daddy" is a small, sweet coming-of-age story heavily influenced by Ingmar Bergman in its lyrical view of the Swedish countryside and its sense of the harsh inner lives of children.
Oswald (Nick Borjlind) is an 11-year-old who looks like a somber version of Macaulay Culkin.
In 1959, he and his parents spend the summer with relatives in the country.
His father, Tjaffo (Rolf Lassgard), is tall and heavyset but his greatness is all in Oswald's mind.
Tjaffo is a hapless drinker and womanizer, the kind who glides through life on charm.
Among his most endearing actions, he organizes a local church choir and teaches them Argentine hymns.
Oswald's mother (Ann Petren) is patient, understanding and totally without illusions about her husband.
The most intriguing aspect of the film is Oswald's understandable hero worship of his father, an identification so thorough that the boy sometimes treats his mother with cruel neglect.


No Headline
"I don't want to go back. I just want to get my stuff out of the house and move somewhere else. They said the pipeline had a hole in it. But even if they fix that, it could have another hole." -- PARIS VARNER, an 8-year-old survivor of the explosion.  [ 24:2. ]


French Students Protest Wage Plan


Review/Film Festival; Sex, Tornado Watching And Other Hazards of Life
A woman who walks into a tornado, a murderer who explains himself, and the nerdiest stepfather in the suburbs are the heroes of the three films joined under the rubric "Tall Tales." The works have nothing much in common beyond black-and-white photography, a length more suited to sitcoms than arty films like these (a half-hour, give or take five minutes) and a slightly macabre view of human relationships.
In quality, their dissimilarities are even more glaring.
The best is "The Coriolis Effect," a fresh, self-assured film about sexual jealousy, dangerous living and the afterlife, with a nod to "The Wizard of Oz." The tale begins with the sounds of a jazzy saxophone and of a couple making love, as it happens on their kitchen table.
In the midst of this, with a tornado heading their way, Suzy (Corinne Bohrer) tells her boyfriend, Ray (Dana Ashbrook, from "Twin Peaks"), that she has slept with his best friend, Stanley (James Wilder).


Corrections
An article yesterday about the investigation into the explosion of a natural gas pipeline in Edison, N.J., described the National Transportation Safety Board incorrectly.
It is an independent Federal agency, not part of the Transportation Department.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on March 19, about the compensation paid last year to Charles S. Sanford Jr., the chairman of the Bankers Trust New York Corporation, omitted the value of stock options granted to John S. Reed, the chairman of Citicorp, and thus gave an incorrect comparison of the two executives' compensation.
Using a standard formula that values stock options at one-third of the price at which stock can be bought when the options are exercised, Mr.
Reed received $11.9 million in total compensation last year, not $6.2 million, so that his pay exceeded Mr.
Sanford's compensation of $10 million.


UNIONS EDGE CLOSER TO GAINING CONTROL OF UNITED AIRLINES
A prolonged effort by union leaders at United Airlines to gain control of the airline cleared all but the last hurdle yesterday, setting the stage for a shareholder vote this summer on the $5 billion proposal, which would create the nation's largest employee-owned company.
Despite the prosaic nature of yesterday's news -- the company and the machinists' and pilots' unions signed the final paperwork -- the agreement is significant because it resolved a laundry list of sticking points that had emerged in recent weeks and appeared to seriously threaten the deal.


New York City Is Blamed For Toxics Report Delay
Saying New York City officials had failed to reveal the discovery of toxic waste at the site of the proposed Brooklyn Navy Yard incinerator for nearly six years, the state Department of Environmental Conservation yesterday ordered the city to conduct a complete investigation of the site.
Langdon Marsh, the acting commissioner of the D.E.C., said the city had only last week turned over the results of a 1988 study that found PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl) and petroleum compound contamination in the soil where the $450 million incinerator is supposed to be constructed.
Mr.
March said consent orders requiring the city to evaluate the contamination and begin the cleanup had already been sent to city officials.


Twin Towers Move to Garden State
Rebecca Lobo is a 6-foot-4-inch junior center, an all-American on the basketball court and in the classroom.
Kara Wolters is a 6-7 freshman who normally plays when Lobo gets a rest.
But when things get tough for the Connecticut women, Coach Geno Auriemma sometimes goes to the Twin Towers -- Lobo and Wolters playing the low post together.
Collapse the defense and you risk being 3-pointed to death.
Play one-on-one and you risk giving up easy baskets because of their quickness on turnarounds or spin moves.


Stocks Fall Sharply as Rates Jump
Long-term interest rates shot above 7 percent yesterday, while a sharp selloff in the stock market capped an eight-week decline that has wiped out most of the strong gains made earlier this year.
The Dow Jones industrial average, after falling 46.36 points yesterday, posted its steepest weekly drop since November 1991.
And the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond jumped to its highest level in 10 months.


Age 70 1/2: Decision Time On I.R.A. Withdrawals
MORE than a million Americans reached age 70 1/2 last year, and those with retirement plans must begin withdrawals by April 1 to avoid a hefty penalty.
People in this group who are still working, at least part time, or have investment income may want to take as little money as possible to extend the tax-deferred compounding of their accounts.
They can structure withdrawals favorably by taking advantage of some little-known rules of the Internal Revenue Service.


Building Bridges for Learning


Empty! UConn Shoots Blanks in Overtime and Goes Home
Connecticut's hope of reaching the Final Four came to a sudden, boisterous and bitter end tonight when the Huskies lost a 10-point second-half lead, Donyell Marshall missed two foul shots with 3.4 seconds left in regulation and the Florida Gators took firm control of an emotional 69-60 overtime victory.
Florida, in the first regional championship game appearance in its history, will meet ninth-seeded Boston College, which outlasted Indiana, 77-68.
The Gators, 28-7, prevented Connecticut from reaching the final eight for a second time in five years by holding the Huskies to 3 points in the final 7 minutes 36 seconds of the second half and overtime.


Jerusalem Journal; Passover Being Haunted By Shadow of Hebron
For a measure of how Israelis and Palestinians are getting along, the A. A. Glass garage is a useful barometer.
A.
A.
Glass, in a Jerusalem industrial zone, installs protective windshields and windows in cars.
When its business is good, you know it is time to take cover.


Review/Pop; A Time Trip to the 70's in All Their Musical Glory
Disco is back; was it really as bad as it seemed the first time around?
The music's fans put on their platform shoes and bell-bottoms and filled the Paramount on Thursday night for the WPLJ Disco Dance Party, their anticipation honed by the radio station's all-disco weekend shows.
In the last few years, the time lag of nostalgia has caught up with the 1970's, and what seemed a decade ago to be the most embarrassing pop era has been embraced anew, with and without campy irony.
At the time, disco's worship of artifice, its unsubtle beat and its superficial lyrics earned the scorn of many rock fans.
Yet disco's uncomplicated, pre-AIDS hedonism now strikes some listeners as an Edenic state, before the advent of even more mechanical dance music and even less convincing party anthems.
Disco wasn't entirely without variety; the beat carried touches of big bands, doo-wop vocal harmonies, gospel and torch singing.
But music so committed to the pop moment didn't have much shelf life.


Cambodian Government Holds a Crucial Base of the Khmer Rouge Rebels


Noonan, Leetch Keep Rangers Hot on Road
The Rangers' journey through Western Canada is turning into a tour of rejuvenation.
Slumping when they left home, they have yet to lose in three road games this week, taking tonight's fight-marred match over the Canucks by 5-2 in Pacific Coliseum.
Brian Noonan, one of four players to join the team in trades last Monday, scored twice for the Rangers, who have won two in succession and are undefeated in their last three.
Noonan now has three goals in three games.


Review/Film Festival; Even in a Bleak Life, Song Can Break Out
One of the work songs that the female stone crushers at a quarry in Tanzania chant while sitting in a circle and pounding rocks into fragments asks the question, "What kind of jungle is this?" It is a jungle that will eventually swallow everything into quietness, the song continues.
The jungle is "where the mother went, where the father went, where the children went."
Most of the women who work in the sun from dawn till dusk are self-employed single mothers who bring their children with them.
Many have fled the poverty and political turmoil of neighboring Mozambique.
They labor for a subsistence wage, pounding rocks into pieces that will be used to make concrete.
The work is dangerous.
One slip of the hammer could cause serious injury.


Parents Rally Behind Ousted School Superintendent


Saberhagen Shackles Yanks
The marquee matchup between Jimmy Key and Bret Saberhagen never materialized tonight because the pitcher whose future is secure with the Yankees did not equal the pitcher whose future with the Mets isn't so certain.
Ryan Thompson rapped a two-run triple off Key in the first inning and had a run-scoring single when the Mets scored twice more off the Yankee left-hander in the sixth on their way to a 7-3 victory at Fort Lauderdale Stadium.
Key allowed four hits and four earned runs in five innings and the Yankees lost their fifth straight game.


Clintons Release Tax Data Showing Land Deal Losses
Bowing to political pressure, Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton today released tax returns and other financial data that give the clearest picture to date of how the couple made and lost money early in Mr.
Clinton's political career.
The documents, which include tax returns from 1977 to 1979, show that the couple nearly quadrupled their annual income in those years, from $41,731 to $158,495.


INSIDE
Rates Hit a 10-Month High And Stocks Drop Sharply
Long-term interest rates jumped to their highest levels in 10 months while stock prices fell sharply, capping a decline that has wiped out nearly all of the stock market's gains so far this year.
Page 37.
India Bars Narrow Arms Pact
India told the United States it would not accept a halt to nuclear arms production if such a deal was limited to India and Pakistan.
Page 3.
Schools Lose Private Funds
A poor Bronx school district, a model for corporate involvement, lost private support after a court upheld the superintendent's removal.
Page 21.
UConn Out; B.C.
Moves On
Florida beat Connecticut and Boston College upset Indiana in the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament to advance to the East Regional final.
Page 29.


To Soothe the Nerves, Stock Index Options
PORTFOLIO dangers come easily to the mind of Michael Schwartz, a senior vice president at Oppenheimer &amp; Company.
What about the Persian Gulf war? he asks.
What about Wall Street's reaction to a Presidential election?
And what, he says, if "the Feds start talking about a tax on gaming -- and you own a lot of casino stocks?"
He might also have mentioned a Mexican politician's murder, Whitewater and the aging bull market.


President Inspects Crash Scene


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.  5-3 and 10 Rebounds  Frank Brickowski had 18 points and the 5-foot-3-inch Muggsy Bogues had 18 points and a career-high 10 rebounds, leading visiting Charlotte to a 106-92 victory over Detroit.
"The ball was bouncing in my direction tonight, so you just have to do what you have to do," said Bogues. (AP)


Beatrice Fulcher, 89, A Protestant Educator
Beatrice Card Fulcher, a retired educator with the Protestant Council of New York and the National Council of Churches, died last Sunday at Highland Farms, a retirement community near Black Mountain, N.C.
She was 89.
Mrs.
Fulcher, a native of Richmond, Me., was a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Boston University.
She started working as a high school Latin and English teacher in Massachusetts, and came to New York as an instructor at New York University.


ISRAEL-P.L.O. DEAL ON POLICE SPEEDED
Israel has agreed to let the Palestine Liberation Organization begin deploying a Palestian police force in the Gaza Strip and Jericho as early as next week, a senior Administration official said today.
The move was originally to take place only after Israel and the P.L.O. reached an agreement on putting self-rule into effect in those areas.


19 Blocks up Broadway: It Seems a World Away
SUSAN GOODMAN, a bold New York woman who once went off blithely to live and start a business in Milan, is apprehensive these days about moving 19 blocks up Broadway.
"I've been trying to figure it out," she said, sitting next to packed cartons and rolled-up rugs in the ninth-floor corner apartment overlooking Lincoln Center that she will be leaving at the end of the month.
"Why should moving less than a mile be so much more traumatic than going to another country?"


Reporter's Notebook; Collisions in Cyberspace on Data Encryption Plan
To paraphrase Oscar Wilde, the Clinton Administration threw a couple of its lions into a den of savage Daniels here this week.
As speaking assignments go, the officials from the White House and the National Security Agency might have preferred facing a Congressional Whitewater inquiry to explaining to some 500 people at the annual Computers, Freedom and Privacy Conference here why the Administration wants to make wiretapping access a standard part of all new telephones and personal computers.


Classical Music in Review
Festival of 20th-Century Music  Manhattan School of Music


Bosnian Serbs Demand Tolls From Sarajevo Aid Convoys
Bosnian Serb fighters interfered with two aid convoys trying to use one of the three newly opened access routes into Sarajevo today, violating a United Nations-brokered agreement allowing for limited freedom of movement into and out of the city, United Nations officials here said.
The Serbs demanded 30 percent of the cargo as a toll from convoys belonging to Catholic Relief Services and the French Boy Scouts on the Visoko-Sarajevo road, said a United Nations spokesman, Maj.
Simon MacDowall.


Super Food Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 12


Observer; Ashes In Phoenix
The Democrats may be brain-dead, but the Republicans are now entering the Robespierre phase of their conservative revolution, which means the end is near for them too.
After that we can all enjoy government by PAC (shorthand for political action committee), a system under which gangs of the well-to-do, both corporate and rich, pool money to buy Congressmen.


Modify Beckett? Enter, Outrage
Samuel Beckett's "Footfalls," a 20-minute monodrama that was originally staged in 1976, has become the center of a theatrical tempest.
Trustees of the playwright's estate were so enraged by Deborah Warner's revival here that they canceled the rights for a European tour.
English critics were diametrically opposed in their assessments, while audiences filled the Garrick Theater.
In an unusual venture, the play, starring Fiona Shaw, was performed twice every evening, with theatergoers paying $:4 (about $6) for unreserved seats.
The play closed over the weekend after its one-week run, but the controversy won't subside, with Beckett partisans demanding fidelity to his text and others insisting on greater theatrical license for directorial interpretation.
Clearly, the event will have repercussions on how Beckett's plays, and plays by other recently deceased authors, will be done or not done in the future.
Although there have been a number of conflicts over productions of Beckett, this is the first significant clash since the playwright's death in 1989.
Modernist Collaborators
The production of "Footfalls" was the latest in a series of collaborations between Ms.
Warner and Ms.
Shaw.
Having previously worked together on "Hedda Gabler" and "Electra," they brought their modernist sensibilities to bear on this pivotal experimental work.
Their own stature in the English theater almost guaranteed a successful run.


School Ouster Leads to Loss Of Donations
One of New York City's poorest school districts, which became a model for corporate involvement in schools, lost much of its private support after a court ruling yesterday upheld the local school board's removal of a reform-minded superintendent.
District 9, in west central Bronx, had received more than $2 million from I.B.M., in the largest corporate partnership in the school system, but the corporation said yesterday that it would be winding down its philanthropy there.
Another benefactor, the Charles Hayden Foundation, said yesterday that the superintendent's removal would have a chilling effect on private-sector donations.
The district has been racked by graft and its schools are among the city's worst.


Getty Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Somalia: An Accounting
Except for 50 marines left behind to guard diplomatic buildings, the last American troops left Somalia yesterday.
The humanitarian intervention that began in a burst of can-do confidence and prime-time publicity in the waning days of the Bush Administration ends far more quietly and with decidedly mixed results.
Ambiguous endings make politicians and military officers uncomfortable.
No one any longer wants to talk about Somalia as a prototype for post-cold-war military action.
Yet in a world full of potential Somalias there are valuable lessons to be learned from this sobering experience.


Classical Music in Review
Marina Shaguch Soprano  Alice Tully Hall


Speedy Muffler King reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Review/Television; Unlikely Allies in a Dangerous Place and Time
The Attica prison uprising took place in 1971.
In retaking the prison, state troopers and members of the National Guard killed 29 inmates and 10 guards who were being held hostage.
The explosive confrontation was dramatized in a 1980 television movie based on the book "A Time to Die," an eyewitness account by Tom Wicker, the former correspondent and columnist for The New York Times.
Tonight, HBO's new film "Against the Wall," directed by John Frankenheimer ("The Manchurian Candidate"), looks at the Attica story from a different, partly fictionalized perspective.
This version is told largely through Michael Smith (Kyle MacLachlan), a novice 22-year-old guard who has only just decided to go into what he calls the family business.
His father, Hal (Harry Dean Stanton), a retired guard, now owns a small bar in the working-class town of Attica in upstate New York.
His Uncle Ed (Tom Bower) still works inside the local "factory," as the prison is called.


Limit on Toxic Exports
A majority of Western industrialized nations agreed in Geneva to stop exporting hazardous wastes to developing lands, Eastern Europe and former Soviet republics.
But the United States dissented, and the bulk of such exports -- material destined for "recycling" -- would be exempt till 1998.
Article, page 3.


Religion Notes
Gaining Influence
The growing role of Hispanic Americans in Christianity in the United States -- especially in the Roman Catholic Church -- is detailed in the 1994 edition of the "Yearbook of American and Canadian Churches." "We are more typical as United States Catholics than are the Irish Americans," Anthony M. Stevens-Arroyo writes in the yearbook, which was published this week by Abingdon Press.


If Questions Were Home Runs . . .
The meeting that was supposed to produce answers about the players still hoping to make the Yankees was not conclusive.
At least publicly.
Whatever George Steinbrenner and his army of stone-faced officials decided during a two-hour meeting today, if anything, remained behind the glass doors of a dining room at Fort Lauderdale Stadium.
In case there was doubt about its secret nature, a sign on the door read, "Closed."


Western Lands, Except U.S., Ban Export of Hazardous Waste
With the United States dissenting, most Western industrialized countries agreed today to ban the export of poisonous or hazardous industrial wastes and residues to the developing world, the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
The action was a significant tightening of the existing international rules governing waste disposal, but experts said that it remained unclear whether governments will be able to enforce them effectively.


Old Ranger, Talismans, And a Venerable Quest
Neil Smith and Clint Smith are not really related, although both have hockey bloodlines that are Ranger blue.
Neil Smith, 40 years old, is the president and general manager of the team that oddsmakers in Las Vegas, Nev., rate as the favorite to win the Stanley Cup for the first time since 1940.


Passions Ignited, French March for Wages Again
Carrying banners and singing protest songs, tens of thousands of students marched through the streets of Paris and other French cities today as part of their growing campaign against a Government decree lowering the minimum wage that can be paid to young people.
Most of the 30,000 demonstrators in Paris were peaceful, with student leaders maintaining order.
But some 300 youths began breaking shop windows and throwing stones at the riot police who answered with tear gas and baton charges.
At least 43 demonstrators were arrested, while some 48 police officerswere wounded.


Arkansas, Michigan To Match Juggernauts
The Midwest Regional final on Sunday will feature a classic matchup between two powerhouse teams: Arkansas, with its 40 minutes of hell attack, against Michigan's fabled Fab Four.
The Razorbacks (28-3), the No. 1-seeded team, using a deep bench to go big when they needed to and a quick and fast lineup when it was necessary, rolled over Tulsa by 103-84 in the first semifinal game.


Boeheim Lauds Orangemen
The morning after Syracuse's overtime loss to Missouri, Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim awoke to a confluence of emotions: the pain of a heartbreaking loss swirling with the satisfaction of guiding the Orangemen into the round of 16.
"Getting to the round of 16 was a great accomplishment," Boeheim said today.
"The first year back from probation is a difficult year. I thought the players responded tremendously."


Pipeline Owner Was at Fault in Fatal Accidents in the 80's
The Texas Eastern Transmission Corporation, the owner of the 33-year-old underground pipeline that ruptured and set off a fiery explosion in central New Jersey, was responsible for three fatal accidents in the 1980's in the South and Midwest.
And it is a partner in a venture responsible for a 1990 propane explosion that enveloped an upstate New York village in a fog-like vapor and killed two people.
Still, noting that the company and its parent, the Panhandle Eastern Corporation, control some 26,000 miles of gas pipelines, nearly one-tenth of the nation's total, some industry and government officials say that its fatality record is not abnormal by industry standards and that the company has enjoyed a relatively good safety record in the past few years.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6-6.5
6-6.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.43
3.49
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.47
3.43
2.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.79
3.77
3.03
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.63
6.54
6.09
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.01
6.95
6.94
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.85
7.79
7.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.07
6.03
6.03
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Time Warner Increases Its Stake in Atari
Shares of the Atari Corporation rose sharply today after Time Warner Inc. said it would increase its stake in the company to 27 percent from 25 percent.
Also, Atari and the Atari Games Corporation, a subsidiary of Time Warner, said they had reached settlements in their patent infringement cases against Nintendo of America.


Intel to Begin China Venture
The Intel Corporation, the world's largest computer chip maker, will set up its first semiconductor production venture in China, Intel executives said today.
A subcontracting deal will be signed next week with the China Huajing Electronics Group in Beijing to assemble and test imported Intel 386 chips at a Huajing plant at Wuxi in south-coastal Jiangsu province.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in Business Day on Thursday, about a patent dispute between the Sony Corporation and the Eastman Kodak Company over a magnetic recording system used in camcorders and videocassette recorders, mischaracterized the action taken by the United States Patent and Trademark Office.
It rejected Kodak's claims in an initial determination, the first step in a re-examination of a patent; it did not invalidate the patent.


An Inspired Cook With a Disability Starts a Business
Edith Quarles, 52, of Wyandanch, L.I., was diagnosed with lupus erythematosus in the 1970's and quit her job at the urging of her doctor.
Mrs.
Quarles and her husband have five children, and being unemployed not only created a financial hardhip, but left her longing for her previously active life.


Calling Mr. Fiske
The battle lines have hardened and the stakes have been raised.
That much can be said of the remarkable sequence of events on Thursday, in which Representative Jim Leach all but accused the Clinton Administration of obstructing justice and Bill Clinton, in a nationally televised news conference a few hours later, unequivocally denied that he had done any such thing.
This can also be said: The truth about the tangled mess known as Whitewater remains more elusive than ever.
Representative Newt Gingrich summed it up pretty well for the Republican critics: Here we have two believable men making two equally plausible cases.
And they disagree on just about everything.


Sunshine-Jr. Stores Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 30


Ameron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Gaps in the Mayor's Plan
Three official overseers of New York City's fiscal fitness have found a huge gap in Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's preliminary budget for the coming year.
A fourth faults him for ruling out cuts in the police and fire departments and among schoolteachers.
None of these four monitors have direct power over the budget or the Mayor, but their critiques are too substantial to be brushed off.
Mr.
Giuliani's preliminary plan for balancing next year's $31 billion budget rested mainly on city payroll cuts, growth in tax collections, more help from Albany and Washington, and a few measures that are pure gimmickry.
His final proposals are due at the end of April.


CHRONICLE
The Association for a Better New York has contributed $10,000 to a reward fund established by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, said the group's chairman, LEWIS RUDIN.
The money is to be used for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the individuals responsible for shooting a Maryland couple, Gerald and Edith Schaeffer, on Wednesday, when the couple were shopping with their two daughters at the Vera Wang Bridal House, on Madison Avenue.
The fund now totals $36,000.
The city put up $10,000; Ms.
Wang donated $15,000, and Crime Stoppers, a crime prevention group, gave $1,000.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  EXPLOSION IN EDISON: SIFTING THROUGH THE WRECKAGE
As they were bounced from line to line in a bureaucratic blur of forms and interviews, hundreds of Edison residents left homeless by a thunderous gas explosion learned it is not easy to piece together their lives without the conveniences most people take for granted.
Page 1.


A Season Without Leavened Bread


Syms reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


National Arts Standard Sets Unrealistic Goals; Local Interaction
To the Editor:
It was gratifying to see recognition of the value of arts education by the Clinton Administration, as reported in "U.S. Sets Voluntary Standard in Teaching the Arts" (news article, March 14).


Banesto Holders Voting on a Rescue Plan
Shareholders of the troubled Banco Espanol de Credito are expected to approve a rescue plan on Saturday that will reduce the book value of the bank's shares by 43 percent.
The bank's new managers, who replace the board ousted by the Bank of Spain three months ago, are also expected to ask shareholders to hold the former directors legally responsible for the bank's problems, including accounting irregularities that caused Banesto shares to lose millions of dollars in value.
Such a step, which requires the support of 50 percent of the bank's shareholders, is a precursor to filing legal charges.


India Rejects U.S. Bid for Nuclear Pact With Pakistan
A new attempt by the Clinton Administration to prevent a nuclear arms race between India and Pakistan has been rebuffed by India, which responded to initial discussion of the American proposals this week by saying that it would not accept the capping of its arsenal in a reciprocal deal with Pakistan.
After meetings with Robin Raphel, the Assistant Secretary of State for South Asia, senior Indian officials said India opposed any agreement halting the production or deployment of nuclear weapons if the agreement was limited to India and Pakistan.
The officials said India favored steps to limit and eventually eliminate nuclear weapons, but only if the major nuclear powers, including the United States, undertook to accept similar restraints.


Review/Film Festival; A Musical About AIDS Crammed With Ideas
"Zero Patience," John Greyson's audacious film musical about AIDS, bubbles with so many ideas that it has the feel of several movies compressed into an unwieldy if stimulating Brechtian revue.
Underneath its giddy surface, it systematically discredits myths surrounding AIDS, most notably the notion that gay male promiscuity can be blamed for the epidemic.
The film, which has screenings at the Museum of Modern Art at 9 tonight and at 6 P.M. tomorrow as part of the New Directors/New Films series, has almost as many mood swings as it has themes.
One minute it is telling the beyond-the-grave love story of the Victorian adventurer Sir Richard Francis Burton (John Robinson) and the ghost of Patient Zero (Normand Fauteux), the gay French-Canadian airline steward portrayed in Randy Shilts's "And the Band Played On" as a critical early carrier of the AIDS virus.


Traffic Alert
Fifth Avenue will be closed tomorrow between 61st and 79th Streets, and 79th Street will be closed between Third and Fifth Avenues from noon to 4 P.M. for the Greek Indepen-dence Day Parade.


Westchester Falters on a Housing Pledge
Three years ago, Westchester County leaders promised to build 5,000 dwellings for a generation of moderate and low-income families that had been priced out of the housing market.
Today, that plan is sputtering along far behind its scheduled completion date of the year 2000.
Town and village governments are increasingly suspicious of burdening taxpayers with more public-school students, and are leery of influxes of outsiders who might change the character of the places those taxpayers call home.


Survivors of New Jersey Blast Begin to Rebuild Their Lives
As they were bounced from line to line in a bureaucratic blur of forms and interviews, hundreds of residents left homeless by a thunderous gas explosion and fire here learned today that it would not be easy to piece together their lives without the conveniences most people take for granted.
Waiting this morning to speak to an insurance adjuster for the first time, Danielle Rhodes glanced at a crumpled list that she had begun jotting after her home at the Durham Woods apartments was destroyed late Wednesday night.
Occasionally she sighed and, like others waiting at the disaster relief center in Edison High School, added new items to her plans for the day:


Edith Porada, 81, Dies; Columbia Art Historian
Dr.
Edith Porada, a Columbia University art historian and archeologist, died on Thursday in Honolulu, where she was staying with her sister.
She was 81 and lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
She suffered a brief illness, said Sidney Babcock, a family spokesman in New York.


Fed Debated Only Size of Rate Rise
When top Federal Reserve officials decided on Feb. 4 to raise short-term interest rates slightly, they debated not whether, but how high, to raise them, according to a summary of their meeting released this afternoon.
The nation's central bank raised the overnight rate for loans between banks -- the Federal funds rate -- by a quarter of a point on Feb. 4, to 3 1/4 percent, the smallest move possible.
And the Fed raised it again on Tuesday, to 3 1/2 percent.


Nets Hand The Bulls A Lesson In Humility
The Nets' 110-87 victory over the Chicago Bulls before a sellout crowd of 20,049 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight was so unusual that Derrick Coleman insists he can't remember the last time it happened.
For the record, it was Jan. 23, 1991, when Coleman, fresh from Syracuse, was a Nets rookie.
After that loss, the Bulls won 12 straight games against New Jersey, 6 straight in the Meadowlands, and captured 3 straight National Basketball Association championships.


Suspensions of Whalers Overruled by Bettman
Six Hartford Whalers -- including the captain, PAT VERBEEK, and the star rookie CHRIS PRONGER -- were suspended yesterday for violating a team curfew in connection with a saloon brawl in Buffalo.
But the National Hockey League promptly reversed the decision of team's owner, RICHARD GORDON.
Commissioner GARY BETTMAN rescinded the suspensions, pending the outcome of an investigation that he ordered earlier in the day.
His decision came hours after Gordon announced the suspensions at a news conference.


WorldCorp Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Students' Baseball Caps Prompt a Principal to Balk
KENNETH J. HANDLER is a man of many hats, none of them his own.
Mr.
Handler, principal of Mineola Middle School, can be found on most workdays at his desk against a backdrop of at least 15 hats, all baseball caps.
Mr.
Handler is headstrong about baseball caps.
He insists that the caps, which are de rigueur for all self-respecting American males between 11 and 17, have no place in the hallowed halls of learning.


Trail of Memos on Whitewater Inquiry
Nearly two years ago, L. Jean Lewis, a Federal investigator of financial fraud, fixed her attention on a collapsed Arkansas savings and loan, Madison Guaranty, run by a former business partner of Bill and Hillary Clinton.
Ms.
Lewis began to see a paper trail, a pattern of what she regarded as suspicious loans and potential fiscal crimes, including "a $1.5 million check-kiting scheme," according to memorandums she wrote from her post at the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency charged with unraveling the savings and loan collapses of the 1980's.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $310,000
323 West 21st Street  3-family, 4-story house in a former stable; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in 2 units; third is a 3,700-sq.-ft garage being converted to a duplex; taxes $4,716, listed at $375,000, 9 weeks on market (Broker: Kingman Associates)


IN SHORT: FICTION
ARAB NOVEL  THE STORY OF ZAHRA
By Hanan al-Shaykh.  Anchor, $18.


Helping Train Leaders
Jackie Robinson Foundation awards dinner and fund-raiser, Waldorf-Astoria, March 14.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


March 20-26: No Clemency for Pollard; One Who Spies for a Friend Is Still a Spy, Clinton Says
Jonathan J. Pollard, the American who is serving a life term in prison for spying for Israel, lost his best chance for immediate release last week when President Clinton rejected his clemency petition.
Now he will have to wait until at least next year.
Mr.
Clinton ignored appeals from leaders of Jewish groups who had argued that Mr.
Pollard, who was jailed in 1987, had been punished enough.


WHITEWATER WORDS
'All of us got hired here to work for the American people," President Clinton told reporters who were badgering him about charges by Republican leaders in regard to the Whitewater affair, "not to throw off on each other."
Lexicographic Javerts have homed in on the South Midland regionalism.
The Oxford English Dictionary doesn't have throw off in the Clintonian sense, but the English Dialect Dictionary, by Joseph Wright, published in 1905, has this Dorsetshire usage from before the turn of the century: "Volks be throwen off 'bout it. Vather made vun 'bout it at tea-time." The contextual meaning: "to make fun of."


High Speed in Seattle
Train travelers riding between Seattle and Portland get to sample Spain's high-speed Renfre Talgo cars for six months, beginning April 1.
The Talgo train has the capacity to travel at 180 miles an hour.
Unfortunately, Federal speed limits won't allow the train to go over 79 miles an hour at present.
But plans are under way to turn the Seattle-to-Portland route into a high-speed corridor, according to a spokeswoman for the Washington State Department of Transportation, which selected the Talgo over several other high-speed European trains for the test run.


Don't Trample Prisoners' Rights
Some of the noblest work of the Federal and state courts is vindicating the rights of prison inmates to decent treatment and fair disciplinary procedures.
Some of the silliest work of the same courts is sifting through frivolous prisoner complaints that seek to make Federal cases out of petty grievances.
But it is often hard to tell at first blush which prisoner lawsuits are meritorious and which will prove ridiculous.
That means that it takes time -- estimates vary as to how much time -- to sift the complaints and dispose of them.
Meanwhile the most frivolous cases, even though rarely successful, threaten to undermine or obscure the serious cases of brutality and mistreatment.
In New York, Attorney General Oliver Koppell claims that prison cases tie up 20 percent of his litigation staff.


Andrea L. Lyons, Claus F. Rademacher
Andrea Lucille Lyons, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Lyons of Flushing, Queens, was married yesterday to Claus Friedrich Rademacher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norbert Rademacher of Baden-Baden, Germany.
The Rev.
Donald Brouillard performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Jean Baptiste Church in New York.
Mrs.
Rademacher, 28, is the advertising coordinator at The New Yorker magazine.
She graduated from Marymount Manhattan College.
Her father is an assistant vice president at Scor U.S., a reinsurance company in New York.
Her mother, Barbara-Ann C. Lyons, is the director of the library and learning center at Community Elementary School 4 in the Bronx.


A Dylan In Slacker's Clothing?
THE CROWD CHANTED, "LOSER! LOSER!" when Beck finished a determinedly sloppy set at Emo's here.
It wasn't hostility but anticipation; Beck, a 23-year-old songwriter from Los Angeles, hadn't performed his hit, "Loser." Beck came back to demolish the song, half-heartedly rapping the verses while band members imitated drumbeats.
It was pure slacker attitude; no one was going to mock his song before he did.
Beck wore 1970's detritus: a Pinto cap, a Farrah Fawcett T-shirt.
But his music is fascinated with the 1960's.
While everyone knows the decade is over, Beck wants to rub it in.
Harking back to Bob Dylan, he started his set with a rewritten Woody Guthrie song.
Songs on his debut album, "Mellow Gold" (Geffen 24634; CD and cassette), echo the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, Neil Young and lesser 60's figures.
Beck's borrowings aren't sacred relics as they are for 60's idolaters like Lenny Kravitz; they're only junk he found on the cultural sidelines.
And where 60's rockers set out to be beacons for a generation, Beck aspires only to be a symptom of his.


Name's the Same, but the Place Is New
LAST fall it seemed as though the Basil Leaf Cafe in Locust Valley was through.
Hungry weary customers at the Plaza Shops found the cafe's doors closed and its rooms dark.
Then in November new owners brought the stylish cafe back to life.
Their changes were not merely cosmetic.
This is an all-new restaurant.
Three distinct dining areas beckon.
They are the original cafe, with its clean lines, wood-burning pizza oven, inviting brick bar and pressed-tin ceiling; the adjacent cottage, with a marble fireplace, traditional decor and floral swags at the windows, and the new upstairs gallery.


Nervous and Skeptical, Mexicans See Dark Plots
Raymundo Urbina, a 35-year-old resident of the southern city of San Cristobal de las Casas, took it more or less in stride when the textile factory where he had worked his entire adult life shut down last year and left him out of work.
He could accept it when one of his sisters had to go to the United States to find work.
That he must struggle now to provide for his children, he says, is simply a function of the way things are.


Sports of The Times; The Jimmy and Jerry Show Could Be Heading for Cancellation
IT'S inevitable.
Sooner or later, Jimmy Johnson or Jerry Jones will file for a Dallas divorce.
They're incompatible.
And after the latest spat between the Cowboy coach and the Cowboy owner-general manager, it might be sooner instead of later.
For all the rule changes adopted at the National Football League meetings in Orlando, Fla., the Jimmy and Jerry Show will eventually affect competitive balance much more than the new 2-point conversion.


A Meal for Easter, With Time to Spare
THIS is a very simple Easter meal, and it has become something of a tradition in my family.
Virtually no last-minute preparation is needed, so you don't have to spend a lot of time in the kitchen after guests have arrived.
The first course is asparagus, served at room temperature, with a colorful sauce made with red and yellow peppers.
The main course is lamb, marinated overnight in mustard, garlic and soy sauce and served with potatoes roasted at the same time with sliced artichokes and fava beans.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  House
1.
Education: Vote on passage of compromise House-Senate bill aimed at raising educational achievement levels.
Approved 306 to 121, March 23.
2.
Lobbying: Vote on passage of a bill tightening lobbyist registration rules and limiting their gifts to government officials. (The bill was considered under a rule that required a two-thirds majority for passage.) Approved 315 to 110, March 24.
3.
Education: Vote on passage of a five-year renewal of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.
Approved 289 to 128, March 24.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
4. Shays (R) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
5. Franks (R) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
3. Saxton (R) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
4. Smith (R) . . .
Nay
Yea
Nay
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Nay
Yea
Yea
6. Pallone (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
7. Franks (R) . . .
Nay
Yea
Nay
8. Klein (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
A
10. Payne (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
11. Gallo (R) . . .
A
A
A
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Nay
Yea
Nay
13. Menendez (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
2. Lazio (R) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
3. King (R) . . .
Nay
Nay
Nay
4. Levy (R) . . .
Nay
Yea
Nay
5. Ackerman (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
6. Flake (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
7. Manton (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
8. Nadler (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
9. Schumer (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
10. Towns (D) . . .
Yea
Nay
Yea
11. Owens (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
12. Velazquez (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
13. Molinari (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
14. Maloney (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
15. Rangel (D) . . .
Yea
Nay
Yea
16. Serrano (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
17. Engel (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
18. Lowey (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
19. Fish (R) . . .
Yea
Nay
Yea
20. Gilman (R) . . .
Yea
Nay
Yea
21. McNulty (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
22. Solomon (R) . . .
Nay
A
Nay
23. Boehlert (R) . . .
Yea
Nay
Yea
24. McHugh (R) . . .
Nay
Yea
Nay
25. Walsh (R) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
26. Hinchey (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
27. Paxon (R) . . .
Nay
Nay
Nay
28. Slaughter (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
29. LaFalce (D) . . .
Yea
Yea
A
30. Quinn (R) . . .
Yea
Yea
Yea
31. Houghton (R) . . .
Yea
Nay
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


The Bazaar
Spice for sale.


Journal; The Two-Way Mirror
The book on the press during the '92 campaign was that it favored Bill Clinton because it identified with him.
Here at last was a potential President of their same 1960's generation: He opposed the Vietnam war (and avoided the draft), smoked dope, listened to rock music and then settled down to an imperfect marriage and an establishment career that, however successful, stayed clear of the go-go greed of the Reagan-Bush 80's.
Now that these same reporters are obsessed with Whitewater, the theory is turning violently on itself.
Those who so identified with Mr.
Clinton's 60's idealism and touchy-feeliness are enraged, it's said, because he may turn out to be an 80's sort of guy, after all.
Whatever the final verdict on Whitewater, it puts the Clintons in close proximity to income-tax sleights of hand, high-flying market investments and a bevy of lawyers and bankers right out of "Barbarians at the Gate."


Patricia Bowman, Matthew Aiken
Patricia Anne Bowman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James F. Bowman 2d of Sugar Land, Tex., was married yesterday to Matthew Andrews Aiken, the son of Drs.
William and Jane Aiken of Blacksburg, Va., and Truro, Mass.
The Rev.
W.
Ramsey Richardson performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Chapel of the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, Va.
Mrs.
Aiken and her husband, both 24, graduated from Virginia.
The bride is an associate director of member services at the Advisory Board Company, a health care research and consulting concern in Washington.
Her father, now retired, was a geology professor at Lehman College in the Bronx.
Her mother, Mary M. Bowman, is a manager of information systems at the Prudential Insurance Company, in Houston.


When Seals Move In
BEWHISKERED and big-eyed, gray seals have expressive faces.
They have larger heads and longer snouts than their more common cousins, harbor seals.
They appear calm and deliberate.
Large-bodied, gray seals are usually a light gray and marked by large dark spots or blotches.


The Power of Arrogance, The Arrogance of Power
WHAT a seductive musical "Evita" is.
Harold Prince's theatrical concept of a pop opera that started out as a record album continues to thrive more than 15 years after its premiere, winning over some critical condescension and a popular misinterpretation that insists the Andrew Lloyd Webber-Tim Rice work is a glorification and glamorization of evil.
Not so.
"Evita," a rich theater piece that does not lack self-awareness, is a caustic commentary about media manipulation, the chanciness of celebrity, people's need to adulate, to manufacture icons and the power of arrogance and the arrogance of power.


Squeeze Play
To the Editor:
When I was growing up on Long Island, my paper route allowed me to see many Broadway shows.
I saw "Fiddler on the Roof," "Company" and "Follies" for $2 each.
How many papers would a boy have to sell today to attend theater on a regular basis?
I also recall that when I was in my junior year in high school, in 1973, balcony seats were routinely available for $3 or $4.
Today it is difficult to purchase a balcony seat for less than $25.
So much for cultivating new audiences.
CHRISTOPHER GORMAN  Los Angeles


Streetscapes/The Provident Loan Society; High-Class Pawn Shops With Redeeming Qualities
THERE are lots of trademark buildings that unify New York -- the limestone Carnegie Libraries, the Robert Moses park structures of the 1930's, the red-brick firehouses of the 1880's.
Another group, the gem-like branches of the Provident Loan Society, used to dot New York City neighborhoods but have been dwindling for the last 30 years.
Now another one, the tiny branch at 153 East 60th Street, has closed but will not vanish entirely as an architect/restaurateur transforms it into a palace of Indian food.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT STORIES  CULTURAL REVOLUTION  Stories. By Norman Wong. Persea, $21.


Here Comes Peter Cottontail
The third annual Bunny Hop, to benefit the Pediatric Day Hospital at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, March 16.


Digging Deeper Into Harlem's Health Crisis
In 1990, The New England Journal of Medicine published a health study by two doctors at Harlem Hospital.
Their summary findings: "Black men in Harlem were less likely to reach the age of 65 than men in Bangladesh."
By virtually every statistic, Harlem residents have alarming rates of a vast array of diseases, including asthma, cancer, heart and kidney disease, alcoholism, pneumonia, diabetes and AIDS.
The problems are compounded by high infant mortality rates and a high homicide rate, not to mention Harlem's status as one of the most medically underserved areas of the city.


Claire Nichtern, 73, Broadway Producer
Claire Nichtern, who produced or helped to produce several dozen Broadway plays and musicals in her theatrical career, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 73.
The cause was cancer, said her daughter, Judith Nichtern.


Presidential Nominations
To the Editor:
If Florida as a setting and not just social issues drew the President to Carl Hiaasen, he might like to try some titles by Laurence Shames, Les Standiford, Kevin Robinson or Edna Buchanan.
Also, John Straley's Alaskan mysteries might lead him to those of Dana Stabenow.


Hot Hands Of Gilliam Lead Nets' Comeback
Although the New Jersey Nets have risen to the occasion several times this season in facing down big guns like the Knicks, Atlanta Hawks, Seattle SuperSonics, San Antonio Spurs and -- as recently as Friday night -- the Chicago Bulls, they have had a particularly hard time dodging the Bullets.
But they did it again tonight in their fourth and final meeting of the season with the cellar-dwelling Washington Bullets before a crowd of 17,724 at the USAir Arena, erasing a 17-point third-quarter deficit in the 103-100 victory.
The Nets are now five games over .500 for the first time this season, at 36-31.


Sexual Harassment: Stories From The Field
IT'S enough to give sexual harassment complaints a bad name: One woman takes umbrage at mistletoe, saying that it creates an abusive atmosphere; another objects to photographs of a colleague's cousin, a Dallas Cowboys cheerleader, on his desk.
But while cases like these abound, often inviting ridicule, they are the exceptions to the rule.
Most harassment cases reflect clear abuses, or at least much closer calls.
And studies show that most women are mute when faced with demands for sexual favors, or with a hostile atmosphere at work.


Hide-and-Seek at 110 Livingston
SCHOOLS Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has changed the rules in the game of hide-and-seek that every mayor plays with every board of education over the size of the central bureaucracy.
In the past, when a Mayor has called for major reductions in administration, the board and chancellor have responded that the bodies are just not there to be cut.
This year Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani played his part, but the Chancellor was a spoil sport.
He actually did a count of bureaucratic heads, and announced that the number of administrators was nearly double the 3,500 the board had listed.


Entering The Stretch, It's Norman By Four
If the Players Championship were a horse race, which Greg Norman is taking great pains to assure it is not, the track announcer's call today would have sounded something like Chic Anderson's famous take on Secretariat's stretch run at the 1973 Belmont Stakes.
"On the turn it's Greg Norman. Greg Norman is blazing along . . . 17, 18, 19 under! Greg Norman is widening now! He is moving like a tremendous machine."


Health Plan Must Preserve Doctor-Patient Ties
To the Editor:
Most discussions of health care reform focus on the costs of medical care.
Little attention is paid to the doctor-patient relationship, but it is the hallmark of high-quality American medicine and should be preserved regardless of what plan Congress provides.


Manager's Profile
Peter J. Allegrini
Fund: Fidelity Advisor High-Income Municipal Bond Fund, the best-performing national muni fund over five years; 4.75% sales charge; $560 million in assets.
Manager since 1992. (Sponsor: Fidelity Investments, Boston.)  Born: Oct. 13, 1952; Waterbury, Conn.
Education: B.S., economics, Mount St.
Mary's; M.B.A., University of Hartford.
Last Vacation: Two weeks in August with family on Cape Cod.
Fund Performance: Year through February: +6.9% (all national muni bond funds: +5.1%); three years: +11.1% (+9.3%).*
Bond Market View: (self-rating; = most bullish).
Bond Pick: Wayne County, Mich., Airport Revenue Bonds (Northwest Airlines) 10 3/8, due in 2015, because of the "high value of the ground lease securing the issue."  Current Strategy: "To get an above-average yield plus capital appreciation if long-term rates continue to fall." *Source: Morningstar Inc.


Tricky Logistics Of Sports Trips
WHEN the Final Four -- the remaining teams in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's men's basketball championship -- play next weekend in Charlotte, N.C., the 23,500 spectators will include thousands of fans who bought packages of transportation, hotels and probably tickets.
If things go the way they did at the Rose Bowl, on Jan. 1, there may also be people in the parking lot who paid for tickets but ended up with none.
Hundreds of Wisconsin fans arrived in California only to learn that they did not have tickets, and scalpers took over.


In Manila, the Film Makers Test the Censors
When "Schindler's List" opened in 15 Manila theaters this month, people stood in the aisles to see it.
And despite a ruling by Government censors, they saw the entire movie.
The Government's Movie and Television Regulatory and Classification Board had decided to cut portions of the film because they showed "too much breast" and a scene where Schindler has sex with his mistress.
In protest, Warner Brothers, the film distributor, withdrew the movie, saying the director, Steven Spielberg, wanted it shown uncut or not at all.


Presidential Nominations
To the Editor:
Thank you for the kind reference to my novel, "Slow Motion Riot," in Marilyn Stasio's very enjoyable article.


Odets Waves An Olive Leaf In a Last Play
TO FOLLOW ITS MUCH PRAISED "TIMON OF Athens" and a not exactly celebrated "Government Inspector," Tony Randall's National Actors Theater concludes its current season on the upbeat: a genial, stylish production of Clifford Odets's "Flowering Peach," now at the Lyceum.
"The Flowering Peach" is Odets's last, least characteristic play.
It has more to do with his professional history than with theater itself, but that's of no matter.
The mix of the play, of history and of an exceptionally good performance by Eli Wallach makes for a production that both entertains and haunts.
Under Odets's direction, "The Flowering Peach" originally opened on Broadway in late December 1954, the year made memorable by the telecast of the Army-McCarthy hearings.
The folksy Odets comedy fit the fashion of those fearful times, when unpopular political opinions were to be avoided at all costs.
Not even the most rabid Red-hunter could object to this: a reworking of the biblical story of Noah and the ark in which Noah and the members of his loving, quarrelsome family talk in the Yiddish locutions of the New York of his youth.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
POPULAR CULTURE  INSIDE PEOPLE  The Stories Behind the Stories.
By Judy Kessler.
Villard, $19.95.


Fish Market's Problems Revert to New York City
Eight years ago the top Federal prosecutor in Manhattan began a crackdown against the Mafia that led to extensive Federal oversight of the Fulton Fish Market, the nation's largest wholesale fish and seafood distribution center.
Now the headaches of running the market and combating mobsters have come full circle to the former prosecutor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, New York's new Mayor.
As Federal intervention wanes, it is Mr.
Giuliani's administration that will be faced with directly supervising the market as the city resumes responsibility for it for the first time since 1982.


Paramount's Bet on Madison Square Garden Is Looking Good
FOUR years ago, Madison Square Garden was a grungy, outdated complex that, only two decades after it was built, had lost much of its glamour.
Its owner, Paramount Communications Inc., wanted to abandon the site and build a larger, more modern arena a few blocks away.
When that project fell through, Paramount settled for a $200 million renovation of the old place, completed in autumn 1991.
Many people viewed that as a dangerous gamble at a time when cities like Boston, Chicago and the Detroit suburb of Auburn Hills, Mich., were choosing to build from scratch.


Construction Equipment Damage May Have Caused Gas Explosion
Federal investigators found evidence today that a rupture in a gas pipeline that touched off a powerful explosion at an apartment complex here may have been caused by repeated damage to the pipeline from construction equipment.
After searching a jagged crater carved by the blast near Durham Woods apartments, the investigators said they found deep scratches on nearly every piece of the splintered pipeline they picked up.
They said the marks may have been made by digging equipment belonging to an asphalt plant, owned by Quality Materials, that is so near the pipeline that its fuel tank was wrecked in the blast.


Truce (for now) in Crosstown Bus Battle
The Transit Authority agreed last week to order an independent study on the impact of a change in a bus route in Yorkville.
The agreement, between the authority and two neighborhood associations, settled a suit in which the neighborhood groups charged that the M31 bus route was altered without a required public hearing.
Earlier this year, citing financial reasons, the authority merged the route, which ran from 92d Street along York Avenue, with the M58, which ran crosstown on 57th Street.


The World; Bottom Line for U.S. and China: No Kowtows on Human Rights
INSCRUTABLE, these Americans.
Their China policy has never seemed to be in so many hands.
President Clinton's Cabinet (not to mention Congress and the American public) is divided between those who emphasize what China can do for American business and those who emphasize what China must do about human rights.


Street Clearing Puts Family In Tight Spot
For nearly half a century, members of the Stone family have been a fixture outside Grand Central Station, selling newspapers at a portable stand at Lexington Avenue and 43d Street.
But now the family is battling to keep its spot in the wake of a City Council decision last July to ban from congested areas all vendors, including those who sell printed material from tables and portable stands.
Sheldon Stone, a 64-year-old vendor who runs the business with his brother Bernard, has defiantly remained at the post and is appealing two violation notices from the city's Environmental Control Board.
He said he has a constitutional right to sell newspapers.
A decision is imminent.


In Russia, a National Style Lives, Precariously
IN A RECENT PRESS RELEASE announcing the formation of Friends of the Kirov Opera, Valery Gergiyev argued the urgency of an international fund-raising arm for the St.
Petersburg company, of which he is artistic director.
"Support is necessary," Mr.
Gergiyev wrote, "to enable the best Russian singers to continue working and developing in the Russian national opera tradition -- this is far more important for the opera world today than to have the same singers dispersed and performing everything everywhere."
It was a typical Gergiyev gesture, combining cold business sense with warm idealism.
The Russian conductor, who is currently leading the new production of Verdi's "Otello" at the Metropolitan Opera, is an anomaly in the music business today.
He guest-conducts all the major orchestras: Berlin, Boston, Chicago, New York.
But he sometimes pursues these activities ambivalently.
He has turned down half a dozen music directorships in the United States and Europe.
He says of himself, "I am not a typical star in a Western way."


The Importance of Being Biased
THE SILENT WOMAN Sylvia Plath &amp; Ted Hughes.
By Janet Malcolm. 208 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


As Fed Talks, Wall Street Gets Wrong Message
THE Federal Reserve Board, after years of complaints, is finally trying to be less secretive.
Unfortunately, both Wall Street and the media are finding it very difficult to adjust to the new openness.
The problem is that the old way of looking at the Fed was to assume that it was trying to keep secrets.
When a Fed chairman actually announced a policy, in unambiguous language, it was clearly an important event.
And the financial markets reacted, or over-reacted, accordingly.


The Nation; How Houston's Angry Din Still Haunts Republicans
REPUBLICANS are afraid to act like Republicans these days.
The hesitancy can be traced not to the election of President Clinton in November of 1992, but to the Republican National Convention 10 weeks earlier.
The aura of negativism, even intolerance, that seemed to encase the Astrodome that week in Houston, still hangs heavy over the Republican psyche.


Men and Women, Forever Misaligned
THE STONE DIARIES By Carol Shields. 361 pp. New York:  Viking. $21.95.


Molly Andrews, Hunt Worth
Marion Taggart Andrews, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
George E. Andrews 2d of Boca Raton, Fla., was married on Friday to Theron Huntting Worth, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theron O. Worth Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
Dorsey W. M. McConnell performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of Bethesda-by-the-Sea in Palm Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Worth, 24, is known as Molly.
She is the staff worker in New York for Focus, the Fellowship of Christians in Universities and Schools.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father, an Episcopal priest who is the headmaster of St.
Andrew's School, a private secondary school in Boca Raton.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
BROOKLYN HEIGHTS  Safe as Houses, Er, Make That Subways
When you think of the New York City subway system, do you revel in a sense of transporational security?


Serbs Nurse Old Hate Against Muslim Rule
To the Editor:
Re "How Turks Saved the Jews" (Editorial Notebook, March 13) by Karl Meyer:


Technology; The New Space Race In Satellite Communications
NOBODY ever accused Craig O. McCaw of being too cautious, but the cellular telephone pioneer's $9 billion proposal to circle the planet with 840 communications satellites is almost swashbuckling in its optimism.
That was apparent in the fine print of the plan submitted last Monday to Federal regulators by the Teledesic Corporation, the company Mr.
McCaw has formed with assistance from William Gates, chairman of the Microsoft Corporation.


Is Growth Moral?
SILENT DEPRESSION The Fate of the American Dream.
By Wallace C. Peterson. 317 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.


From the Attic, Singing as Good as It Gets
ONE OF THE melancholy obligations of writers on opera is to break the news about those Carusos, Galli-Curcis and McCormacks in grandmother's attic.
Many correspondents want to convert them to cash; a few want to donate them where they can be useful -- but alas, there is no market, not even for the ancient-looking single-siders.
Which is not to say that they aren't treasures.
Even rare 78-r.p.m. records change hands for amounts that would look trivial in the world of serious collectibles; and the records generally found in American attics, especially the wonderfully successful products of the Victor Talking Machine Company, bring prices that range from can't-give-'em-away to a medium-long cab ride.
Serious collectors already have what your grandmother kept; research libraries have them, too, and community libraries can't play them.


Wall Street; Changing the Rules for Class Actions
IT'S far too outrageous to happen in real life, of course, but imagine that you've lost your shirt investing in a company whose president spent big shareholder bucks on a speedboat, gave jobs to his relatives and had a side job running an investment bank where four employees wound up getting hauled off by the Feds in handcuffs.
Imagine that the company put out news releases that turned out to be less than accurate.
And imagine that you bought at around $11.75 a share when the good news was announced, only to watch the stock sink to $4 when it become clear that the "news" was fiction.
You feel even worse because the insiders sold before the bombshell.


Ideas &amp; Trends; For Sale. Cheap. Your Own Piece Of the Airwaves.
Back in the glory days of "Dallas," the machinations of J. R. Ewing and the glittering images of vast petro-riches reinforced the almost universal conviction that oil prices would never come down again.
But then came the glut.
Prices plunged, bringing woe to both Dallas and "Dallas," and the markets for petroleum and natural gas have been depressed now for almost a decade.
Now some experts predict that the same kind of sickening deflation might be on the horizon again.
This time, the speculative plunge wouldn't be in oil or copper or downtown real estate.
Instead, it would be in what is arguably the hottest commodity market of the 1990's: the radio airwaves.


A Prodigal Son Makes His Way Home
Garrison Keillor Smiled AS he listened to the ovation swelling from the capacity crowd shoe-horned into the World Theater in downtown St.
Paul.
Mr.
Keillor -- recently repatriated to Minnesota after a bitter, self-imposed exile -- knew, however, not to acknowledge the applause from this audience, which had braved 30-below-zero wind chill to witness his live national radio broadcast of "A Prairie Home Companion."
Those unfamiliar with Minnesota's sometimes hate-hate relationship with its most famous son might assume that a high-decibel din was a salute to Mr.
Keillor.
A homeboy, he had conquered the country's airwaves and stood at the center of a $100 million-a-year media industry and mail-order company that relied heavily on selling yuppie gewgaws based on his stage persona: a humble yarn-spinner from fictional Lake Wobegon, Minn.


A Rematch for Assembly Seat?
After barely winning a special election last month to represent the northwest Bronx in the State Assembly, Jeffrey Dinowitz faces one and possibly two more election contests this year to keep his new seat.
His chief rival, Mark Friedlander, says he may decide to challenge Mr.
Dinowitz for a full term in a rematch this fall.


Lopez and Rice Win New York Title
With midnight approaching as he was signing autographs at the Glens Falls Civic Center for a horde of fans on Friday night, Felipe Lopez was asked how he felt about having to come back to play for the state championship some 12 hours later.
"I don't like to play at noon," said Lopez, the nation's best high school basketball player.
"But I've got to get up and be ready to play. It's my last game. I could play at 6 o'clock in the morning."


Avert Chimney Fires by Cleaning Out the Creosote
FIREPLACES, wood stoves and chimneys require annual inspections and cleaning, especially if used regularly.
Promptness is crucial.
Burning wood produces creosote, a tarlike substance that lines a chimney with a sticky flammable coating.
If allowed to cool until the next heating season, the creosote hardens to form a glassy layer that resists removal.
Thick deposits of creosote can crack masonry and loosen stovepipes.
More important, allowing creosote to build up can lead to a chimney fire.


The Cutting Edge
The compact Swiss Army knife, with its distinctive red shell, contains many tools -- scissors, bottle opener, corkscrew, tweezers, blades, ballpoint pen and toothpick, to name a few.
But the new Swiss Army Brand Traveler-Set holds even more: a tiny flashight, compass, ruler, magnifying glass and thermometer as well as the classic knife.
It comes in a neat palm-size leather case with a belt loop on the back.


The Nation: The Whitewater Chronicle; No Bombshell, and No End
No bombshell was dropped.
But there was no sense either that the full story of Whitewater was out.
Last week seemed just another chapter in a story that goes on and on without major revelation or firm resolution.
The week began with an odd turnabout.
On Monday, senior House Democrats abruptly canceled a public hearing on banking that Republicans had promised to turn into a session on Whitewater.


High Court Lets Stand Ruling on Bumping
The Supreme Court last month let stand a ruling by a Federal appeals court that held that travelers with a valid ticket who are prevented from boarding a plane because the airline has overbooked it, and suffer financial harm as a result, can sue the airline for damages.
The appeal to the court involved a case in which William D. West, a former patent attorney from Helena, Mont., sued Northwest Airlines after it refused to honor his ticket from Great Falls, Mont., to Washington in 1986.
He was to attend a two-day seminar on patent law in Washington, but Northwest switched the plane to one with fewer seats.
Mr.
West, who was bumped, refused all compensation and offers to put him on a later flight.
He is seeking $10,000 in compensatory damages.


A Phoenix Is Once Again Deep in Ashes
It was "a veritable Phoenix," rising from its ashes, the American Institute of Architects Guide said of the Roanoke in 1988, a year after a developer began restoring the fire-ravaged, century-old building to its full Romanesque revival glory.
Now, say residents of South Oxford Street in Fort Greene, squatters are picking the building apart.


McReynolds Adjusts to Plights (and Sound)
It was crowded in left field the first day Kevin McReynolds worked out with the Mets this spring.
At least, it seemed that way.
McReynolds shared the position with Joe Orsulak, who many thought might end up in an outfield platoon with McReynolds this season.
It was not the possible job competition, though, that made the outfield seem like such close quarters.
It was Orsulak's mouth.
McReynolds is infamous for his silence -- he has at times been criticized for being so undemonstrative.
Orsulak does not know what the word "quiet" means.


On Sculptures That Captured Grief
I never thought I'd see the day that sculptures of naked women would be on display in a town square, with the blessing of local officials ("Sculptures Capture Grief of Plane Bombing," Jan. 30).
That this is happening says much about the times in which we live.
Beyond a basic objection to nude art's being exhibited in the public realm, without the opportunity being given to parents to shield their children from it or to others not wishing to view it to avoid it, I am troubled by what I see as the exploitation of the women -- the mothers and wives of the victims of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 -- depicted in the work.
Nudity is not only superfluos to this work, it is absurb -- the women were not, I presume, naked when word of the tragedy reached them.


Embarrassment And Emptiness
To the Editor:
I was more than happy to read Vincent Canby's essay "Two on the Aisle, Yes, but Which Aisle?"  [ March 6 ] .
I was relieved.


Assessing an Old Favorite, Chinese Food
CHINESE food is among a handful of first-rate international cuisines.
Unfortunately, as served in so many restaurants, this diverse, complex and inventive cuisine is rarely at its best, rarely even at second best.
So clonelike have the area's Chinese restaurants become, we rarely anticipate a new one.
It is a sad admission, inasmuch as Chinese food has been among our all-time favorites since the long-ago time when we lived in Asia.
That said, we approached Hunan Spring in Stamford, with more than a little trepidation.
The location was familiar, the site of a French, then briefly a Thai restaurant.
In its current metamorphosis the decor is simpler: a large room, with smoking and nonsmoking areas, pale pink walls adorned with a few watercolors, well-spaced tables, neatly napped with white cloths and pink napkins, and comfortable chairs with shiny black lacquered high-backs.
All in all, understated and comfortable, enhanced by a cordial, accommodating staff.


Residents in Project Stand Up to a Gang
What struck the detectives, beyond the apparent viciousness of a group of youngsters, was that residents of the Glenwood Houses in Canarsie, including some of the older folks, were not going to take it, were willing to come forward and bear witness.
From their windows, or across the greens of the 20-building housing project off Ralph Avenue and Farragut Road, they saw the gang members -- none older than 16 and one only 12 -- stalking and mugging their victims, growing more violent each time.


What's Junk to Some Is Information to Others
To the Editor:
What angers me is the relatively recent practice of sending similar catalogues over and over, often with different covers to trick consumers to peruse them again.
What happened to the good old days when one received only a quarterly catalogue from Lillian Vernon and L. L. Bean?
Who needs a Lands' End catalogue every month?
Don't these merchants know that this mountain of paper goes straight from the mailbox to the recycling bin?
LENI GROSSMAN  Princeton, N.J., March 13


Pedestrians' Plea: Please Curb Your Wheels
ELENA PAPA found a new cause last September a few seconds after she stepped off a city bus and onto the sidewalk at 82d Street and Bay Parkway, a block from her Bensonhurst home.
She remembers thinking how nice the bus driver had been to drop her off at the corner instead of at the official bus stop.
Next she remembers feeling as though she was sliding into second base on her nose.
A bicycle rider had struck her from behind and slammed her face-first into the concrete.
"If I wasn't in such great shape I would have been killed or at least broken my hip," Mrs.
Papa said the other day.
"But ever since my heart attack I've gone to cardio-rehab twice a week at Victory Memorial Hospital in Bay Ridge, and all that walking and lifting and stretching saved my life. I was on my way back from the hospital when it happened."


CORRECTION
The essay on Feb. 27 about United States intervention abroad misidentified the country ruled by Rafael Leonidas Trujillo.
From 1930 to 1938 and 1942 to 1952, he was President of the Dominican Republic, not Panama.


An American Original
If anyone deserved the title American Original, it was Isadora Duncan (1877-1927).
She was the preternatural free spirit, the one who dreamed up modern dance as a thing of powerful simplicity and economic means aligned with great music, the one who beat a barefoot path for the likes of Ruth St.
Denis and Martha Graham to follow.
Live free, dance free, be free was her guiding principle.
Although many luminaries of her day have described the power of Duncan's dancing, no shred of film footage exists; she steadfastly avoided the movie camera, believing that the absence of an audience would alter her art.
The remarkable drawings and photographs in LIFE INTO ART: Isadora Duncan and Her World (Norton, $40) give a vivid sense of Duncan; for example, Abraham Walkowitz's spare, brilliant watercolors and line drawings depict her on stage with her marvelously long curving neck stretched heavenward and her feet kissing the ground.
The text -- by Duncan's grandniece, Doree Duncan; Carol Pratl, a dancer and teacher; and Cynthia Splatt, the author of "Isadora Duncan and Gordon Craig" -- is, while graceful, a hit-and-run affair that gives minutiae nearly equal rank with major events and screens out such material as Duncan's besotted, suicidal states of mourning.
For the grainy details of truth that bring a reader close to this mesmerizing figure, there's still no book to compare to Francis Steegmuller's "Your Isadora." There one finds Gordon Craig, the actor and theatrical producer, commenting to Duncan on a photo of her and their daughter, Deirdre -- on how it misses perfection because mother is not looking down at daughter, but straight ahead at the camera.
The same photo in "Life Into Art" sheds no such specific light.
DONNA PERLMUTTER


For People With AIDS, Bronx's Biggest Program
To the Editor:
On the weekend the Mayor was considering cutting AIDS services, your March 13 article "After the Test: What Should I Do Now?" made a timely and compelling argument for them.
But the article and its service guide omitted the Bronx's largest AIDS organization.


A Taste of Passover


In a Flash
To the Editor:
In "Game Fashion" (March 6), the term "Miss Pity" describing Tonya Harding made me think of Aunt Pitty Pat, a maiden who wore black in "Gone With the Wind." In that film, Belle Watling, a madam with a heart of gold, wore flashy satin with gold fringe -- Tonya's free-skate get-up.
MARY LU WALKER  Corning, N.Y


BROOKYN UPDATE
*
BROOKLYN HEIGHTS: The expansion of the chronically crowded Pierrepont Playground on the Brooklyn Heights Promenade does not necessarily mean the demise of a popular flower garden and its stone thunderbird mosaic, Henry J. Stern, the city's Parks Commissioner, said last week.
On Monday Mr.
Stern told Julius Spiegel, the Brooklyn Parks Commissioner, that the flower garden and the mosaic could be moved 20 feet south onto another strip of parkland if Community Board 2 votes at its April meeting to expand the park.


Barbara Petersen, Frederic Parker
Barbara Reebie Petersen, the president of an environmental arts organization, was married on Friday to Frederic Wesby Parker, an insurance executive.
Francis H. Strain, a justice of the peace in Greenwich, Conn., officiated at the bridegroom's home there.
The bride is the founder of Center for Art and Earth in New York.
She graduated from New York University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Conrad W. Petersen of Greenwich.
Her father, who is retired, was the general manager of the industrial division at Lever Brothers, the consumer products company, in New York.


Habitats/Staying in Bayside; Better, but Not Yet Best
MARGIE LOTITO drove by the large detached bungalows that line Bell Boulevard in the Bayside Hills section of Queens as her 2-year-old son, Craig, gleefully demolished a lollipop in his back-seat carrier.
She sighed, a sigh that betrayed just the slightest tremor of desire.
"Someday, maybe, we'll have one of those," she said.
"But for now, we're very happy where we are."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
HUNTING FOR EGGS
The Easter Bunny will show up for at least two Westchester locations on Saturday.
At 10 A.M. he is due in Yonkers to oversee the hunt for eggs hidden all over Redmond Field on Cook Avenue.
Three areas have been marked off for children of different ages; one for pre-kindergartners through 5 years, another for youngsters 6 through 8 and the third for children 9 through 12.
The hunt will go on, rain or shine, and prizes will be given to successful hunters.
Admission is free.
Resident rabbits at the Greenburgh Nature Center will be joined by the Easter Bunny at 2 P.M. when children search for chocolate eggs under bushes and stones on the trails surrounding the lawn.
Hunters must bring bags or baskets for collecting eggs, and prizes will be distributed to children who find the special Golden Eggs.


The New Line On Sinkers
Trout season -- the time of carefree hours spent in icy water with worm or fly, performing time-honored rituals, one of which is putting a split-shot sinker on the line with your teeth.
Yes, your mother and all the fishing books told you not to.
Orvis sells neat little tools.
And Tony Dolle of Cabela's catalogue (huntin' and fishin') recommends pliers.
But unless they've had a recent root-canal, real fisherpersons traditionally crimp their split-shot sinkers with a chomp and don't give it a second thought until they break a tooth.


Florence
Florence is, perhaps more than any other spot in Italy, a city of beautifully ordered spaces.
Medieval and Renaissance man ignored the traces laid down by ancient Rome and made their own rules, turning Florence, in its circle of hills, into an architectural jewel.
The city's narrow streets open suddenly onto broad, expansive piazzas, which provide breathing spaces of exquisite design, encouraging one to emerge from the cool, private shadows of gray back alleys into powerful sunlit vistas.
Florence may stupefy a visitor with its artistic and architectural richness, but thanks to human proportions and harmony of design never loses its human feel.
A surprising number of Florentines get around by bicycle, but walking is still the best way to see the city, especially now that pedestrian zones have reduced traffic in some central areas to an almost tolerable level.
Ask for help finding the right bus and someone will probably take you in hand till you reach your destination.
But despite such small town touches, the graceful city has a cosmopolitan flair.
Events
Maggio Musicale, the city's celebrated May music festival, actually runs from April 26 to July 1.
Zubin Mehta conducts the festival orchestra for Schoenberg's "Moses und Aron" on April 26 and 29, and for works by Mozart and Bartok May 4 and 5.
Mikhail Baryshnikov and his White Oak Dance Project will perform April 28.
Other performers this year include the Bamberg Symphony Orchestra on May 8 and the Chung Trio on May 12.
To buy tickets in advance, contact the organizers by fax, (39 55) 2779410.
International money orders are required to get tickets by fax.
Beginning April 5, tickets can be purchased at the box office, Teatro Comunale, 16 Corso Italia; 211158, from 9 A.M. to 1 P.M.
Tuesday to Saturday.
Tickets cost $12 to $72. (Prices are calculated at 1,650 lire to the dollar.)


Restoring the Eagles
HISTORY: The four 1,200-pound bronze eagles at the Grand Army Plaza entrance to Prospect Park are being removed for cleaning as part of a $1.3 million renovation project.
The sculputres were installed nearly 100 years ago and have never been cleaned.
REMOVAL: Last Tuesday workers cut a hole in the sphere under each eagle to reach the corroding cast-iron stanchions achoring the sculptures, freeing the eagles.
CLEANING: The eagles were taken to the Modern Art Foundry in Long Island City, Queens.
Workers will blast them with tiny glass beads or crushed walnut shells.
HOME BASE: The project should be finished in August. (Source: TProspect Park Alliance Capital Projects)


No Spitting 2; Yet another guide to life.
6Barometers for Judging You Unfairly Your car Your luggage Whether or not you eat red meat Your cologne The way you throw Your job 11Barometers for Judging You With Good Reason  Your politics (better have some) The way you dance How you treat a waiter Your shoes Bathtub ring?
The ice cream and frozen dinners are on the bottom All meat, no vegetables Every package says "Extra," "Chunky" or "New" 4Requests That Explain More Than Any Questionnaire List five favorite films -- off the top of your head (not best, favorite)  Where and what was the best meal you ever ate?
Your idea of a perfect day?


Moscow Rumors, True or Not, Show The Weakening of Yeltsin's Position
The rumors that swept through Moscow this week have cast a shadow over the Russian political landscape in ways that are sure to haunt President Boris N. Yeltsin.
The 63-year-old Russian leader -- due back in Moscow on Sunday after a two-week Black Sea vacation -- has been weakened by a steady stream of reports and anecdotes, some old, some new, that suggest he is no longer fit to guide this country out of its crisis.


Pupils Get a Jump on Careers
MOST busy executives struggle to stay ahead of the stacks of paperwork that multiply so rapidly on their desks.
But for Scott Drassinower, a White Plains-based commercial provider of access to the Internet computer network, the papers he devotes his energies to when he is not operating his business have more to do with social studies assignments and English essays than to the world of cyberspace.
Scott is a 15-year-old Ardsley High School sophomore who started his own business last December to link Westchester residents with the information superhighway.


Painful Memory
To the Editor:
I have nothing but applause for Vincent Canby's comments regarding the price of attending the theater in New York.
Sometimes it's not just the price that is painful to bear but the seats themselves.


POSTINGS: 1,000 Apartments; West Side Housing
Construction has begun on Manhattan West, a million-square-foot residential complex being built by the Brodsky Organization on a four-acre site between 61st and 64th Streets, the west side of West End Avenue and the edge of the Riverside South project being planned by Donald J. Trump.
Scheduled to be completed in the summer of 1995, the Manhattan West complex will contain 1,000 apartments, 800 of them market-rate rental and the rest for low-income residents.
The low-income apartments, fully integrated with the market-rate units, are available under a Federal program that provides below-market-rate financing of the development through tax-exempt bonds.


In Denmark, Reports of Links To Defendants in Bombing Case
The addresses and telephone numbers of some of the men recently convicted in the terrorist bombing of the World Trade Center have been found at the homes of two Egyptians under arrest in Denmark on arson and bomb-making charges, Danish police officials said yesterday.
Separately, a Danish newspaper reported that a fingerprint of one of the two men being held in Aarhus, Denmark, had been found in the investigations of the trade center blast, which killed six people in February 1993, and an alleged conspiracy, uncovered last summer, to bomb landmarks in New York.


A SENSE OF PLACE
ELECTRONIC potholes, information bottlenecks and data speed traps: these are the bulletins from the very first traffic report and road advisory for New Jersey travelers on the information highway.
Is this necessary?
Certainly!
More than a year ago, New Jersey Bell became the first telephone company to commit itself to link every customer within a single state to a fiber optic system.
That should happen by the year 2010.


Drink for Thought
An advertising campaign for Bass Ale is supposed to target the "thinking man." But it seems that Guinness, the company that imports the ale, might have done better with a thinking ad agency.
The campaign, which has been on for several years, this year includes some new radio spots.
One of them recounts the exploits of the famous Antarctic explorer Ernest Shackleton.
He loaded up his dog sleds with Bass for a 1921 expedition, so the ad goes.
And, "several months, and many snowcovered miles later, the explorers reached the South Pole and toasted their achievements with pints of Bass."


New Guinea
To the Editor: Reading James Heer's "A Wing, a Prayer and Papua's Back Door" (Feb. 27) brought back memories of flights within Papua New Guinea two years ago.
Flying from Madang to Karawari on Talair, I had to change planes in Mount Hagen.
The 15-minute connecting time there had me concerned, especially since the flight was 20 minutes late.
When I queried airline employees, they assured me the connecting flight to Karawari would be held.
As I disembarked a Talair employee took my ticket, asked me to point out my luggage and walked me and my luggage to the waiting flight, which left immediately.


End of the Tunnel
Suits in a new light.
More shape, more freedom, more choice.
You may barely even notice the toll.


What's Junk to Some Is Information to Others
To the Editor:
We need a law that demands guaranteed return postage on all direct-marketing mail.
Then we could keep what we want and send the rest back.
HILLIARD L. LUBIN  Camden, Me., March 17


Palm Sunday Preparations


What's Junk to Some Is Information to Others
To the Editor:
Many would be surprised to learn that list brokers access sensitive information, including medical and prescription drug records, to develop detailed profiles that are bartered for profit.
In all these applications, the information is used for purposes different from those for which the information was initially gathered.
Inaccuracies and improper disclosure can deny an individual access to basic necessities and can threaten personal and financial well-being.


Ed Zern, 83, Writer For Field &amp; Stream And Conservationist
Ed Zern, an author, conservationist, outdoorsman and illustrator, died on Friday at Stamford Hospital in Stamford, Conn.
He was 83 and had been a longtime resident of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The cause of death was Parkinson's disease, said Sandra Weiner, his companion.


Bracing for a Long, Hot, and Very Crowded Summer
Organizers call it the world's biggest gathering of gay, bisexual, cross-dressing and transsexual people, and it's coming to New York in June.
Already city officials are wrestling with the logistics of coping with the hundreds of events and the expected one-million-plus visitors.
The festivities celebrate the 25th anniversary of the so-called Stonewall Rebellion in Greenwich Village, a turning point in the gay-rights movement.
Though events are scheduled across the city, the Village will remain a symbolic focal point, and some neighbors are concerned that their narrow streets will be overwhelmed.


We'll Always Have Paris. Big Deal.
"WE want it to remind people of Paris," the architect said wistfully, describing plans announced this month to transform the bleak, windswept plaza at the World Trade Center and its disorienting underground maze beneath Lower Manhattan's twin towers into a bustling, sunlit mecca of commerce and leisure.
It's hard to fault efforts to make the World Trade Center more hospitable; but what is it about Paris that causes so many Americans to reflexively hold it up as the highest expression of the modern metropolis?


Mutual Funds; Sifting Fact From Fiction on Taxes
MANY mutual fund investors probably will be surprised by the amount of taxable income their tax-free bond funds produced in 1993.
The reason: higher bond prices last year caused by falling interest rates created capital gains for fund shareholders.
The average national municipal bond fund paid 16.03 cents a share in taxable income last year, according to Morningstar Inc.
Here are more tax myths that fund investors should watch out for:


Picasso's Studios Disgorge His Inspirations
THERE HAS NEVER BEEN AN exhibition quite like "Picasso: Sculptor/Painter" at the Tate Gallery.
There have been bigger Picasso shows -- ones that knocked us down and rolled us over -- and there have been smaller, tightly focused ones that fizzed with intellectual energy, like the one devoted to the "Demoiselles d'Avignon" at the Picasso Museum in Paris a few years ago.
But the one at the Tate is predicated on a single idea -- that the role of sculpture in Picasso's colossal output has been consistently underrated.
That idea is fairly and spaciously set out, with a great deal of new or unfamiliar work.
Not to see this show is not to know Picasso.
The art historians responsible for the exhibition (at the Tate only, through May 8), Elizabeth Cowling and John Golding, have chosen and installed 168 works in terms not of rivalry between painting and sculpture but of a dialogue between stupendous equals.
The dialogue is conducted on many levels.
And one shouldn't be surprised if from time to time the equals will exchange roles, impersonate one another or suddenly coalesce.


Bookshelf
PRAISE FOR THE SINGING: Songs for Children.
Collected by Madelaine Gill and Greg Pliska.
Illustrated by Madelaine Gill.
Little, Brown. $18.95. (All ages) These hymns and songs of praise from widely different cultures and traditions in the United States are gathered thematically.
Simple musical arrangements, charming illustrations.
STORIES FROM THE BIBLE: Old Testament Stories Retold.
By Martin Waddell.
Illustrated by Geoffrey Patterson.
Ticknor &amp; Fields. $17.95. (Ages 8 and up) The author kindly suggests that parents read his version of these 17 familiar stories along with the Bible, "not instead of it."


Kerala Visit
To the Editor: My husband and I celebrated my 50th birthday and our 30th anniversary with a trip to southern India in December.
We especially loved our week in Kerala and were delighted to see Edward A. Gargan's article "Where Monsoons and Sea Rule" (March 6).
On my birthday, we took the eight-hour, 40-mile boat trip from Quilon to Alleppey -- an experience that totally fulfilled my fantasy of how I'd most like to spend that day.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Tim Sebastian, a British writer and former BBC broadcaster, was stationed in Moscow for a long time.
When he writes about Russia and the Russian mind, he knows what he is talking about.
It is not only a story that he tells in LAST RIGHTS (Morrow, $22).
Rather, the novel is just as much about the Russian psyche: the hold that Mother Russia has on her people, no matter where they live; the idealism, cynicism, fatalism and gloom that suffuse them.
That goes as much for the new Russia as for Soviet Russia, and it is the new Russia that is examined in this book.
Plus ca change. . . .
Sharks are still below the surface, hungry and waiting.
More than 70 years of subservience to a cruel and monolithic order cannot soon be overcome.


SOMALIS SEE PACT AS A LAST CHANCE
When the American troops arrived in Somalia 15 months ago, Hassan Tahlil Kahie joined the welcoming crowds, convinced that the fighting would finally end.
But as the troops left on Friday, the 28-year-old militia commander shrugged in disinterest.
He was more concerned about the chances of success of a newly signed peace agreement among warring Somali factions.
In the last year, his hopes had been repeatedly dashed as more than five peace conferences and many more cease-fires broke down.
Now, like many other Mogadishu residents, he is optimistic, though skeptical, believing that this is Somalia's last chance at survival.


Battle for TV City: CBS v. the Cookie Baron
Tangling with big money, big reputations and big egos in the television industry can be a nasty business -- at least according to David Liederman, the founder of David's Cookies, who was sued this week by CBS Inc. over a planned restaurant venture.
Hoping to cash in on the big-time successes of theme restaurants like the Hard Rock Cafe and Planet Hollywood, Mr.
Liederman and his brother, Bill, are planning to open a 303-seat restaurant called Television City by next winter at Rockefeller Center.
Stocked with spotlights, television memorabilia and interactive television sets, the restaurant would be the first in a chain that would be expanded to Los Angeles and Las Vegas and to other countries.


Duke Goes Forward as Battle of Forwards Doesn't
Grant Hill's fanny hit the bench with 9 minutes 54 seconds to play and the Blue Devils clinging to a 46-41 lead.
The magnificent all-America forward had picked up four fouls, and now the stage was set for Purdue's superb junior forward, Glenn (Big Dog) Robinson, to put the drama back into the much anticipated showdown between the two players.
"When Grant got his fourth foul, I said a little prayer," said Duke senior forward Antonio Lang, who had 19 points.
"I said, 'I hope Glenn doesn't go off on us.' "


It's Time to Do Something About This Sexist Term 'Secretary'
To the Editor:
"As the Boss Goes, So Goes the Secretary: Is It Bias?" (front page, March 17) points out that a secretary's salary is tied to her boss's salary and is likely to be downgraded along with his, without justification.
You hardly mention that the secretary's employment itself may be so dependent.
In many instances, a secretary's employment ends when her employer retires, and with it her considerable knowledge of company activities, perhaps greater than some of the executives in it.


The Executive Computer; Reining In the Rising Hidden Costs of PC Ownership
WOULD you pay $40,000 for a personal computer? Most likely, your business already has.
According to a new study by William Kirwin, an analyst with the Gartner Group, a consulting company in Stamford, Conn., $40,000 is the typical large corporation's average five-year cost of owning a personal computer.
Far beyond the purchase price of the hardware and software are the costs of technical support -- setting up equipment, installing new programs and learning to use it all.


BRAZIL'S EMEREGING NORTHEAST
FLYING three hours beyond the Caribbean, travelers from Miami cross the Equator and discover a parallel archipelago of beaches that is still largely unknown to North Americans -- a 2,000-mile arc of white sand, turquoise sea, coconut palms, tropical fruits, fresh seafood, historic monuments and a friendly, sensuous people.
This region, Brazil's Northeast, is such an overnight sensation among Europeans and Argentines that it is expected to displace Rio de Janeiro this year as Brazil's primary tourist destination.
With weekly flights now linking Recife and Salvador with most major European capitals, the foreign tourist flow is expected to hit 1 million this year, up from 350,000 in 1992, according to a regional government tourism commission.


INSIDE
Haiti Policy Takes a Turn
The Administration is reversing its Haiti policy to focus on pressing the military for concessions rather than seeking them from the exiled President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Page 4.
No Welcome Mat for Rapist
Things have not worked as the Governor of California had hoped when he sent a notorious rapist to a desolate county to serve his parole.
Residents are up in arms.
Page 18.
U.S. to Audit Cancer Records
To help restore confidence in a breast cancer treatment after reports of falsified data, Federal officials will audit all documents at the university that coordinated the study.
Page 22.
The Crucifixion Gospels
A biblical scholar says the Gospels' descriptions of Christ's Passion are variations on a "core of memory" about Jesus's execution.
Page 22.


Presidential Nominations
To the Editor:
Marilyn Stasio's article made it clear why President Clinton was not able to acknowledge receiving Riane Eisler's book "The Chalice and the Blade," which I sent him as a gift.
Who cares that Ms.
Eisler's book has been acclaimed by Ashley Montagu as "the most important book since Darwin's 'Origin of Species' "?
So what if scholars are quoted as saying "The Chalice and the Blade" casts a new light on all of the major problems confronting us today?
It missed the mark with our President because it was not an action-driven story with substantive social content.
ANN MOLIVER RUBEN 1 Miami Lakes, Fla.


Presidential Nominations
To the Editor:
Marilyn Stasio asked for additional nominations to fill up President Clinton's crime-fiction cabinet ("The Case of Bill Clinton and 'The Concrete Blonde,' " Feb. 27).
After rigorous background checks, these candidates appear to fit the Bill:


It's Wretched News Too For Connecticut's Women
A great American philosopher, Bill Parcells, often said that most people looked at everything in sports as euphoria or disaster.
About 13 hours after the Connecticut men's team was knocked out of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, the UConn women fell to North Carolina, 81-69, in their East Regional final here at Rutgers University's Louis Brown Athletic Center.


The Nation; When Does a Young Offender Lose the Right to Privacy?
IT'S the kind of horrifying event that leaves everyone thinking something has to change.
One night earlier this month in Manalapan, N.J., according to the police, 19-year-old Kevin Aquino slipped from his parents' house into that of a neighbor, abducting 6-year-old Amanda Wengert, then sexually assaulting and killing her.
The parents, of both suspect and victim, were best friends who had taken family vacations together; the very night of the murder, they were all at a party celebrating the Aquinos' 20th anniversary.


Ivana Trump's Big Canopy That Couldn't


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
THE FRAME AS ART FORM
Frames rather than pictures are the focus of an exhibition opening today in the Simpson Galleries of the Discovery Museum in Bridgeport.
"Exploring the Borders of Art: American Frames 1820-1920" contains frames modeled on architectural styles, natural elements, Oriental and other ethnic motifs -- frames of historic significance and frames made by the artists whose pictures they contain.
The show will remain on view through May 29.
Much of the content is from the collection of Eli Wilner &amp; Company in Manhattan, the firm that framed "Madame X," a John Singer Sargent masterpiece now in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, as well as paintings by Eakins, Homer, Inness, Hassam, Ryder and other American masters housed at the Virginia Museum of Art and the Detroit Institute of Art.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST NOVEL  A YEAR OF FAVOR  By Julia MacDonnell. Morrow, $25.


Artisans' Legacy
An exhibition of African-American Craft Art at the American Craft Museum, March 16.


A Meal for Easter, With Time to Spare
THIS is a very simple Easter meal, and it has become something of a tradition in my family.
Virtually no last-minute preparation is needed, so you don't have to spend a lot of time in the kitchen after guests have arrived.
The first course is asparagus, served at room temperature, with a colorful sauce made with red and yellow peppers.
The main course is lamb, marinated overnight in mustard, garlic and soy sauce and served with potatoes roasted at the same time with sliced artichokes and fava beans.


An Appraisal; Columbus Circle's Changing Face: More Than Geometry
There are just three weeks left before the clock runs out on Mortimer Zuckerman's deal to develop the Coliseum site at Columbus Circle.
And last week, Donald Trump jumped into this less-than-charmed circle with a proposal to reclad the bleak exterior of the former Gulf and Western Building and convert the interior from offices to condominiums.
Meanwhile, one block to the north, the owners of the Mayflower Hotel are studying a plan to build an office tower.
Like the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria, these three projects could well transport Columbus, or at least his towering, century-old statue, into a whole new world.


The Art of Hitting, or What Brett Did and Jordan Is Learning to Do
It's just three years shy of a century since Willie Keeler revealed his time-honored philosophy on hitting.
After batting .432, the diminutive outfielder explained: "Hit 'em where they ain't."
It sounds simple enough, and ultimately it makes sense.


A Meal for Easter, With Time to Spare
THIS is a very simple Easter meal, and it has become something of a tradition in my family.
Virtually no last-minute preparation is needed, so you don't have to spend a lot of time in the kitchen after guests have arrived.
The first course is asparagus, served at room temperature, with a colorful sauce made with red and yellow peppers.
The main course is lamb, marinated overnight in mustard, garlic and soy sauce and served with potatoes roasted at the same time with sliced artichokes and fava beans.


On Sunday; Katie's Back, But Her Gloves Are Missing
BEVERLY FICON remembers the white glove and snood years at Katharine Gibbs School.
That was before some voices of feminism began scorning the very idea of teaching a woman to be an office secretary, as if it were capitalism's version of foot-binding.
"I came in during the era of hat and gloves, when the girls used to wear hairnets because hair was not to touch their shoulders," says Ms.
Ficon, who began 28 years ago at the Katharine Gibbs School in Montclair, N.J., and is keeper of a flame that's far from sputtering as the chain of seven office-skill schools approaches renaissance.


Source Materials
When the world gets steamy, relief is basic. Go with what you already know.


In America; Mr. Hance's 'Perfect Punishment'
Ten years ago Gayle Lewis Daniels, then 26 years old, was the only African-American on a jury in Columbus, Ga., that was deciding whether to impose the death penalty on a man named William Henry Hance.
Mr.
Hance, a black soldier from Fort Benning, had, in separate incidents in 1978, beaten two black prostitutes to death.
The victims were named Gail Faison and Irene Thirkield.


Ms. Tassone And Mr. Grimes
Elizabeth Ann Tassone, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Tassone of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Spencer Browning Grimes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
William Grimes of Greenville, S.C., and New York.
The Rev.
Thomas Pike performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Calvary Church in New York.
Mrs.
Grimes, 25, works in Atlanta as the director of marketing for the Classic Sports Network, a cable television network now in development.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is the president of the Tassone Equipment Corporation, a distributor of food service equipment and supplies in Syosset, L.I.


Writing a New Musical in the Old Style
PETER J. LOEWY was lamenting the decline of the traditional musical theater.
"Where are the shows with catchy songs, characters you actually care about, as opposed to helicopters and chandeliers, and themes that matter?" he asked.
"Whatever happened to family entertainment?"
As the producing artistic director of the Forum Theater Group, which specializes in musical revivals, Mr.
Loewy was imagining a new musical in the old style.
Then he found just the one, budding.
Nine years later, it is about to open.


Useful Ploys in Bidding
AS the market begins to gain momentum buyers may suddenly be swept into a bidding war over a house -- a phenomenon that has been picking up steam since brokers started to notice it in January.
Not all neighborhoods and all types of property are affected, and inventory on the whole remains plentiful, so it should not serve as a panic signal.
Indeed, certain areas and certain homes are still crying out for buyers.


Hidden Costs
To the Editor:
As an avid playgoer of many years, I was delighted to see an announcement for the forthcoming production of "Show Boat." In three full pages of space, however, was there no room to list the ticket prices?
And how about the cast of performers -- don't they count anymore?


Health Care Reform at Risk
The two linchpins of President Clinton's health care plan -- universal coverage and regional purchasing alliances -- are under sharp attack in Congress.
Yet the Administration has responded with dismaying diffidence.
If it waits much longer, the heart of its health care reform could be lost.
Universal coverage is the most important principle at risk.
The President's bill would provide universal coverage primarily through an employer mandate, requiring employers to pay about 80 percent of the cost of insuring workers.
But small employers bitterly oppose mandates because, they say, it will bury them in costs and force them to lay off workers.


Sabine Barnhart, Arthur Martinez
Sabine Barnhart, a daughter of Gary and Pamela Barnhart of Wichita, Kan., was married yesterday to Arthur Martinez, a son of J. Luis Martinez and Luz Maria Martinez Diaz de Villegas of New York.
The Rev.
Orlanda Brugnola, a Unitarian minister, officiated at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University.


The Cunningham Enigma Is Still Full of Surprises
THE CASE FOR MERCE Cunningham no longer needs to be made, but the case of Merce Cunningham, which is quite different, remains one of the most unusual in the history of an art form.
Here is a choreographer whose genius, in revolutionizing the very way dance can both be created and perceived, is internationally recognized and honored.
Even if one knows nothing about the underlying principles of his works, those works testify -- through their purity, originality and complexity -- to the integrity of a seminal giant in the field.
Yet for all this seriousness (or because of it), Mr.
Cunningham can hardly be considered popular in the conventional sense.
This month at the City Center, on the nights when the Cunningham dance company first performed two of his freshest and most accessible premieres, the orchestra level seats were barely filled.
Only by the initial weekend, after news had spread about these pieces -- "Breakers" and particularly "Crwdspcr" -- did the troupe attract a bigger house.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Music to Shop By
LANCE CHRISTIANSEN figures he has played the piano before a million people in the last year and a half.
Of course not everyone stays till the end.
Not with the escalators moving up and prices going down.
With Mr.
Christiansen's audiences, songs are not as important as sales.
That's the way it is when you are the house musician, but the house is a department store.
Mr.
Christiansen, of Bethpage, is a full-time pianist at the Abraham &amp; Straus store in the Roosevelt Field Shopping Center.
He rotates the piano chores with Steve Tuchman of Hempstead.
The tuxedo-clad men play a baby grand situated in the middle of glassware, next to the escalators.


Winston Lord: Where the Buck Stops on China and Human Rights
Suddenly, it seems, Winston Lord has found himself at odds with the two worlds that have defined his career.
The point man for the Clinton Administration on China, Mr.
Lord has emerged as the bane of official Washington -- including some leading members of the Administration's economic team -- which has begun to blame him both for Secretary of State Warren Christopher's confrontational trip to Beijing and for the China policy linking trade and human rights.


A Long-Lost Trove of Fabulous Fakes
EVERYONE dreams of finding authentic masterpieces in the attic.
For two art historians, finding fake John Singer Sargents in a basement was a dream come true.
An exhibition, "Parodies of the American Masters: Rediscovering the Society of American Fakirs," is displaying long-lost paintings at the Museums at Stony Brook through June 19.


TALK OF FLORIDA: HOW TO END CRIME
Seeking to calm constituents and erase Florida's image as the most crime-ridden state in the nation, legislators here have set aside many differences to craft tough new statutes with provisions like the death penalty for young killers and punishment for the parents of juvenile offenders.
Only two weeks remain in the Florida Legislature's annual session, and one bill that the lawmakers are moving toward approving will allow youths as young as 14 years old to be executed for murder.
Another measure would treat children, regardless of age, as adults after they had been incarcerated in juvenile centers three times for felonies.
Other bills would allow the authorities to make public the names of youths 17 and under who were charged with a felony and would allow cities to impose a midnight curfew on youths 16 and younger.


Commercial Property/1515 Broadway; A Reversal of Fortune for a Once-Bankrupt Building
SOMETIMES, things work out exactly as planned.
Sometimes, unforseen circumstances wreak havoc with everything.
And sometimes, just sometimes, decisions are based on assumptions that turn out to be wrong -- and things work out right anyway.
That's a good synopsis of the Equitable Life Assurance Society's odyssey with 1515 Broadway, the 54-story building between 44th and 45th Streets officially known as One Astor Plaza.
Equitable bought it with the highest of hopes during the real estate boom of the mid-80's, only to see those hopes dashed by the recession of the 90's.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TRUE CRIME  LOST LOVE  A True Story of Passion, Murder,  and Justice in Old New York.
By George Cooper.
Pantheon, $23.


A Musical's New Turn
Preview of Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Carousel" to benefit Lincoln Center Theater, March 15.


Update
30 Taxi Inspectors Plead Guilty to Extortion
In July 1992, 30 of New York City's 50 taxi inspectors were arrested and charged with taking bribes from taxi owners to overlook safety and emission violations in yellow cabs.
Investigators said the graft had potentially jeopardized the safety of passengers and contributed to the fouling of the air.
Last week, Federal and city investigators announced that all 30 defendants had pleaded guilty to Federal charges of conspiring to commit extortion.
The announcement was made as 14 of the 30 were sentenced in Federal District Court in Brooklyn to prison or jail terms ranging from three months to three years and ordered to pay various fines and restitution.
The remaining 16 defendants are to be sentenced April 19.


March 20-26: The Wages of Bad Judgment; Demotion at White House Shuts Out the Gatekeeper
Another Arkansan fell victim last week to Washington's unforgiving ways as William H. Kennedy 3d, a top White House lawyer, was stripped of his duties and assigned to less important tasks.
A former law partner of Hillary Rodham Clinton who had been the Administration's ethical gatekeeper, Mr.
Kennedy emerged as a kind of henhouse fox after it appeared that he tried to conceal damaging information about himself.
His sins: the late payment of Social Security taxes for a nanny, and delays in sharing sensitive information necessary for himself and others to obtain White House passes.
Douglas Jehl


Where the Grass Is Really Greener
When the Rockefeller family's Hudson Valley estate is thrown open to the public on May 4, visitors will detect plenty of clues that John D. and his heirs didn't put much stock in frippery -- the Beaux-Arts mansion, designed in 1906 by Delano &amp; Aldrich, doesn't even have a proper front door.
Rather, you enter through a carriage drop-off.
Kykuit (Dutch for lookout) was Nelson Rockefeller's bequest to the National Trust for Historic Preservation, which came as news to family members still living on the property.
Consequently, tours of the house and its Italianate gardens will be carefully restricted and chaperoned, lending what small frisson of excitement there is to peering at modest 1970's-styled interiors, complete with reproduction Chippendale furniture and a connoisseur's collection of china.
Only a few curtained windows look directly out at the glorious river view.
No matter, for it is the formal gardens, with their parterres, boxwood hedges, romantic arbors and linden allees that make the visit so otherworldly.
Some 20 fountains account for the ever-present trill of water; every perspective is punctuated with a modern sculpture.
But if breathtaking landscapes don't appeal, there are the cars, the oldest a road coach from 1892.
The Rockefellers used Kykuit only on weekends.
The public is luckier.
It will be able to book reservations any time from April to October.


The Positive Power of Negative Thinking
Does it make sense that a Paul Strand vintage print should be insured for $200,000, while the negative from which it was made should be insured for only $200?
John Loengard, a former Life photographer and picture editor, thinks not.
In "The Negative Project," a show of 34 photographs at the James Danziger Gallery (through April 16) and "Speaking for the Negative," a book to be published by Arcade in October, Mr.
Loengard underscores the value and unique quality of negatives.
Some years ago he set out to track down and photograph the negatives of famous pictures.
Here are five of them, along with his comments.
ANDRE KERTESZ
"Satiric Dancer," 1926
A year after Andre Kertesz arrived in Paris from Budapest at the age of 31, he was clowning around with some Hungarian pals in the sculptor Istvan Beothy's studio.
The dancer Magda Forstner mimicked the host's statuary while Kertesz, with his small glass-plate camera, recorded her jest.
WYNN BULLOCK


Total Immersion
To the Editor:
Emotional impact is what I want from live theater.
Don't separate me from the living actors to the extent that they might as well be puppets.
For a fraction of the cost of Broadway, I can experience excellent live theater at our local playhouses, where I really "see" shows and can be immersed in them.
SHEILA BUNIN  Tappan, N. Y.


POSTINGS: A $100 Million Job; Grand Central Renovation Team
Hoping to repeat the "astounding success" of the Union Station redevelopment in Washington, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has selected the same real estate team to help plan and manage the $100 million renovation of Grand Central Terminal.
The redevelopment team is composed of LaSalle Partners, based in Chicago, and Williams Jackson Ewing, of Baltimore.
Other finalists included Rose Associates and Tishman Speyer, both of New York.


U.S. AGAIN SHIFTS ITS POLICY ON HAITI
Stung by criticism from Congress and human-rights groups that its Haiti policy has reached a dead end, the Clinton Administration is reversing itself and will focus on wringing concessions from the Haitian military rather than from the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
In an effort to increase the chances of restoring democracy and forcing Haiti's military leaders to step down, Administration officials say the United States plans steps that include tightening the trade embargo on Haiti and jettisoning a United States-backed plan that Father Aristide had rejected because it called on him to make concessions without providing assurances that Haiti's military would cede power.


At a Renamed Gallery, a Fresh Start
THE telephone company has changed its name, and so has the venerable Kornbluth Gallery here.
Under the direction of Sally Walker, Lillian Kornbluth's assistant for about five years, it has become Walker-Korn bluth and, not to press the corporate analogy, seems none the worse for the change.
If anything, there is a sense of a fresh start about the current exhibition by Byron Browne, Stephen Greene and John Heliker, painters who, in their different ways, define the midcentury watershed in American art.


GOD IN HIS KINGDOM
The distinction between the historical and the trivial has no place in Washington.
If you're really big, nothing about you is too small.
Thus the green suspenders with blue border that Larry King wore on the night of the great Nafta debate are now museologically secure, safely a part of the national patrimony.
The invitation to last week's lunch at Planet Hollywood was quaintly reverential: "You are cordially invited to Larry King's presentation of the telephone he used for his first radio show and suspenders he wore when moderating the Al Gore-Ross Perot debate to Planet Hollywood's collection of movie, television and sports memorabilia." (The whereabouts of the garters that held up F.D.R.'s socks at Yalta, by contrast, is unknown.)


Panama Coming Back Onto Tourist Scene
FOR years after the 1989 United States invasion that unseated the military dictator Manuel Antonio Noriega, Panama languished in the doldrums as a travel destination.
Benefiting lately from the spread of peace in Central America, however, Panama is making a comeback.
According to Government figures, in 1993 there were 332,850 visitors, up from a low of 187,307 in 1989.
Like some of its Central American neighbors, Panama has large, unspoiled rain forests, uncrowded beaches and distinctive Indian cultures that have managed to preserve their traditional ways of life against Western-style development.


The Freedom to Choose Doctors: What Freedom?
THE LAST TIME I TRIED TO donate blood, the nurse declared me anemic on the basis of a routine finger-prick test.
So I called my internist to ask whether I should redo an extensive battery of blood tests I had passed only two months earlier.
Barely concealing contempt, he snorted: "If you belonged to an H.M.O., the answer would be no! But because you're my patient, the answer is yes."


Health Plan Must Preserve Doctor-Patient Ties; Long-Term Care
To the Editor:
As we grope toward a long-term health care policy, only one model, the continuing care retirement community, incorporates all the essential elements: independent living as long as possible, individual health assessment and managed care in a variety of settings -- ambulatory primary care with emphasis on prevention, home care, assisted living, skilled nursing, hospice-type terminal care -- prescription drugs, social and spiritual supports and insurance covering all or most of the above.


Frank Wozencraft, 70, Former Justice Official
Frank M. Wozencraft, a Texas lawyer for almost 40 years and an Assistant Attorney General under President Lyndon B. Johnson, died on Friday while on vacation in Carmel, Calif.
He was 70 and lived in Houston.
The cause was pneumonia, said his wife, Shirley Wozencraft.


What's Junk to Some Is Information to Others
To the Editor:
While conventional wisdom dictates that we all roundly despise direct mail and every shabby thing it stands for, most of us are shamefully using it to buy more and more each year -- 55 percent of the population bought via phone or mail in 1992 to the tune of an estimated $113 billion in consumer sales.


The Romance of Flannel
A double sleeping bag might be nice, or matching flannel nightshirts.
With the renaissance of monogamy and the return to hearth and home that are supposed to characterize the 90's, it makes perfect sense that L. L. Bean is reintroducing its gift registry for down-to-earth brides and grooms.
The mail-order company had an unrequited flirtation with a registry in the 1980's, during the age of the Porsche.
Now, it's the age of the Jeep, and 175 couples have signed up.
No threat to Tiffany, but a company spokeswoman suggests that L. L. Bean is perfect for second-timers with children in tow.
First the wedding -- then a camping honeymoon for the whole family.


Two Trips With a Single Focus: Chinese Art
Two tours for devotees of Chinese art this spring offer different geographical approaches to the subject.
"Art and Empires -- Treasures from China in Imperial Europe," May 14 to 25, sponsored by the China Institute in America, acknowledges that many of the world's greatest treasures are no longer in their mother countries.
Bypassing China altogether, this tour starts in Stockholm, proceeds to St.
Petersburg and ends in Istanbul.


Maternity-Bed Persists
Despite low occupancy rates at Harlem's maternity units and a recent legal setback, two civil rights organizations are continuing their battle to restore a full ward at St.
Luke's-Roosevel Hospital, at 114th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
Part of the unit, which in 1991 was supposed to be moved to 59th Street as part of an overall merger of St.
Luke's and Roosevelt, was kept at 114th Street after protests that Harlem could not afford to lose the beds.


The Lineup
No, officer. I don't remember his face, but I'd know those shorts anywhere.


Funeral Held for Five Children Killed in House Fire


Small Businesses And Tax Groups Question Proposal To Raise Sales Tax
WHEN County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke announced Monday during his annual State of the County Address here that he wanted to increase the sales tax in most Westchester communities by half a percentage point, Town Supervisor John A. Lombardi of North Castle and other municipal officials in the audience shrugged their shoulders in response.
"We're not crazy about it, but what's the alternative?" Mr.
Lombardi said.
"We can't continue to punish the property owner, and if we can't raise taxes one way, we have to look at another.


Deja Who
One afternoon 20 years ago, Keith Moon goodnaturedly whipped a record album across a Boston hotel room at me.
There were no injuries; felicitous air currents within the suite brought the thing harmlessly to rest among the folds of some tastefully muted drapes.
I assumed, at the time, that the Who's notoriously madcap drummer was just trying to be civil to a bumbling college interviewer.
But subsequent events have caused me to re-examine the incident.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES Volume One: Hopes Betrayed, 1883-1920 By Robert Skidelsky.
Penguin, $15.95.
This biography examines the ethical philosophy as well as the intellectual brilliance of one of the world's greatest economists, giving full attention to his homosexuality and the guilt he felt over his British Government role during World War I. Selected as one of the best books of 1986 by the editors of the Book Review, it is a "brilliant achievement," Robert L. Heilbroner said here.


Why Neighbors Oppose West Side Shelter Program
To the Editor:
In "Shelter to Take Fewer Mentally Ill Clients" (March 6), you reported that hundreds of community residents shouted down the Volunteers of America and political officials at a meeting.
That accurately portrayed the opposition to the V.O.A. residence proposed at 2643 Broadway.


In Economic Pain, Ukraine Searches for Direction
It is here in Kharkov, a sprawling industrial city of two million people that was the capital of Soviet Ukraine in the 1920's, that the Ukrainian dream of prosperous independence can seem most hollow.
In this city less than 30 miles from Russia, where salaries for the same work are nearly six times higher because of the relatively stronger ruble, fury with Kiev's economic mismanagement is pushing people to look more and more toward some form of reassociation with Russia.


My Child, My Dog  To the Editor:    The idea that "dogs are child substitutes" and "children are dog substitutes" hit me in the face like a brick after I had read Emily Prager's "Fashion Unleashed" (Feb. 20).


Tennis Club Staves Off The End
The doors of the city's only black-owned tennis club are still open, four months after the owner was supposed to close up shop to make way for moderate-to-middle-income housing in the Atlantic Center, a commercial and residential complex.
"The bulldozers are swirling around the building, but they haven't touched us," Richard Northern, the club's owner and founder, said last week.
"I think that's a good sign."


Miss Albertson And Mr. Zirk
Judianne Albertson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerry L. Albertson of Birmingham, Ala., was married yesterday to Kenneth Robert Zirk, a son of Anton Zirk of Thousand Oaks, Calif., and Elizabeth Duddleston of Warwick, N.Y.
Msgr.
Francis Bellew performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The bride, 29, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is a vice president in the capital markets division of Citibank in New York.


The Sorry State Of City Buildings
To the Editor:
I read with much interest the interview with William J. Diamond  [ "New Commissioner Says Conditions Are 'Atrocious,' " Feb. 20 ]  in which the new head of the city's Department of General Services deplores the condition of city-owned office buildings as "atrocious," stating that there has been a "massive disinvestment" in these buildings "over at least four years."


Elmsford Offers 'Evita' in Different Guise
THERE is just one way to stage "Evita" the Harold Prince way.
Nothing else will do, so goes a theatrically viable theory.
Let other musicals demand reinterpretation, reconstruction, deconstruction or any fashionable directorial reimagining of the moment.
This one is diamond set, from start to finish.
If every original idea, every step, is faithfully, precisely re-created, the result is tremendous.
Several productions that superimposed alternatives or disregarded essentials invited disaster, and disaster came.


Backstage Jitters
Uptown -- Last Monday, on Oscar night, many show business people were trying not to look nervous.
Jackie Mason wasn't among them.
"I'm not the type to get nervous before a show," he said in his dressing room at the Golden Theater, where the first preview of his latest, "Politically Incorrect," was to begin shortly.


POSTINGS: Upper East Side Historic District; Putting 1 House Where 2 Are
Two adjoining three-story brick houses on 65th Street just off Fifth Avenue have been bought by the record producer David Geffen, who is expected to demolish them and build one house on the site.
They total 34 feet, far wider than the average brownstone.
The prices were $1.7 million for No. 7 1/2 and $2.25 million for No. 9.
Clark Halstead, managing partner of the real estate company that bears his name, said that even if Mr.
Geffen spent $5 million more to raze them and build a grander place, "he'd still be doing fine."


Conflict Casts Uncomfortable Light on Marino
His top aide sometimes whispers answers in his ear at news conferences, and if there is anyone around to defer to, Ralph J. Marino, the most powerful Republican in state government, usually will.
Though colleagues say the gentlemanly Mr.
Marino is in quiet but firm command of the State Senate that he presides over as majority leader, he has never aspired to be a dynamic or visible spokesman for Republicans statewide.
And in his trademark mumble the other day, Mr.
Marino deferred again, saying there are others in the party far better suited than he to decide who will run against the Democratic Governor, Mario M. Cuomo.


March 20-26: A Vote for Continuity; Salvadorans Contemplate Future and Opt for Present
Voters in the first national elections since a peace accord was reached two years ago chose continuity over sweeping but uncertain reform after 12 years of civil war in El Salvador.
In elections marred by charges of government manipulation of voter registration rules, Armando Calderon Sol, the presidential candidate of the governing rightist Arena party, just missed the victory that would have spared him a runoff next month.
HOWARD W. FRENCH


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Barbara Hutton House Is a Mexican Hotel
Barbara Hutton's estate in Cuernavaca, 50 miles south of Mexico City, is the site of a new hotel recently opened by Camino Real, a Mexican chain.
The building was constructed for the late Woolworth heiress with materials from Japan and housed her collection of Asian art and furnishings.
The original structure has been incorporated into the 163-room hotel, which is surrounded by landscaped gardens.
Room rates currently range from $170 to $210 and suites are $400 and $600 a night.
Packages are also available.
More information or reservations: (800) 722-6466.
A Four Seasons Hotel opened this month in Mexico City, the first Mexican venture by Four Seasons/Regent Hotels and Resorts.


(Pennsylvania) Dutch Treats
DAVID WENGERD says he's a farmer.
But several times a week, the bearded and behatted Mr.
Wengerd navigates the waters of commercial Manhattan, hawking his homemade pies and cheeses and handcarved furniture in the most uncountrylike of settings.
Mr.
Wengerd, who is Amish, operates two stores, Dutch Country Natural in Grand Central Terminal and Amish Farms on the western edge of Union Square.
Though both stores sell New York staples like bagels and Snapple, the specialty is goods made by the 13-member Wengerd family and their Amish neighbors in Bloomsburg, Pa.


Arkansas Has No Easy Assignment In Its Showdown Against Michigan
For all the excitement over the upsets in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, the penultimate weekend of men's competition boiled down to greatness.
While today's Duke-Purdue Southeast Regional final in Knoxville, Tenn., offered a match of two outstanding players -- the Boilermakers' Glenn Robinson versus the Blue Devils' Grant Hill -- the Midwest Regional final here at Reunion Arena on Sunday will match two great teams: top-ranked Arkansas and the Michigan Wolverines.
Put another way, it's "40 minutes of hell" versus the Fab Five, minus one.


On the Takeover Of a Police Department
Re: South Hackensack Journal, "County's Takeover of Police Department Angers Residents," Feb. 20:
An occupation like the police service is one that has more of an attraction than just a earning a living.
It has the further appeal of bestowing power to its members.


The Lure of Literature
AN entire guidebook to the cemeteries of Paris, "Permanent Parisians" by Judi Culbertson and Tom Randall, caters to those who come to the city of romance and light to track the famous to their tombs.
The "Blue Guide: Literary Britain and Ireland" and books like "Isak Dinesen's Africa" and "James Joyce's Ireland," by David Pierce, direct those who derive an esthetic and touristic satisfaction from standing where something happened in writers' lives or in their books.
It's an impulse as old as the quills, older in fact.
In antiquity, young Roman noblemen, touring Greece as part of their higher education, delighted in visiting literary and mythological sites -- the marketplace where Socrates taught, the cliff from which lovesick Sappho leaped to her death, the plain where Troy burned, causing the Trojan hero Aeneas to flee to Italy, where he sired a line that descended to their own emperor Augustus.
This last was a piece of mythology that the poet Virgil had made into a kind of holy book to justify Rome's place in history, and his "Aeneid" sent hundreds of togaed visitors to Troy, where it all began.


From 'Riverrun' To Cyberspace
RONALD WEITZ spends his days in Brooklyn, overseeing a squad of city social workers who try to find help for cocaine-addicted babies.
But every few weeks he takes up a well-worn paperback, tones up his self-taught brogue and joins two dozen other New Yorkers to plumb the richly double-entendre'd depths of "Finnegans Wake." They read, reread and try to filter meaning from a few pages at a time.
Three years beyond "Riverrun," they are still only 447 pages deep.


Islanders' Profile Suffers a Blow Against the Panthers
The Islanders, unable for the fourth time this season to tame the upstart Florida Panthers, took another giant step toward playoff obscurity this afternoon before a judgmental crowd of 13,835 at Nassau Coliseum.
The spectators definitely did not get the valiant matinee performance they felt they had paid for.
Neither did Coach Al Arbour, who thought that the loss "exposed a lack of character" on the part of more than just a few of his players.


One Moment Please, Before Digging In
NOW that spring has come, gardeners are eager to get outdoors and begin.
But patience is necessary.
Winter was long.
The melting snow has been seeping into the ground and making it very wet.
Don't forget, too, the old rhyme that "April showers bring May flowers." The next few weeks may be tricky.
Heavy rainfall could cause even soggier soil.
Any wet soil can be ruined by carelessly treading on it.
The tracks made on wet lawns, which are especially vulnerable, are difficult to wipe out.
Heavy foot marks from too eager gardeners or even youngsters at play can damage a lawn because the soil becomes compacted and the tiny wisps of new grass have a difficult time emerging.


A New Air Terminal For Manchester, N.H.
A new, three-story passenger terminal has opened at Manchester Airport in New Hampshire.
Nine airlines, including USAir, United and Continental, operate from the airport, which is in southern New Hampshire just off Interstate 93.
The airlines fly to domestic and North American cities, major European destinations, Israel and some Caribbean islands.


WHITE HOUSE AIDE BECOMES SUBJECT OF NEW INQUIRIES
The White House and the Whitewater special prosecutor are conducting separate inquiries into whether a senior aide to President Clinton acted improperly last month by raising questions about the hiring of a high-profile Republican lawyer to look into the bankruptcy of an Arkansas savings and loan.
Thomas F. McLarty 3d, the White House chief of staff, ordered the internal review on Friday night after learning that the prosecutor was looking into a conversation on Feb. 25 between George Stephanopoulos, one of Mr.
Clinton's closest aides, and Joshua Steiner, a close friend of Mr.
Stephanopoulos who is the Treasury Department chief of staff.


What's Junk to Some Is Information to Others
To the Editor:
As an executive of a midsize catalogue and direct marketing company, I object to Deborah L. Jacobs's portraying advertising mail as "junk" and ad mailers as invaders of others' privacy ("They've Got Your Name. You've Got Their Junk," March 13).


His Favorite Things
A CHEF'S TALE A Memoir of Food, France and America.
By Pierre Franey with Richard Flaste and Bryan Miller.
Illustrated. 259 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Worldly Cities of Iron (and Angels)
IT WAS THE WORST OF TIMES, IT WAS THE WORST OF times.
Historians have dealt harshly with the period following the revolutions that swept through the cities of Europe in 1848.
Repressive, reactionary, stuffed with overblown eclectic buildings, the third quarter of the 19th century was dominated by bad faith and bad taste.
Yet this was also the era that gave us the cosmopolis, the dazzling hub of industrial and imperial prosperity, a place designed to be not only a home to its citizens but also a host to the rest of the world.
The year 1848 is remembered more for barricades than for buildings; in France, Italy, Germany, Austria and Spain, workers and students took to the streets to fight for a litany of socialist demands.
The year is also remembered as a time of disillusionment, a season when European artists and intellectuals lost their faith in social progress.
Many artists adopted the oppositional stance that persists, in somewhat fossilized form, to this day.
But something more profound than utopian hope perished in the uprisings of 1848.
Neither wholly of the middle class nor fully estranged from it, many artists lost a clear sense of which side of the barricades they were on.
That perplexity, the gnawing sense of doubt and displacement underlying the epoch's showy display of confidence, is what is most compelling about architecture and urbanism in the years after 1848.


A Few Thousand Women, Networking
FOR more than 20 years, the singer Judy Collins left her finances to her business manager and concentrated on her art.
"I never wrote a check," she told a luncheon audience of several hundred businesswomen the other day.
One day in the late 1970's, the manager told her she had no money to pay taxes.
That was the end of innocence.
She is now her own manager, for an artistic career that includes writing books as well as performing.
"I broke personal barriers to learn how to do it," she said, seguing into a stanza of the Mimi Farina song "Bread and Roses," a feminist anthem that celebrates the struggle for both art and a living wage.
Now, Ms.
Collins said, "Nothing thrills me more than to pay my quarterly taxes. I sing with joy."


Congressional Compromise; Clinton's Health Plan: Not as Dead as It Looks
PRESIDENT CLINTON'S health care bill got nowhere in Congress last week.
But his cause of health insurance for all Americans made substantial progress.
The difference lies in the way Congress works, and underscores the danger of treating the government and the President as one and the same.
If major health care legislation is passed, it will be a long, slogging fight.
It will take compromises piled on compromises, and it will take patience.
That is the way major legislation gets enacted.


At Work; The Women Behind McDonald's
TO most people in New York, a bagel is breakfast or, at most, a way to accessorize lox.
To Isabelle Villasenor one day last week, it was a lesson in business development.
Ms.
Villasenor, the owner and operator of four McDonald's franchises in Southern California, including one at the John Wayne Airport in Orange County, came bursting out of a McDonald's in midtown Manhattan, her handbag clutched under an arm, cupping a shrink-wrapped pumpernickel bagel and pack of cream cheese in two hands, as if carrying a communion chalice.
Ms.
Villasenor showed her prize to Sally Allen, an owner and operator of seven franchises from El Paso,, saying, "Look at this." She peppered the restaurant's supervisor, Albert Velasquez, with questions: "Do you wrap this here? How do you do it? Do you need a special machine?"


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the views of two ex-convicts on sentencing laws misstated the date on which California's new "three-strikes-and-you're-out" statute was signed.
It was March 7, not March 17.
The article also misstated the age of the Delancey Street Foundation, a self-help organization for felons and addicts in San Francisco.
It is 23 years old, not 25 years.


A Second-String Casanova in Free Fall, N.J.
WHAT IS TOLD By Askold Melnyczuk. 201 pp. Boston: Faber &amp; Faber. $21.95.


Diane LaScala, M. E. Bordonaro
Diane Marie LaScala, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Serie LaScala of Smithtown, L.I., was married there yesterday to Michael Edward Bordonaro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Bordonaro of Palm Coast, Fla.
The Rev.
Robert Brennan performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church.


Mugga's Night of Terror
IT is 5 P.M. and Mugga has beaten the crowds to the Academy Theater on West 43d Street.
She is two hours early.
And why shouldn't she be?
She isn't about to blow her big chance stuck on the IRT or lost among the throngs of fans outside the theater.
HBO's "Def Comedy Jam" is taping tonight, a big step for a 22-year-old comedienne who spends her nights bouncing from small club to small club.
Mugga needs time to think before being thrown to the wolves.
An hour later, she is six flights up from the stage, sweating bullets as she sits in an overheated dressing room with the window open.


Shakespearean Role Models? Forget It
To the Editor:
"Ugg a Wugg," Frank Rich's entertaining March 13 column, pokes fun at a teacher who would not let students attend a performance of "Romeo and Juliet" because it is a "blatantly heterosexual love story." Yet this is a problematic play for parents and teachers.


Expect Reports of Sightings of Elvis's Stuff
IT'S HIP-SWIVELING TIME AT THE auctions.
Over the next two months, Elvis Presley's persona will be recalled in music and memorabilia from Los Angeles to London to promote the sale in Las Vegas on June 19 of the largest collection of Presleyana ever auctioned.
Prior to the event, the organizer, Butterfield &amp; Butterfield, will exhibit the 1,000 items at its auction galleries in San Francisco and Los Angeles and will send 100 important objects to previews in London and New York.
"I never idolized Elvis," says Jimmy Velvet, the 54-year-old owner of the collection who was a friend of Presley's and the founder of the Elvis Presley Museums.
"But I knew he was the greatest talent, a wonderful man and the most popular person in the world."


Benefits
Night of Soup  TUESDAY -- Women Aware, which provides shelter and services to battered women and their families in Middlesex County, N.J., will sponsor an evening of soup tasting to raise funds for a program to support the children of battered women.
Soup -- 14 varieties -- will be served from 6 to 8 P.M., to the accompaniment of live music, at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in New Brunswick, N.J.
Tickets, $30, from (908) 937-9525, or $35 at the door.
Broadway's Hat Show  TUESDAY -- Broadway's eighth annual Easter Bonnet Competition: A Salute to 100 Years of Broadway will be at the Minskoff Theater.
Performers and others associated with 20 Broadway and Off-Broadway shows will vie to produce the most appealing bonnets in the Easter tradition.
The program will feature a musical revue in which Chita Rivera, Tony Roberts, Gwen Verdon, Geoffrey Holder and others are scheduled to perform.
Other prominent entertainers will present hats at the show, which begins at 4 P.M.
The show will benefit Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS.
Tickets are $20 and are on sale for cash only at the Minskoff box office.
Recorded information: (212) 978-0295.
Helping the Kitchen  SATURDAY -- Faced with a reduction in financing from the National Endowment for the Arts, the Kitchen, a showcase of avant-garde works in the performing arts, is holding a fund-raiser.
At 3 P.M., there will be a performance of "Twilight: Los Angeles" at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street at Astor Place.
A reception follows at the Paula Cooper Gallery, 149 Wooster Street at Houston.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 255-5793.
Benefit for Musicians  APRIL 4 -- The annual prize-winners' concert sponsored by New Music for Young Ensembles, which promotes emerging professional musicians, will be at the Weill Recital Hall at Carnegie Hall at 7:30 P.M.
A reception will follow at Steinway Hall across the street.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 877-1999.
A Nonprofit Umbrella  APRIL 5 -- The Nonprofit Coordinating Committee of New York, an association of nonprofit groups, will celebrate its 10th anniversary with a black-tie benefit at the Grand Hyatt.
Charlie Rose, the television interviewer, will be the host.
There will be a reception at 6:30 P.M., and dinner at 7:30.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 463-0684.


F.T.C. Has a Strong Record on Ads
To the Editor:
In "To Stop Sneaky Ads, Stir Up the F.T.C." (Viewpoints, March 6), Bruce Silverglade asserts that the Federal Trade Commission has failed aggressively to pursue cases of deceptive advertising.
In fact, the F.T.C. has recently issued a significant number of advertising cases and other consumer protection actions despite ever-tightening resources and a staff of fewer than 1,000 people.
Further, several of the examples Mr.
Silverglade cited just don't support his case.
Misleading airline advertising, for example, is specifically excluded from the F.T.C.'s jurisdiction.
In another example, he cited an ad from the toy maker Hasbro; the company, in fact, was placed under an F.T.C. order last year and has agreed to pay $215,000 in civil penalties involving earlier ads.


Calhoun's Reasons To Smile At UConn
The journey had actually begun a year before, immediately following a National Invitation Tournament loss in a 15-13 season, with a moment of anger, embarrassment and resolve.
That is when Jim Calhoun, the coach of the Connecticut Huskies, spat out the declaration -- "This will never happen again" -- that established the workmanlike approach that helped create a memorable season.
It was not a championship season, because the disappearance of a 10-point lead in the second half became a 69-60 overtime loss to Florida and an abrupt end to a 29-5 season.
The first-place finish in the revived Big East -- by a conference-record three-game margin -- is not regarded as a championship.
The team that came within one step of matching the longest trip any of Connecticut's 17 N.C.A.A. teams have taken in the tournament became another casualty in an East Regional of surprising results.
Season Worth Treasuring
And yet for all the high standards the Huskies have created, and all the imperfections to be dissected at the end, the lasting memory is the contrast between the coach's embarrassed resolve of a year ago and the words that tumbled out early this morning.


The World Underground


OUT OF SIGHT, OUT OF OUR MINDS
Those of us close to the nuclear energy industry have known for some time that it was imprudent to bury so-called spent fuel elements as "waste" ("Out of Sight, Out of Our Minds," by Kai Erikson, March 6).
The material is, indeed, still useful and valuable and should be recycled as we recycle everything else from beer cans to newspapers.
We in the industry had about given in to the politics of the situation thinking it was perhaps better to bury the material permanently than insist on doing things "right," because the plant sites are quickly running out of temporary storage space.
Prairie Island in Minnesota may well be the first plant to face the decision to shut down or find another location for temporary storage until the promised Federal disposal facility is available.


By George!
To the Editor:
In his fascinating article on America through Russian eyes ("Under Eastern Eyes: What America Meant to the Writers of Russia," Feb. 27), David Plante observes that there are "very few" references to America in Tolstoy.
One Tolstoy reference Mr.
Plante might have noted struck George Kennan with singular force when Mr.
Kennan was Ambassador to Moscow.


A Corrections: Insurance Coverage
A front-page chart last Sunday about the health-insurance coverage of workers on Long Island reversed the identifications of the uninsured and those covered by public insurance (Medicare and Medicaid).
This is a corrected chart.


Corrections
A picture caption on March 8 with an article about foster care for the elderly incorrectly described the financial arrangement Mary Taub has at her home with the Mondonedo family in Yonkers.
Mrs.
Taub pays the Mondonedos herself; the state does not pay for her care.


Q. &amp; A.
Board Says The Price Isn't Right  Q. My co-op board recently turned down a prospective buyer for a tenant's apartment with the excuse that the tenant's selling price was so low it would devalue the market value of apartments in the building.
He wanted to sell his studio apartment for $65,000 and the board said he could not sell it for less than $75,000.
Does the board have the legal right to make this price determination? -- Virginia Munday, Manhattan


Topics of The Times; Dvorak Sympathy
One of New York City's least viewed statues is a life-size bronze of the Czech composer and onetime New Yorker Antonin Dvorak, a gift to the New York Philharmonic 30 years ago by an association of Czechoslovak-Americans.
He has stood ever since on the roof of Avery Fisher Hall, the Philharmonic's home in Lincoln Center.
The thought had been that his presence would be appropriate to the then-new Lincoln Center, under construction at the time; he had composed his most familiar symphony, "From the New World," while living in the city in the 1890's.
Nice thought, but nothing came of it.


Wall Street; Data Technology I.P.O.'s Just Keep Rolling Along
ANOTHER year, another record.
Richard A. Shaffer, who runs Technologic Partners in New York, expects that 1994 will be yet another record year for initial public offerings among information science companies -- outfits in the software and computer business.
In his Venture Finance newsletter that will soon go out to clients, Mr.
Shaffer predicts that between 100 and 120 companies in the group will go public this year.
That's up from 89 in 1993, and a big jump from the 22 that went public in 1988.
I.P.O.'s in Mr.
Shaffer's tech world used to move in crazier boom-or-bust spurts, with the going-public window of opportunity in good markets staying open several months, followed by a dry spell of several years, he said.
"But this market has been going on for quite some time now, and the appetite doesn't seem to be abating," he said.


Britain's Answer To Barney
Americans may ooh and ah over Anthony Hopkins and Emma Thompson.
The British prefer Mr.
Blobby.
Seven feet tall and shaped like a bowling pin, Mr.
Blobby began his life as a doodle.
He was intended as a minor, ephemeral character on a BBC show called "Noel's House Party." Now he enjoys all the perks -- and anxieties -- of a media superstar.


Gun Peddlers Start Selling Door to Door
Perhaps it was bound to happen.
Illicit gun dealers have taken a leaf from Fuller Brush men and Avon ladies, going door-to-door to offer revolvers, assault rifles and even bogus gun permits, store owners along Nostrand Avenue say.
A half-dozen merchants interviewed last week said they had been approached in the last six months.
Other storeowners said the gun sales were common knowledge.


Diversity of Residents Is Reflection Of a Changing Central New Jersey
Preeti Sanghavi came to Durham Woods from India by way of Texas.
Chao-Tsun Yen came to Durham Woods from Taiwan by way of Brooklyn.
Michael Adeyemo came to Durham Woods from Nigeria by way of Alabama.
George Moices came to Durham Woods directly from Brooklyn.
In so doing, they joined an international bazaar of 1,500 residents in an apartment complex where so many people look and talk differently but wish and hope for the same things.
A mix of middle-income professionals and members of the working class -- security guards, store owners, salesmen, teachers, police officers, warehouse managers, computer operators, chemists -- they constitute the full backbone of working America.
Resigned to toiling hard for their money, they came here for opportunity, a touch of the bucolic and suburban equanimity.
A Dissimilar Group
In these respects, Durham Woods affords a telling snapshot of the swarm of people who have converged on bulging central New Jersey during the last decade or so, a far more dissimilar lot than this state has been accustomed to.


Rhymes With Sheila
Milla Jovovich is no ordinary model-actress-whatever.
She's a model-actress-singer-whatever who has crossed over almost as many careers in her short, happy life as has Madonna -- and at half her age.
Her multimedia resume so far: At 11, her first cover, for the Italian fashion magazine Lei.
At 14, her first top billing in a movie, "Return to the Blue Lagoon." Now, at 18, she has her first album, "The Divine Comedy," which will be released on the SBK/ERG label early next month.
Her slavic name has been truncated to, simply, Milla, in anticipation of its impending famousness.


British Tourist Is Shot in Manhattan Hotel
A British tourist was shot in the shoulder yesterday afternoon in a mugging at the New York Hilton in midtown Manhattan, the police said.
The tourist, Peter Cooper, 46, who was staying in a room on the 26th floor of the hotel, on the Avenue of the Americas at 53d Street, was confronted by a man outside his door around 4 P.M., the police said.
They said the man shot Mr.
Cooper in the right shoulder and fled with his wallet.
A police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis, said last night that he could not say whether Mr.
Cooper had struggled with his assailant or how much money had been taken.


Billion-Dollar Barbie
When Qin Shi Huang Di, the first Emperor of China, died in 210 B.C., he left behind the Great Wall and a tomb with 6,000 neatly arranged life-size terra cotta soldiers and horses.
What will modern civilization leave behind?
Eight hundred million Barbie dolls, a number that almost equals the population of India.
This month marks Barbie's 35th birthday, and worldwide sales now top $1 billion a year.
The Barbies shown above, spun off the assembly line, hand-painted and awaiting finishing touches, do resemble terra cotta soldiers, or perhaps stockpiled weapons in a trade war, which is oddly fitting.
Barbie's creator, the late Jack Ryan, had another career as a missile designer.


The Surprising Suitability Of Your Wardrobe
THE NEW CASUAL.
CASUAL ELEGANCE.
ELEGANT INFORMALITY.
INFORMAL formality.
Formal relaxation.
Relaxed tailoring.
Tailored Casualness.
How many different ways can they say it?
Folks pushing fabric want you to loosen up.
But smoking isn't the only sticky habit.
About two years ago, certain branches of Chase Manhattan Bank inaugurated let-it-all-hang-out Fridays.
To make sure its pin-striped employees got the message that the management meant this with all its heart, T-shirts emblazoned with the company logo were distributed.
Sure enough, on that initial Friday, Tina Nederlander, editor at large for the electronic shopping service Q2, remembers walking into her branch and seeing all the men in Chase T-shirts -- over their shirts and ties.


Rapist Isn't Exiled Far Enough for Community in Wilderness
Earlier this month, Gov.
Pete Wilson pledged that when a notorious rapist named Melvin Carter was paroled from prison, he would be kept out of populated areas -- banished, the Governor promised, "out in the wilderness someplace."
In 20th-century California, it is hard to imagine a wilder area than the Devil's Garden Conservation Camp, a minimum-security institution three miles up a hillside along a gravel washboard called County Road 73.
This is where Mr.
Carter arrived after dark on March 17, hidden in the trunk of a car so an alarmed citizenry would not see him.
Here, where the high desert of California bleeds into Nevada and Oregon, lies one of the state's emptiest areas.
Not Exactly as Planned
But things have not worked as Governor Wilson had hoped.
Though Modoc County is desolate, nearly 10,000 people call it home.
And many of them are now obsessed with Mr.
Carter, who admitted assaulting 100 women in the San Francisco Bay area in the 1970's and served half his 25-year sentence.


Still Speaking After Writing 'The Ref'
WITHIN THE DIALOGUE-DRIVEN comedy of "The Ref," starring Denis Leary, Judy Davis and Kevin Spacey, one scene stands out for its pure visual humor.
Grouped around a suburban Connecticut dining room table, seven WASP's and a cat burglar are forced by their hostess to celebrate Santa Lucia Day by donning crowns of ivy and improbably tall candles, which have been lit.
As the family's barbs become more icy, their lies less poker-faced and the hostess more drunk, the tapers begin to list perilously.
It's a tableau that would seem to have been conceived by someone familiar with tense family gatherings.


June Wetenhall, Douglas DaPuzzo
June Catherine Wetenhall, a daughter of Mrs.
Pierson Keating of Greenwich, Conn., and the late John H. Wetenhall Jr., was married yesterday to Douglas Charles DaPuzzo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter DaPuzzo of New York.
The Rev.
William Bergen performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
DaPuzzo, 28, teaches kindergarten at the Hewitt School in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Colorado, and she received a master's degree in teaching from Manhattanville College.
Her father, a member of the Council on International Economic Policy in the Ford Administration, was also the president of Palm Beach International Mortgage Brokers and the executive vice president of Barclay's International, in Palm Beach, Fla.


A New Use for That Useful Maiden Aunt (It's a Job)
GIVE A WOMAN AN INCH AND she'll say thank you; offer her an opportunity and she'll take a mile.
After all, there were so many years when no one offered.
In the years between the two World Wars, opportunities opened up and women reached out to accept them. (Of course then as now, necessity drove more women to work than mere opportunity did.) Women won the right to vote in Germany in 1918 and in America two years later.
They also established a sizable presence in the arts.
By 1935 an American survey found that about 41 per cent of artists receiving Government assistance were women; presumably that means a pretty fair number were doing all right before the Depression hit.
Photography was held up to women as a field where they could make their mark, both as business people and as artists.
An ad for a women's magazine in the late 20's asked, "What has become of the useful maiden aunt?" and answered, "She isn't darning anybody's stockings, not even her own. She is a draftsman or an author, a photographer or a real estate agent."


Going for Senate, a Pothole at a Time
First, New Jersey's Assembly Speaker, Chuck Haytaian, decided he wanted to take the job of the state's junior Senator, Frank R. Lautenberg.
Now it seems that Mr.
Haytaian is trying to usurp the title of Senator Pothole from Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York.
Mr.
D'Amato earned the nickname and a reputation in Washington because of his unabashed lobbying for any public works projects and programs that might find favor with the voters back home.


A Meal for Easter, With Time to Spare
THIS is a very simple Easter meal, and it has become something of a tradition in my family.
Virtually no last-minute preparation is needed, so you don't have to spend a lot of time in the kitchen after guests have arrived.
The first course is asparagus, served at room temperature, with a colorful sauce made with red and yellow peppers.
The main course is lamb, marinated overnight in mustard, garlic and soy sauce and served with potatoes roasted at the same time with sliced artichokes and fava beans.


Boston College Learns, Along With Its Coach, That Nothing Is Assured
Before anyone even thinks of applying a glass-slipper analogy to the giddy tournament success of ninth-seeded Boston College, there is the reminder of the sharp pain the Eagles endured three years ago this month, and the reality that a series of victories in March does not come with a guarantee of a happily ever after.
For a senior group that has sometimes struggled in its effort to help Coach Jim O'Brien establish a successful and stable program, the possibility of the school's first trip to the Final Four would bring much more than a reward.
The trip could provide a climax that could forever be compared with the misery of a freshman year, and the night the season ended without their coach.


No Headline
"The public needs to wake up and smell the roses. A person goes to prison, and unless he goes to the death chamber, he's going to get out eventually, and where does he go then?" LIEUT.
DALLAS REYNOLDS of the California Department of Corrections.  [ 18:3. ]


The Artists of South Africa: Separate, and Equal
AS YOU GO NORTH from Johannesburg, the landscape grows in scale and grandeur, and you begin to feel that you are incontrovertibly in Africa: the vague Europeanizing influence that is so powerful in Cape Town and half-successful in Johannesburg disappears.
If this area is a hotbed of gross Afrikaans conservatism, that must be because it is so obvious here that you cannot shut out Africa with a high fence or a well-planted garden of foreign herbs and flowers -- and Africa, taken in its entirety, is not only beautiful, but also frightening to most whites.
The road from the town of Louis Trichardt to the Venda homeland climbs slowly into the gentle hills south of the Limpopo River.
When you arrive in Venda itself, you are made quiet by it; an air of mystery and joy and of a dialogue of spirits dwells over Venda the same way an atmosphere of excitement and bustle and urban decay hangs over New York.


Q and A
By Freighter Down Under
Q.
Can you give me any detailed information about getting to Australia and New Zealand by freighter? -- Stanley Hamer, Sebring, Fla.
A.
There are two freighter lines with passenger cabins that make the trip to Australia from the United States, and both can be boarded in Florida.
Columbus Line operates four ships from the East Coast, three with three double cabins and six singles and one with four doubles.
The ships are the Columbus America, the Columbus Australia, the Columbus New Zealand and the Columbus Queensland.
On the West Coast the Columbus Victoria, with four double cabins, leaves from Los Angeles.
All accommodations are in outside cabins with private bathrooms.
The vessels are registered in Germany and have German officers.
The East Coast voyages begin in Jacksonville, Fla., continue to Houston, and then transit the Panama Canal to Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane in Australia and Wellington, Auckland and Port Chalmers, New Zealand.
On the return trip the vessels end the voyage in Philadelphia, sometimes calling at Kingston, Jamaica, on the way.
The round-trip voyages from the East Coast take 68 days; one-way voyages last about a month.
Jacksonville departures are made about once a month; from Los Angeles ships leave every 50 days.
Round-trip fares from Jacksonville are $5,450 a person, with two people to a cabin, and $6,070 a person for a single cabin.
One-way fares from Jacksonville to Australia are $2,725 a person (two to a cabin) and $3,035 for a single.
One-way fares to New Zealand are $3,270 and $3,645 a person.
More information can be obtained from Freighter World Cruises, 180 South Lake Avenue, Pasadena, Calif. 91101; telephone (818) 449-3106.
The company acts as exclusive passenger agent in North America for 14 lines and publishes a twice-a-month update of what ships are going where and what the trip will cost.
A subscription to the publication, called Freighter Space Advisory, is $33 a year.
The other freighter company with passenger space that makes the run to Australia and New Zealand, the Blue Star line, operates four ships on the East Coast and they, too, leave from Jacksonville.
The ships are the America Star, the Melbourne Star, the Sydney Star and the Queensland Star.
Its two ships on the West Coast, the Columbia Star and the California Star, leave from Los Angeles.
All the ships are registered in the Bahamas.
The East Coast ships transit the Panama Canal and cross the Pacific Ocean to Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane, continuing to Wellington and Auckland, New Zealand, returning to Philadelphia.
The West Coast ships cross to Melbourne, Sydney, Wellington and Auckland, coming back through Suva, Fiji, and ending the voyage in Seattle.
The round-trip fare from Jacksonville is from $5,400 to $7,700 a person for two people sharing a cabin, depending on the time of year, with summer sailings at the lower end of the range.
The round-trip voyage from Los Angeles, which takes 42 days, is $4,400 a person for two people sharing a cabin or $5,300 a person for a single cabin.
The round trip from Jacksonville takes from 65 to 70 days.
There are about 20 sailings a year from Jacksonville and 17 a year from Los Angeles.
The Blue Star line, which is represented by the Travltips Cruise and Freighter Association, recently introduced a fly-sail program.
Passengers can fly from Los Angeles to Australia or New Zealand and come back to the West Coast by ship, for a total of 22 days at sea.
Fares are about $2,900 a person for two people sharing a cabin or $3,308 for a single cabin.
The air fare to Los Angeles would be an additional expense for East Coast passengers.
Passengers can also sail from Jacksonville to Australia and fly back to the West Coast.
Fares start at $3,600 a person for two people sharing a cabin.
On that trip you would be sea for about 30 days.
Travltips, 163-07 Depot Road, Post Office Box 188, Flushing, N.Y. 11358, (800) 872-8584, puts out a 32-page magazine every other month on news of ships and accounts of trips by association members.
The magazine, Travltips, is available for $15 a year.
Polish Trains
Q.
I will be traveling to Poland soon.
Can you give me some information about the availability of trains between Warsaw and Cracow and the approximate travel time? -- J. James, Smithtown, L.I.
A.
The two cities are very well served by rail, with a minimum of five express trains every day from Warsaw to Cracow.
In addition, at least three Inter-City trains make the trip from the capital to Cracow every day, with additional Inter-City service once a day from Monday to Saturday, once a day from Monday to Friday and once a day from Sunday to Friday.
On the return trip to Warsaw there are five express trains every day, with an additional daily express from Monday to Saturday, plus four Inter-City trains a day.
The journey by express and Inter-City to Cracow takes 2 hours 40 minutes.
One-way tickets for express trains with seat reservations are $13 in first class and $9 in second.
One-way tickets for Inter-City trains with seat reservations are $14 in first class and $10 in second.
The Inter-City trains, which are part of the European Inter-City network, are newer than the expresses and in first class the price of the ticket includes a small sandwich, fruit and tea, coffee or a soft drink.
Express trains leave Warsaw every day at 6:55 A.M., 9 A.M., 12:55 P.M., 3:55 P.M. and 6:55 P.M.
From Sunday to Friday an express leaves at 4:55 P.M.
The Inter-City leaves Warsaw every day at 10:55 A.M., 2:55 P.M. and at 5:55 P.M.
An Inter-City also leaves at 7:55 A.M. from Monday to Saturday, at 9:55 A.M. from Monday to Friday, and at 1:55 P.M. from Sunday to Friday.
Expresses, which take 2 hours, 35 minutes for the trip from Cracow, leave daily at 6:10 A.M., 7:10 A.M., 10:10 A.M., 4:10 P.M. and 7:10 P.M.
From Monday to Saturday an express also leaves at 8:10 A.M.
The Inter-City trains, which also take 2 hours, 35 minutes to reach Warsaw, leave Cracow every day at 1:10 P.M., 3:10 P.M. and at 6:10 P.M.
An Inter-City train also leaves from Monday to Saturday at 9:10 A.M.; from Monday to Friday at 11:10 A.M. and 5:10 P.M.
On Sunday an additional Inter-City leaves at 8:10 P.M.
Budapest and Vienna
Q.
I will be in Budapest from April 22 for a week and will then go to Vienna for a week.
What sort of temperatures can I expect? -- Betty Wilson, Scarsdale, N.Y.
A.
Weather conditions in both cities will be strikingly similar, with a slight edge in temperature to Budapest.
Average highs in Budapest in April are 62 degrees and average lows 44.
The comparable figures for Vienna are 58 and 42.
The average monthly precipitation is both cities in April is identical at 1.8 inches.
TERENCE NEILAN


Over Their Dead Bodies
KEEPERS OF THE FLAME Literary Estates and the Rise of Biography.
By Ian Hamilton. 344 pp.
Winchester, Mass.: Faber &amp; Faber. $24.95.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Call her Mugga, waiting for her seven minutes of TV fame on "Def Comedy Jam," a testing ground for black comics.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  How does an Amish farmer make it in the big city?
Simplicity, perseverance and a series of compromises.


In the Region/Westchester; The Lull Ends for Growth on the County's Campuses
AFTER a long lull in new construction on Westchester's college campuses, four schools are now expanding or doing substantial renovation.
In some cases, these are just the beginning of ambitious long-range development plans that will carry the schools into the next century.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Returning Soon: An Old Friend in a Bottle
McSorley's Ale, a venerable hometown beer not seen in bottles since the 1980's, will soon be sold again in New York stores.
Six-packs of the ale, now available in New York only on draft, should be on shelves by Memorial Day at a suggested retail price of $4.69, said Ron Coughlin, a brand manager at the G. Heileman Brewing Company.


Saying Another 'Hi' to Chrysler's Neon
WHEN Chrysler introduced its Neon subcompact at the Frankfurt Auto Show in Germany last September, it created a lot of excitement.
Consumers had heard in advance and were mightily interested.
And the car writers who had actually fondled the prototypes, me included, gave the car a lot of ink.
For one thing, this was not merely another "import fighter." No, the Neon was an American car designed for the American buyer, and the point was to prove that Detroit could produce a small car that was as good -- and maybe better -- as the best from Japan.


Toting Up the Costs
THE cost of renovation varies within even the simplest category -- for example, skim coating a new wall with plaster and then painting it can triple the cost of just painting it; four-panel solid wood doors are at least twice as much as hollow-core doors.
Doing advance research so you can tell the contractor or craftsperson exactly what you want saves time, money and aggravation.


THERE IS NO MIDDLE EAST
In Robert D. Kaplan's insightful essay, he states that the term "Middle East" is a false label and expresses a preference for the name "Near East" as more suitable in both the historic and contemporary context ("There Is No 'Middle East,' " Feb. 20).
His call for a more inclusive view of this critical region is important, but his nomenclature is also a little faulty.
The easiest way to examine these terms is to look at how their originators -- the Europeans who drew the maps and the borders -- used them.
Ironically, the best source here is Winston Churchill, whom Kaplan singles out as perhaps the premier map drawer.
Churchill, in his six-volume memoir of World War II, wrote that the "Far East" included Japan and China; the "East" referred to British India (now India, Pakistan and Bangladesh), the "Middle East" was Iran, Iraq and the gulf; and the "Near East" denoted modern Turkey, Syria, Israel and Egypt.
Explained this way all four names make sense, especially if you're sitting in London.
The problem today is that all these terms are relative to a European orientation and the Europeans aren't the only ones who matter anymore.


On Moral Criticism
ON WRITERS AND WRITING By John Gardner.
Edited by Stewart O'Nan. 297 pp.
New York: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $25.


Elementary Choices
The guy on the cover looks pretty comfortable, doesn't he?
So do the men on the following pages, who are dressed just as simply.
That's the idea.
You don't believe it, do you?
This is fashion, you're thinking.
There's got to be a trick somewhere.
The jacket lining must be skunk tail.
The pants have no back, is that it?
Ah, you almost had me, but that sweater costs more than my condo because it's been hand-dyed in a rare Italian Amarone, right?


Ivana Trump's Landmark Fight
Ivana Trump is no novice when it comes to restoring a landmark building: after all, she supervised extensive renovations at the Plaza Hotel, the jewel in the Trump crown.
Nonetheless, she was cited this month for two violations by the Landmarks Preservation Commission -- for installing a large burgundy canopy over the entrance of her East 64th Street home and for gilding the wrought-iron door without permits.


Towns At Work On Diversity For Schools
WHEN the Westport advisory panel on school desegregation sent out a survey to 12,000 people this year, panel members were encouraged by the response to one of the first questions.
Of the 2,094 people who mailed the forms back, 73 percent said it was important for children to be exposed to different cultures and ethnic groups.
But on later questions, more than 70 percent also said they thought it was important to educate children in the communities where they live even if those neighborhoods don't reflect racial and cultural diversity.


Still In Its Adolescence
To the Editor:
I found rather specious Greg Tate's core argument that the clamor over the "gansta rap" genre's glorification of violence, racism, misogyny and gay-bashing somehow denies all hip-hop of serious consideration as an art form.
One would be hard pressed to find an emergent music form more swiftly (and justly) accepted into the popular mainstream than rap.


Federal Officials to Review Documents in Breast Cancer Study With Falsified Data
To help restore public confidence in a breast cancer treatment that has been shaken by news of falsification of research data in a major study, Federal health officials now plan to audit all documents at the University of Pittsburgh, which coordinated the study.
Auditors will also check the original records at many of the 89 hospitals in the United States and Canada where 1,843 women took part in a surgical study that helped change the way breast cancer is treated by declaring that a partial mastectomy and radiation are just as effective as the more disfiguring full mastectomy.
The audit is expected to take several months, and it may later be extended to 13 other cancer studies.


A Rich Explosion of Song for Holy Week
WELCOME sweet springtime, we greet thee in song!" so wrote the 19th-century Russian composer Anton Rubinstein, articulating a sentiment particularly appropriate in 1994, the year of the relentless winter. There will be a profusion of song, both solemn and joyous, around the county during Holy Week.
Some of it will be presented outdoors -- if it doesn't snow.
In Bedford a concert of guitar music will be performed on the green in front of the Presbyterian Church at 7 o'clock Easter Morning, and there will be folk music in the courtyard of the Presbyterian Church in Rye at 6:30 A.M.
Because Daylight Saving Time goes into effect at 2 A.M. that day, sunrise, according to the Farmer's Almanac, will occur at 6:34.


Angry Students Protest Throughout France


Business Diary: March 20-25
THE ECONOMY The Prime Rate: Rising, Yes, but Still Low  Well, it was nice while it lasted.
The prime rate -- a bank benchmark that determines rates for everything from mortgages to credit cards to small-business loans -- hadn't risen in five years and had stayed at its rock-bottom 6 percent since July 1992.
When the Federal Reserve nudged its rates higher last week, though, big banks like Citibank, Chase and Chemical quickly matched that quarter-point increase in their prime rates.
But in the glass-is-still-half-full department, remember that 6 1/4 percent is still a long way from the 11 1/2 percent rate in early 1989 -- not to mention the harrowing 20 percent levels of the early 80's.
And as the Federal Reserve keeps insisting, letting short-term interest rates inch up is merely a tactic to keep long-term inflation at bay.
Also, of course, remember that people who live on interest income are just as glad to see rates inch up a bit.


Light Bulbs
To the Editor: As a dedicated reader-in-bed, I confirm Robert Packard's observation in "Reading in Bed: Europe Takes a Dim View" (Feb. 13) that European hotels in "some countries have refined their ways to torment readers."
My most notable success occurred under inauspicious circumstances, at the height of the cold war, when my wife, daughter and I ventured to travel "independently" into Leningrad (now again St. Petersburg) under the rigid control of the all-powerful Intourist.


Not Welfare, but Employment Subsidies
To the Editor:
"Welfare Reform Meets Reality" (editorial, March 13) is well taken in warning how costly the Administration's welfare reform plans could be.
However, let us be reminded from the outset that there are those on welfare who cannot help themselves, who would work but cannot find a job.
There are others who are on welfare because they do not care to work.
With the second group it is a sickness, and it is this group that requires much attention.


A Yonkers Family in Recital
IT is a family affair in the Bronx today, as the cellist Michael Rudiakov, a Yonkers resident, joins his son Ariel, a violist, and his cousin Shoshana, a pianist, for a free recital at Lehman College.
The program at 2 P.M. will be the American debut of the Rudiakov Trio, featuring Beethoven, Shostakovich, Chopin and Brahms.
The Music at St.
James series, built around the Odell organ at St.
James Episcopal Church in North Salem, concludes today at 4 P.M.
John Stansell, organist of First Congregational Church in Greenwich, will be joined by Victoria Drake, at the harp, for music by Soler, Liszt and Marcel Grandjany, each artist contributing a few solo pieces as well.
The information number is 232-5894; tickets will be available at the door.


Country Clubs Give Women More Power
MANY country clubs on Long Island are moving to become "gender neutral." That term refers to the acceptance of women as equal members of the clubs, which have historically allowed just men as members.
The path toward equality has taken several directions.
The numbers of women sitting on and heading committees has been growing.
Many clubs have at least one woman on their boards of governors, some of which are elected and others appointed.


Noisy Start in East Side Rite of Spring
With spring here, can SummerStage -- and the perennial dispute over decibels -- be far behind?
Long before Central Park's free concert series opens in June, opponents and proponents have begun to make noise.
Last month, under pressure from Fifth Avenue residents, festival organizers agreed to turn down the maximum sound level from 102 decibels to 100.
"That's rock bottom," said Erica Ruben, the series' producer.
Sam Berkow, accoustics consultant for SummerStage, said that at 100 decibels the sound in nearby apartments -- along Fifth Avenue and 72d Street -- would be "faintly audible, less than traffic, with windows open."


Alchemy


In North Bosnia, a Rising Tide of Serbian Violence
While the world's attention has been focused on the cease-fire in Sarajevo and diplomatic moves to broker peace elsewhere in the shattered former Yugoslavia, a savage Serbian campaign to drive Muslims and Croats from land seized in the last two years is continuing, even growing, in the Banja Luka region of northern Bosnia.
"It's business as usual in Banja Luka; it's even getting worse and worse," said Joren Bjallerstedt, the chief protection officer for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Zagreb, the capital of Croatia.
"Ethnic cleansing, violence toward minorities has increased in the last month, clearly."


This Little Piggy Ate Roast Beef
I learned most of what I know about pork from a little black pig named Bart.
I raised him with visions of prosciutto, smoked ribs and fresh hams, but Bart had different plans.
He ended up raising my consciousness about pork while positioning himself for a long and happy life as a 600-pound house pet.
For a young woman who ate mostly vegetables, I'm not sure why pigs had become a crucible for me.
Perhaps it's because I grew up in Columbus, Ohio, where polite society saw itself as superior to pork, eating only the occasional crown roast or stuffed loin, while our neighbor to the south, Cincinnati, was known as "porkopolis" even before it was found that corn (Cincinnati is at the tip of the Corn Belt) was the ideal feed for hogs.


Apart From the Crowd
Anna Piaggi is one in 10 million.
Her style of dress, often considered eccentric, is definitely outside fashion.
She has been noted for this quality since at least the early 1960's, but never for being banal or a cliche.
She is a legendary Italian fashion editor and represents an extreme, alternative, one-of-a-kind fashion credo.
Ms.
Piaggi, sometimes called "the walking museum," is not a caricature of fashion.
She is a down-to-earth woman who speaks and writes in six languages, although her most potent way of communicating is her highly creative manner of dress.
Alfa Castaldi, her husband and a photographer, who usually wears Army surplus clothing, said, "We have to take the train from Milan to Paris to accommodate Anna's 10 trunks for the week of showings." Each morning, from her vast collection of clothes spanning 200 years, she puts the pieces together like a puzzle, creating, for the day, a fresh image.
Her friend the designer Karl Lagerfeld said: "She dresses the way one plays a role. She's a great performer, but she is also the author of the play."


Malcolm R. Hobbs, 77, Publisher on Cape Cod
Malcolm R. Hobbs, a newspaperman who for almost 40 years was editor and publisher of The Cape Codder in Orleans, Mass., died on March 15 at his home.
He was 77 and lived in Orleans.
The cause was complications of bone disease, said his wife, Gwendolyn.


U.S. IS BOLSTERING FORCES IN KOREA
While the United States seeks support at the United Nations for possible economic sanctions against North Korea, the Pentagon has been moving to bolster its forces in South Korea to protect against an attack by the North.
Washington wants sanctions imposed if North Korea continues to block inspections of its nuclear program.
To improve the ability to rush warplanes to South Korea, Defense Secretary William J. Perry has ordered the Air Force to build up its supply of munitions and spare parts there.
The Army has also begun to replace older helicopters in South Korea with new Apache attack helicopters.


Making a Dent in Drug Dealing on 109th St.
When Ruth Swinney became principal of Public School 165 last September, crack dealers badgered teachers going to work in the morning and schoolchildren in the playground during the day.
Nightmares drove some of the 4- to 14-year-olds to the school counselor.
With the roof under renovation, the scaffolding around the five-story school was being used as shelter by crack users.
One Monday morning, school workers collected more than 100 crack vials around the school, on 109th Street between Broadway and Amsterdam Avenue.


One Moment Please, Before Digging In
NOW that spring has come, gardeners are eager to get outdoors and begin.
But patience is necessary.
Winter was long.
The melting snow has been seeping into the ground and making it very wet.
Don't forget, too, the old rhyme that "April showers bring May flowers." The next few weeks may be tricky.
Heavy rainfall could cause even soggier soil.
Any wet soil can be ruined by carelessly treading on it.
The tracks made on wet lawns, which are especially vulnerable, are difficult to wipe out.
Heavy foot marks from too eager gardeners or even youngsters at play can damage a lawn because the soil becomes compacted and the tiny wisps of new grass have a difficult time emerging.


Scenes of the Crimes
THE UNQUIET GHOST Russians Remember Stalin.
By Adam Hochschild.
Illustrated. 304 pp.
New York:  Viking. $22.95.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Talkin' 'Bout the Retrovirus
Bruce Springsteen's "Streets of Philadelphia," which won the Academy Award as Best Song last week, is about AIDS, just like the movie it comes from.
Or is it?
Nowhere in the lyrics does it mention the four-letter acronym, or the term H.I.V., or even the notion of illness.
The closest it comes to suggesting specifics is the question "Oh brother, are you gonna leave me wastin' away?" The despondent tone of the music and the song's placement in the film provide context.
But like so many pop songs in the age of AIDS, it dares not say the name of the plague.
Rock has been skittish about AIDS for obvious reasons.
From its propulsive rhythms to its innumerable stories of love and lust, much popular music is associated with pleasure; it's made for dancing and romancing.
Music's time-honored use as social lubricant is incompatible with thoughts of a lingering, incurable, sexually transmitted disease; nothing stops a party faster.
In particular, the association of AIDS with homosexuality has been worrying to male rock stars whose exuberant heterosexuality is part of a bankable image.
Heavy-metal singers with shoulder-length hair and glittering spandex costumes apparently feared that paying attention to AIDS would make them seem effeminate.


RESULTS PLUS
SPEED SKATING  Blair Breaks Mark  Bonnie Blair broke her world record in the 500 meters in an invitational competition at the Calgary Olympic Oval yesterday.
Blair clocked 38.99 seconds to beat her previous record of 39.10, set on the same ice at the 1988 Olympics.
It was one of three world records to fall in the meet.


Meditation Agitation
Sleeping pills and antihistamines carry warnings of possible side effects, as do pain relievers and liquid diets.
In fact, a good rule of thumb about all remedies is that anything that has effects has side effects.
So what about meditation?
A recent article by Nathaniel Mead in Natural Health magazine reports that meditation can have a whole range of negative effects.
A short list includes: "relaxation-induced panic," increased suicidal tendencies (one case), weightlessness, outbursts of laughing and crying, headaches and involuntary sighing.
His notion is that meditation brings you face to face with yourself, and what you encounter may not be pleasant.


Ranger-Canuck Game: 95 Penalty Minutes And Very Bad Manners
Look, it could have been worse, much worse.
Just a few days ago, in a minor league hockey game in Tulsa, Okla., a player in the penalty box was sprayed and put in a choke-hold while wrestling with off-duty police officers.
He ended up in the hospital with a damaged larynx and numbness over the left side of his body.
And earlier this week near Buffalo, six Hartford Whalers and two of their assistant coaches spent a night in jail after a major fight with bar bouncers and police.
Compared with all that, Friday night's fist-flailing, stick-swinging, curse-shouting, multiplayer brawl between the Rangers and the Vancouver Canucks at Pacific Coliseum was closer to routine, part of the game, old-time hockey, sort of a rerun of "Slap Shot" on late-night TV.


Avert Chimney Fires by Cleaning Out the Creosote
FIREPLACES, wood stoves and chimneys require annual inspections and cleaning, especially if used regularly.
Promptness is crucial.
Burning wood produces creosote, a tarlike substance that lines a chimney with a sticky flammable coating.
If allowed to cool until the next heating season, the creosote hardens to form a glassy layer that resists removal.
Thick deposits of creosote can crack masonry and loosen stovepipes.
More important, allowing creosote to build up can lead to a chimney fire.


Around SoHo: Bistros and . . .
CAFE + (212) 274-0505; 210 Spring Street, near Avenue of the Americas; $$; all major credit cards
This attractive restaurant has a casual Parisian feel with its little bar off to the side, marble floor, white tablecloths, rattan chairs and soft lighting.
It is owned by Richard Widmaier-Picasso, a grandson of the artist.
The food is straightforward, enticing bistro fare.
Among better starters are warm leeks with shallot vinaigrette; eggplant custard with tomato coulis; onion soup; truffled chicken liver mousse; a salad of carrots and peas with beet juice, and a vegetable terrine of asparagus, spinach and mushrooms.
Lusty main courses include pot-au-feu of veal, beef and vegetables with stuffed cabbage and bone marrow; grilled sirloin with a pepper and cognac sauce; duck confit with sauteed potatoes; mussels mariniere with leeks and saffron, and a light brandade of morue, the garlicky cod and potato puree. (Article: 6/13/ 93)


Corrections
A picture caption today in an Evening Hours report about an opening at the American Craft Museum, on page 6 of Styles of The Times, carries an erroneous caption.
Kate Carmel, the senior curator at the museum, is at the right, not the left.
The two other women are Shimoda, at left, and Dubaka Leigh, center.
Marcella Welch is not in the picture.


Vaccine Takes On Summer's Bane; Lyme Disease Is the Target of a Regionwide Experiment
Alice Heusinger is so concerned about the threat of Lyme disease in her Dutchess County neighborhood that she is afraid to take her four young grandchildren into her backyard to play.
So she and her husband, Richard, did something about it: they drove 45 minutes to the Westchester County Medical Center here, rolled up their sleeves and were injected with an experimental vaccine that is undergoing trials throughout the metropolitan New York region.


'Tosca' on Location: Illusion Gives Way To (Some) Reality
WHEN, A FEW YEARS AGO, the producer Andrea Andermann announced his intention to televise Puccini's opera "Tosca" live from the actual sites in Rome and at the actual times of day specified in the libretto, the notion had gimmick written all over it.
But surprise: Against all theatrical logic (if there is such a thing), the performance, two summers ago, turned out to be very good on almost every level.
Indeed, the project seemed an unqualified success, at least in the first two acts, and those of us in Europe who staggered out of bed at 6 A.M. for the third act were too busy reveling in our virtuous fortitude to quibble.
Now, with the performance released on video (Teldec 4509-90212; VHS cassette and laser disk), we can check the accuracy of our recollections.
The video presentation faithfully matches the live telecast, the liner notes report, except that two gaffes -- a nasty fall by Placido Domingo in the first act and a momentary sighting of a camera in the second -- have been papered over with footage from one of the two dress rehearsals.
That's too bad, since the cleanup robs the performance of spontaneity, continuity and documentary verisimilitude.
Yet in retrospect, the experience holds up remarkably well.


Dissing the Queen
In the late 70's, the Sex Pistols were the agents provocateurs of rock.
Though the group disbanded after three years, its punk anger and punk style changed the course of popular music.
In a new book, "Rotten: No Irish, No Blacks, No Dogs," John Lydon and his co-authors, Keith and Kent Zimmerman, tell the story of Johnny Rotten, the alter ego Mr.
Lydon used as the band's front man.
In this excerpt, Mr.
Lydon describes a boat party the group threw for the silver jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II in 1977.
THE WHOLE IDEA OF THE JUBILEE WAS THAT you could do anything you liked for 24 hours.
It was supposed total freedom.
All the pubs were open all night.
People were supposed to celebrate, so that's what we did.
We rented a boat, went out on the river, turned up the volume and played our favorite new song ("God Save the Queen").
No doubt countless complained because the amount of police who turned up to stop us was outrageous.
Motor launches.
They waited on every bridge in case any of us jumped off and got away.
Fabulous.
I managed to escape.


Mariel Stroschein, Adam Prawzinsky
Drs.
Mariel Stroschein and Adam Lewis Prawzinsky, otolaryngologists, were married yesterday in Scottsdale, Ariz.
Judge Jacqueline B. McVay, a judge in the Northeast Phoenix Justice Court, performed the ceremony at the Hyatt Regency.
The bride, 36, is a daughter of Edward and Marijane Stroschein of Baldwin, L.I.
The bride graduated from Adelphi University and received her medical degree from the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.
She has a private practice in Scottsdale, which the bridegroom will join next month.


At the Wordsmith's Anvil
Writing at home in suburban Chicago, Veronica Jean sometimes sees the world of New York publishing as a big black hole that absorbs the bright light of talent and gives back only dark rejection.
So when she arrived at the fifth New Orleans Writers Conference earlier this month, the 33-year-old former tattoo artist carried not only seven copies of her first novel, "Out of Body and Mind," and a yellow spiral-bound notebook, but a black velvet cocktail dress as well.
Writing may be a solitary and closeted art, but selling it isn't.


Yanks' Pitchers Don't Project a Mound of Confidence
Glenn Davis slapped a ball through the middle on Friday and Jimmy Key lunged for it before stumbling, grabbing it and watching as another run scored on the single.
It was a trivial exhibition game between the Mets and the Yankees, but Key was mired in a sloppy start and he actually seemed helpless for a few seconds.
For the Yankees, this feeling has become too routine.


Losing Control; For Mexicans, Democracy Exacts A Scary Price
NEAR 4 in the morning, hours after party leaders had confirmed that a .38-caliber bullet had torn through the head of Luis Donaldo Colosio on Wednesday evening and killed the man who probably would have been Mexico's next president, Celzo Hernandez stood outside the headquarters of the ruling party holding a bullhorn, but saying nothing.
The buildings billowed with huge banners of Mr.
Colosio's name, just as they had on the night last November when the 44-year-old former party chief emerged as the hand-picked successor to carry on the party's 65-year reign.
Thousands cheered then, comforted that even though the choice of Mr.
Colosio had been made behind closed doors, it insured a smooth transition and continued stability of a kind that no other country south of the Rio Grande has enjoyed.


Was Freud a Fraud?
To the Editor:
I wonder how many readers noticed the rhetorical sleight of hand in Robert Stewart's otherwise informative review of "The Correspondence of Sigmund Freud and Sandor Ferenczi" (March 6).
"It is fashionable today," Mr.
Stewart writes, "to criticize Freud for his lack of scruples and scientific rigor," but surely we ought to separate "the biographical in the evolution of psychoanalysis from the system of thought itself." He quotes Karl Popper to the effect that "theories, and the conduct of their protagonists, belong to two entirely separate worlds."


Labor and Environmentalists Find Accord on L.I. Sound
IF Moses had had to file an environmental-impact statement before crossing the Red Sea, we'd all be speaking Egyptian now.
"That was a sentiment," reported George Drapeau 3d, "that I overheard when unemployed construction workers gathered at a demonstration in 1992 to vent their anger and frustration at environmentalists whom they blamed for their plight." Mr.
Drapeau is director of the Construction Industry Council of Westchester and the Hudson Valley, an industry trade group.


Feet, Don't Fail Me Now
CONSIDERING WHAT SHOES have to do, men should know more about them than anything else they put on each day.
After all, ill-fitting sweaters just make you look awful, but poorly fitted shoes chuck your concentration, ruin your day and allow your chiropractor to build that gazebo next to the pool.
Nevertheless, most men know more about Gov.
Ann Richards of Texas than they do about shoes.
That's too bad, because like men who study a menu and then ask their wives, "So, what should I have?," some things you have to decide for yourself.
No one can tell you how a shoe fits.
You have to wear it.
*
Men generally buy shoes when they have to, a pair at a time, and then wear the hell out of them.
It's not much different from not changing your socks.
Feet sweat.
A lot.
Even more when they're in boots.
Shoes need to dry out.
And breathe.
And be rotated.
Assemble a wardrobe of shoes if you want any to last.


Topics of The Times; The Man in the Lobby
A friend of ours didn't hear the man slip through the closing door in her building's lobby.
As she turned from getting her mail out of her mailbox, she nodded at the blond man in his late 20's who still stood by the door.
He asked her in a low voice, "Would you date me in the middle of the week?"
Her stomach sank.
In the last few months there had been two rapes in Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village.
With as much calm as she could muster, she replied: "Oh, gee, I'm sorry, I'm busy this week. I already have a steady boyfriend."


U.N. TROOPS WRECK BOSNIAN SERB SITE
United Nations troops destroyed a Bosnian Serb bunker near the town of Maglaj with cannon fire on Friday after an exchange of gunfire with Serbian attackers that lasted for hours, United Nations officials said here today.
No peacekeepers were wounded in the exchange of small-arms fire northeast of Maglaj.


What's Junk to Some Is Information to Others
To the Editor:
If we're to believe Deborah L. Jacobs, advertising mail is "junk" that violates the privacy rights of millions.
But, alas, the newspaper that says it publishes "All the News That's Fit to Print" has instead made an informed discussion of mail, privacy and related matters virtually impossible.


Cold Shoulder to Churches That Practice Preachings
Never mind the biblical injunctions to feed the poor and shelter the homeless.
Increasingly, many Americans do not want the social service programs of religious institutions in their neighborhoods.
They frequently don't want the parking problems or pealing bells that come with churches.
They don't want programs for alcoholics or drug addicts.
They especially don't want the hungry and the homeless that these institutions often feed and shelter.


WHO'S AFRAID OF LANI GUINIER?
Lani Guinier is concerned with two somewhat different aspects of minority representation ("Who's Afraid of Lani Guinier?" Feb. 27).
The first has to do with electoral politics.
Here she has some useful things to say.
The American system of winner-take-all elections does penalize a minority in an electoral district: a group may constitute a substantial minority in a large number of districts and yet be outvoted in all of them.
The cumulative voting scheme she discusses (or a simpler system of proportional representation, of the type used in most other democratic nations) would allow minority viewpoints fairer representation in legislative bodies such as Congress.


The Secret of Angels
In "Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes," Tony Kushner's two-part drama on Broadway, there are verbal and visual references to all sorts of things, including pop and gay culture, Judaism, Mormonism, American history and New York City landmarks.


Mad About Art
Above the Art Deco desk in the inner sanctum of John McEnroe's by-appointment-only gallery is a word-as-art image by the California artist Edward Ruscha.
It reads simply, "An Invasion of Privacy."
Painting and owner are a perfect fit.
Since he opened his SoHo gallery on the second floor of a loft building at 41 Greene Street two months ago, Mr.
McEnroe, the 35-year-old tennis star, has been dodging the press.
He runs from people who want the gory details of his broken marriage to the actress Tatum O'Neal and fends off reporters looking for the answer to the most commonly asked question in SoHo this season: Just what does John McEnroe know about art?


Terreri Earns His 100th Victory in Shutting Down Flyers
Nobody owns the Philadelphia Flyers as completely as does Chris Terreri, the diminutive goaltender of the New Jersey Devils.
Terreri came up with another inspiring performance this afternoon to keep the Flyers without a victory here in four years.
The 7-2 triumph by the Devils raised Terreri's career record against the Flyers to 16-3-3 and helped the Devils keep pace with the Rangers in their pursuit of first place in the National Hockey League.


World Markets; Edgy, but Hopeful, in Hong Kong
THE Hong Kong stock market was rocked Wednesday when Jardine Matheson Holdings, the British trading company, announced that it would quit the Hong Kong Stock Exchange by the end of the year.
Share prices in Hong Kong plummeted -- but just briefly.
By the end of the day, the blue-chip Hang Seng index had soared 5 percent.
The delisting of Jardine Matheson, a company deeply intertwined with the history of the British colony, in some sense symbolizes the transition in the stock market as Hong Kong approaches its 1997 reversion to Chinese rule.
Increasingly, the market will reflect the fortunes of Hong Kong and China, not colonial Britain.


Room to Breathe


Eric Rohmer Writes His Own 'Winter's Tale'
ERIC ROHMER'S FILMS, WHICH HE HAS been turning out steadily for 40 years now, epitomize much that is wonderful and singular about the films of France.
Vincent Canby of The New York Times has called all of them comedies, from "My Night at Maud's" and "Claire's Knee" to "Pauline at the Beach," and the term may well even apply to anomalies like "The Marquise of O" and "Perceval le Gallois."
Yet Mr.
Canby has also called Mr.
Rohmer "the most cerebral, most morally committed of French directors," and that is true, too.
Mr.
Rohmer makes comedies like Jean Renoir's "Rules of the Game": precisely observed studies of good-humored, ordinary people -- however elevated by the quality of dialogue -- who are more or less overtly affected by romance, tragedy and mystical revelation.


Profile; Who Says Success Has to Be All Work and No Basketball?
AS Mannie L. Jackson remembers the boxcar he was born in nearly 55 years ago, it was the neatest, most inviting home in the makeshift Illmo, Mo., subdivision created by the Cotton Belt Railroad for its black laborers.
His close-knit family's early lesson in making the most of one's circumstances has not only stayed with him but paid off to a degree that would no doubt appeal to a Hollywood scriptwriter.
Mr.
Jackson grew up to become a college basketball star, saw the world as a member of the legendary Harlem Globetrotters in the early 1960's and went on to become one of the most successful black executives in corporate America, rising to senior vice president here at Honeywell Inc.
So successful, in fact, that last year he was able to fulfill his yen to own a major sports franchise by buying control of the Globetrotters.


'The Language Instinct'
To the Editor:
Regarding Michael D. Coe's review of "The Language Instinct," by Steven Pinker (Feb. 27): It would seem that Noam Chomsky's tortured writing is the best argument against his own questionable theory.
If, as he supposes, "most of the logic underlying all of the world's languages is wired into children's brains," why is Mr.
Chomsky's "discourse so opaque that it  [ is ]  nearly incomprehensible"?
Surely if language were as instinctive as he claims, he would be able to explain his ideas in clear, childlike prose instead of opaque academic jargon that has to be translated by Mr.
Pinker.
As Mr.
Pinker so clearly demonstrates, the only complicated thing about Mr.
Chomsky's theory is his way of stating it.
JOHN HENDRICKSON  Spring City, Utah


Problems Plague New Energy Plan
In Imperial County, where feed-lot cattle outnumber people four to one, the manure sometimes piles up so high it must be packed down with four-wheel-drive trucks.
Six years ago, a group of investors and engineers came up with what they saw as a novel solution to the problem, and one that would be applicable wherever cattle are raised in large numbers.
They built the first electric power plant to use manure for fuel.


A Foregone Conclusion?
To the Editor:
In her essay "For Rothko, It Wasn't All Black Despair"  [ March 6 ] , Roberta Smith recalled the exhibition of Rothko's late paintings held a few months after his suicide in 1970.
"Single rectangles of gray met rectangles of black to form a bleak horizon. . . . They appeared to be the logical prelude to death." But after seeing the current exhibition, "Mark Rothko -- The Last Paintings," at the Pace Gallery, Ms.
Smith writes: "The last Rothkos at Pace are altogether different, lighter of touch and brighter of hue . . . they belie Rothko's final despair."
These paintings might signal that Rothko had already decided to kill himself.
The psychiatric literature is filled with commentary about the anguish of depressed patients struggling over the decision whether to live or die, and the tranquillity often seen in patients once they have decided to commit suicide.


Robbing The Cradle
Baby-doll dresses.
Party frocks with little-girl cardigans and mommy-dress-up jewelry.
Pleated schoolgirl skirts.
Mary Jane shoes and ankle socks.
Is there anything more perverse and weird than grown women wearing kiddie clothes?
At first, it seemed that regression dressing would be a fleeting phenomenon.
But the baby-doll dresses that surfaced in the collections of spring clothes shown last fall have spawned more and more little-girl looks.
When even Karl Lagerfeld, in his sophisticated Chloe collection for fall 1994, sends out mini-Shetland sweaters and ice-skating skirts, you know that high fashion's downsizing is more than an offbeat trend.


Speeding the Recycling of City-Owned Buildings
A NEW housing team taking shape at the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development is setting out to establish a different voice for housing policy.
But while the voice is different, the singers are using a familiar score.
The effort to unburden itself of the thousands of units of formerly privately owned housing taken over through tax foreclosure has been the overriding task of the housing agency for 16 years.


DON'T SEND IN THE MARINES
In "Don't Send In the Marines," David Fromkin rails against the straw man of a world that no longer exists (Feb. 27).
To fret that dispatching American combat forces around the world will become an "everyday occupation" is ludicrous when the President and Congress are preoccupied with domestic issues.
If interventions never succeed, as Fromkin contends, then why would not the public or our elected officials tire after one or two fiascos?
He claims -- contrary to the results of public-opinion surveys -- that the American people demanded the withdrawal of our forces from Somalia with their first casualties.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about Leon Cooperman, who runs Omega Advisors, misstated the company's investment in R. H. Macy &amp; Company.
It is 20 percent of one class of Macy bonds, not 20 percent of the total debt.


Paying Attention (Rather Than Homage) to Georgia O'Keeffe
THE show, "Of, For and By Georgia O'Keeffe," takes over the Whitney Museum at Champion, filling it with a transcendental calm that hardly fits the character of the building, much less that of downtown Stamford.
It does so with photographs of the artist in her New Mexico habitat and images by her, together with sculptures by others that may or may not have been made for her.
As organized and introduced by Kathleen Monaghan, the former branch director, and installed by her successor, Eugenia Tsai, the display is undeniably a tribute.
But the effect is not reverential -- despite the prominence accorded O'Keeffe's magnificent image of a black cross against a blood red sky.
So far from adding to the mystery and myths that have accumulated around the artist and Alfred Stieglitz, her dealer and later her husband, Ms.
Monaghan reaches in and grasps the nettle.


Corrections
A short report in the F.Y.I. column last Sunday about the Transit Authority's system of naming subway lines misstated the date of the opening of the IRT.
It was 1904, not 1940.
The report also incorrectly described the line's original method of designating its routes.
At first, the IRT used names, such as Woodlawn Express and the Broadway Local, switching to numbers in 1948.
The report also misstated the year the three subway systems were unified.
It was 1940, not 1960.


Security Rides on Two Wheels
When Forest Hills Gardens residents set out last spring to raise $24,000 to buy the police two expensive scooters to encourage more patrols on their privately owned streets, they had no notion of how popular the campaign would become.
The money left over -- $8,000 -- has hit the streets in the form of bicycle patrols.
"Since we're considered a low-crime area, we have relatively few cops covering, and we felt if we helped out with equipment we might see more patrols," said Linda Hoffman, who organized the campaign as the chairwoman of security for the Forest Hills Gardens Corporation, which maintains the gently rolling roads, sidewalks and parks.


Controlling Marital Anger and Reclaiming the Love Interest
SELF-HELP books sell, and may actually help, because they bestow hope.
But even while purporting to change personal traumas, hardly any deliver more than they promise.
A primal subject, anger -- particularly, although not necessarily, in marriage -- receives primer treatment in Dr.
Bonnie Maslin's recently published "The Angry Marriage: Overcoming the Rage, Reclaiming the Love."


March 20-26: A Shortage of Brotherhood; Teamster Head in a Skirmish With Regional Chieftains
The knives and brass knuckles are out again at the teamsters' union.
Ron Carey, the insurgent head of a Long Island local who won the presidency of the nation's second-biggest union in December 1991, keeps tripping over entrenched survivors.
These men -- they are all men, all unelected, all losers three years ago in races for bigger jobs -- occupy top regional offices that Mr.
Carey calls a "fertile ground for corruption and mob influence." They are also a fertile ground of opposition to changes Mr.
Carey would make, and last week the two camps clashed over money and power.


Play Cards! Sports Memorabilia for a Price
WHEN Mike Wacks lined up Lenny Dykstra for a card show in Milford, he anticipated a large turnout.
Dykstra, after all, is not only colorful and outgoing, but also a World Series star.
"But Dykstra didn't draw well at all," Mr.
Wacks said recently.
"I expected about 600 people, but only 200 or so showed up."


ANDREW CUOMO
Stepping to the lectern in the ballroom of a Manhattan hotel, Andrew M. Cuomo begins to weave a metaphor as only a Cuomo can.
He has just returned from Los Angeles, where he surveyed the destruction caused by the January earthquake, and now he is describing the scene to 800 listeners at a forum on homelessness.
Clearly he was stunned by the devastation, but as the Clinton Administration's homelessness czar he was struck even more by the Federal Government's lightning response.
In a week's time, he says, emergency housing was found for 10,000 displaced victims.
It has reinforced his cynicism about how little Washington has done to address a different kind of urban dislocation, one that occurred "not in one cloud of dust but unit by unit, brick by brick," with joblessness and deinstitutionalization and AIDS and crack and teen-age pregnancy all chipping slowly at the mortar.


Buying Undershorts
NO MATTER WHAT SOME women think, not every man walking down the street tugging on his pants is attempting sexual harassment.
It's more likely his undershorts don't fit.
They may be the first thing we put on and the last we take off, yet undershorts remain the forgotten garment.
No matter that Marky Mark flaunting his Calvins has spawned scores of flat-stomached imitators.
Men still wear whatever is handy, or whatever they're handed.
Undershorts are to a man's wardrobe what Susan Lucci is to daytime TV: ever present but disrespected.
Used but ignored.
However, unlike the Emmy Award-losing actress, underwear unexamined exacts revenge.
Sadly, repeatedly, man has discovered that something he didn't bother to think about becomes all he thinks about, and almost always too late.
That's because men retain that image of Mom holding a plastic-wrapped three-pack, begging him to wear clean underwear.
What Mom failed to add is to make sure they fit and feel good.
But you're a big boy now.
And uncomfortable.
Something has to change, besides your shorts.


Do's and Dont's of a Vehicle Drug Search
THE scene on a recent morning in the parking lot of the County Police Headquarters in Hawthorne could have been borrowed from a spy movie.
Detective Dwayne Tabacchi got behind the wheel of a maroon Ford sedan, turned on the ignition and headlights, then placed a magnet on a section of the door frame near the driver's seat, activating a mechanical device that slid the back seat down to reveal a hidden compartment.
The police confiscated the car last year after stopping it for a traffic violation.
A search revealed drugs.
"In most cases of high-level trafficking since the mid-1980's, the drugs are very well hidden," Detective Tabacchi said.
"Drug traffickers modify the vehicle and put different traps -- or secret compartments -- inside. So even if the car is stopped and searched, the drugs are hard to find."


At His Trial, Frenchman's Memory of Nazis Is Dim
During the first full week of his trial for crimes against humanity, Paul Touvier has heard a torrent of evidence describing him as an extortionist and a thief as well as an enthusiastic member of a pro-Nazi militia that persecuted Jews in occupied France.
His responses, though, suggest that his memory is selective.
Time after time, when questioned about illegal acts, he has contended that he could remember nothing.
But when asked to recount his 45 years in hiding before his arrest in 1989, he elaborated for two hours in great detail.


Can't You Hear the Whistle Blowing?
IF only you know where to look in the undistinguished sub-basements of what is now Madison Square Garden, a little of the majesty of the old Penn Station lives on.
It's in parts of the marble floor that can still be seen through newer flooring, in a pink Milford granite slab of the old facade that is still visible if you look through the right hole in the drywall.


At Home for the Aged, Lessons in Living
For nine high school dropouts, the Hebrew Home for the Aged, a complex of eight well-tended buildings nestled amid rolling woodlands along the Hudson, is more than a nursing home.
It's a chance to make good.
"I like this program," said Christina Manso, 17, who enrolled in the program last October.
"Without it, I probably would be at home taking care of my baby."


Extra Pressures And Extra Points
Fans should love the National Football League's new 2-point conversion, adopted last week at the owners' meeting to add excitement.
But excitement for fans is pressure for coaches, which is why some hate the 2-point idea.
Excitement?
Pressure?
"Now there is more of both," said Don Shula of the Miami Dolphins.
"More pressure on coaches? Hey, what's new about that?"


A Love Song of the Cerebrum
PROFANE FRIENDSHIP By Harold Brodkey. 387 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $23.


BEST SELLERS: March 27, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
2
3
4
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
2
10
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
4
4
85
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
5
5
21
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
6
7
50
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
6
5
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths investigate a series of catastrophes.
8
9
3
ROGUE WARRIOR II: Red Cell, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) An attempt to stop nuclear materials from reaching North Korea.
9
8
7
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an accident, creates familial tension.
10
10
9
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a sylvan Vermont town.
11
13
5
RAMA REVEALED, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $22.95.) The concluding volume in a series about the voyage of a starship.
12
11
30
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
13
12
5
MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) Archy McNally's search for the thief of a family's heirlooms uncovers a string of surprises.
14
14
2
SECOND NATURE, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $22.95.) A woman adopts a "wolf man" and, by teaching him, learns a lot about good and evil.
15
15
5
SAREK, by A.C.
Crispin. (Pocket, $22.) The stormy life of Spock's father, an illustrious ambassador for the "Star Trek" Federation.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
46
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
14
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
3
4
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
4
8
2
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she was 11 years old) to 1993.
5
4
11
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
6
5
3
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
7
7
17
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
8
13
2
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
9
6
25
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
10
11
29
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
11
10
6
A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.
12
12
31
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
13
32
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
14
9
4
MY LIVES, by Roseanne Arnold. (Ballantine, $23.) The television personality discusses her professional life and private affairs.
15
15
84
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
10
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
2
2
44
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
3
22
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
4
4
35
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 12, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) ANCESTRAL TRUTHS, by Sara Maitland. (John Macrae/Holt, $22.50.) A splendid novel, formally a book-length family reunion at which everyone is peculiar; its prime focus is on a woman trying to remember whether she killed her male traveling companion (she certainly wanted him dead).
ANIMAL HAPPINESS, by Vicki Hearne. (HarperCollins, $20.) The author of "Adam's Task" investigates, in these essays, what pleases animals; she finds, in many cases, that though creature comforts are important, what really tickles the beasts is the sense of a job well done.
BLACK HOLES AND TIME WARPS: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy, by Kip S. Thorne. (Norton, $30.) A physicist proposes that modified, limited time travel is possible, clarifying his arguments for lay folk with illustrations and anecdotes.
CHILDREN FIRST: What Our Society Must Do -- and Is Not Doing -- for Our Children Today, by Penelope Leach. (Knopf, $22.) No amount of advice to parents suffices, an outstanding advice giver concludes; she proposes social programs that would cost plenty, in money and in effort.
FORDING THE STREAM OF CONSCIOUSNESS, by Dubravka Ugresic. (Northwestern University, paper, $14.95.) A teeming politico-literary satire by a Croatian (written in 1988, before the breakup) in which delegates from various East bloc nations suffer the insults of history.
THE HEART THAT BLEEDS: Latin America Now, by Alma Guillermoprieto. (Knopf, $24.) An experienced reporter's essays on Latin American realities as they are lived and felt as the region copes with urbanization and market economics.
HYPERSPACE: A Scientific Odyssey Through Parallel Universes, Time Warps, and the Tenth Dimension, by Michio Kaku. (Oxford University, $25.) Everything would make better sense, a physicist maintains, if there were 10 dimensions instead of 4; it remains to find the absconded dimensions, which are probably awfully small.
LISTENING, by Hannah Merker. (HarperCollins, $20.) A prolonged lyrical meditation, wise and instructive, on the importance of sound in the lives of the creatures of this planet, by a writer, editor and former librarian who lost most of her hearing when she was 39 years old.
STONES FROM THE RIVER, by Ursula Hegi. (Poseidon, $23.) Resignation is the highest virtue in this historical novel about small-town Germany from 1915 to 1952; its moral center is Trudi, a clever dwarf with a tenacious memory.
SURGERY: An Illustrated History, by Ira M. Rutkow. (Mosby-Year Book/Norman Publishing, $99.) A large, attractive volume by a surgeon, chronicling the art of wounding to heal from prehistory to the present, with 368 handsome (and non-sick-making) illustrations.
TRAIN GO SORRY: Inside a Deaf World, by Leah Hager Cohen. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) Ms.
Cohen, who hears normally but grew up in a school for the deaf, thoughtfully introduces a society that is still deciding how it should live.


Yasmin Bhatia and Moez Magan
Many people move to New York from far-off countries, only to find someone who came from a similar place and knows the same distant rivers, cities and wedding rituals.
That was true for Yasmin Bhatia, 26, and Moez Magan, 37.
They are Muslims of Indian descent who grew up in Africa -- she in Tanzania and he in neighboring Uganda -- and immigrated to New York several years ago.
Ms.
Bhatia (pronounced BAH-tee-uh) is an assistant petroleum underwriter at the Cigna Corporation in Manhattan.
Mr.
Magan (pronounced mah-GAHN) is an owner of Motor Motion, a Manhattan antique car dealership.
For their first few dates, he arrived each time in a different vintage car.
"He picked me up in an old off-white Mercedes convertible once," Ms.
Bhatia recalled.
"Another time, we went to a wedding in a really old Rolls-Royce and when we arrived, they thought we were the bride and groom."


Nature and Economic Boom Devouring China's Farmland
China's frenetic economic boom and natural forces are shrinking the country's farmland at an alarming rate, scientists and Government officials say.
As a result, Chinese and Western scientists are raising new questions about the country's ability to feed itself in the future.
In China's central and eastern provinces, the country's breadbasket for three millenniums, farmers are abandoning the land to chase prosperity in big cities and towns.
There, tens of thousands of new factories have opened under the economic reforms of Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader.


Data Bank/March 27, 1994
Data Bank/March 27, 1994
Merchandise Imports
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
In billions
$60.7
$50.2
$51.0
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$54.4
$40.1
$40.1
New Orders for Durable Goods
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
Monthly percent change
-2.5
4.4
2.0
Weekly Jobless Claims
March 18
March 11
March 4
In thousands
340
345
350
Cash Wheat Price
March 25
March 18
March 11
No. 1 K.C. per bushel
$3.54
$3.61
$3.60
3-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.47
3.44
3.48
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.79
3.76
3.76
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.01
6.82
6.90


A Strip of Green, Reclaimed
For years, Guider Park has been a place to be avoided.
Neglect has reduced the once-popular triangular park into a refuge mainly for vagrants, drug users and their dealers.
The small strip of patchy, trash-strewn green along Eastern Parkway between Washington and Classon Avenues offered a striking contrast to the grand, neighboring lawns: the Brooklyn Museum, the Brooklyn Botanic Garden and Prospect Park.


The Raid Heard Around the World
The police raid on the Stonewall Inn at 53 Christopher Street in the early morning hours of June 28, 1969, was typical of previous crackdowns there and at other gay bars without liquor licenses.
But the reaction was anything but routine: protesting the harassment of homosexuals, patrons clashed with the police and angrily marched in the streets of Greenwich Village shouting "Gay Power!" The so-called Stonewall Rebellion ushered in an era of gay pride and openness and activism for gay rights.


Italians Voting, With Mafia a Top Issue
When he took over as Mayor of Corleone a few months back, Giuseppe Cipriani figured that he was heading for trouble with the Mafia.
He was, after all, a left-wing insurgent, an anti-mob campaigner in a place renowned as the home of the "boss of all bosses," Salvatore (Toto) Riina.
So he was not very surprised last month when early one morning he discovered a severed calf's head on his fiancee's doorstep.
Then came the anonymous phone call.


Italy Votes Under Rules, Born of Scandal
When Italians vote Sunday and Monday to elect a new Parliament they will use a complicated new procedure originally intended to put an end to Italy's system of choosing political parties, rather than individual candidates.
In part at least, the new electoral law allows Italians for the first time to choose from among candidates named on the ballot, much the way Americans elect members of Congress.


One Moment Please, Before Digging In
NOW that spring has come, gardeners are eager to get outdoors and begin.
But patience is necessary.
Winter was long.
The melting snow has been seeping into the ground and making it very wet.
Don't forget, too, the old rhyme that "April showers bring May flowers." The next few weeks may be tricky.
Heavy rainfall could cause even soggier soil.
Any wet soil can be ruined by carelessly treading on it.The tracks made on wet lawns, which are especially vulnerable, are difficult to wipe out.
Heavy foot marks from too eager gardeners or even youngsters at play can damage a lawn because the soil becomes compacted and the tiny wisps of new grass have a difficult time emerging.


A Rich Explosion of Song, Indoors and Out, for Easter
"WELCOME sweet springtime, we greet thee in song!" wrote the 19th-century Russian composer Anton Rubinstein.
It's a sentiment particularly appropriate to Connecticut in 1994, the year of the relentless winter.
And there will be a profusion of song, both solemn and joyous, to be heard around the state throughout Holy Week.
Some of it will be presented outdoors, if it doesn't snow.
In Wethersfield, at the First Church of Christ, a sunrise service is to be held in the cemetery behind the church on Easter morning, with music by a brass ensemble of young parishioners.  (Caution: Daylight Saving Time goes into effect that day, and dawn will be at 6:34 A.M.)
The South Britain Congregational Church has engaged the Royal Brass Quartet to play a half-hour concert on the green in front of the church at 10 A.M.
Easter Sunday, and the First Congregational Church in Old Greenwich will offer a 15-minute outdoor performance preceding each of its services today through next Sunday.
Indoors, at the Church of the Redeemer in New Haven, a "Messiah" sing-in will be held on Friday at 8 P.M., reviving a tradition that was popular in the 1980's.
And in Woodbridge, a new music-drama will be given its first performance this evening at 7 P.M. at Trinity Evangelical Free Church.
"The Victor," by David T. Clydesdale, Tim Shepherd, David Mullin and Jim Owens, tells the story of Jesus's death and burial through the eyes of Benjamin, a mythical Jewish religious leader of the period.
Following are details of these and other programs to be heard around the state.
BRIDGEPORT -- United Congregational Church, 877 Park Ave.
Today, 10:30 A.M., excerpts from "Judas Maccabeus" by Handel, "Lift Up Your Heads" by Wesley Andersen, "Sanctus" from Haydn's "Lord Nelson Mass." Thursday, 8 P.M., "In Love My Saviour Now Is Dying" and chorales from Bach's "St. Matthew Passion" with Joyce Erickson, soprano, "Were You There?" with Nancy Ibsen, contralto.
Next Sunday, 10:30 A.M., works by Gabrieli, Pachelbel and Bach, "Intrata Festiva" by Flor Peeters, "This Joyful Eastertide" arranged by Alec Wyton, "The Glory of Christ" by K. Lee Scott, "O Filii et Filiae" by Geoffrey Butcher, "Hallelujah" from Handel's "Messiah," "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony.
Paul Knox, music director.
DARIEN -- St.
John's Roman Catholic Church, 1986 Boston Post Road.
Today, 11:30 A.M., "Lift Up Your Heads" from the "Messiah," "See Gethsemane" by Lloyd Larson, "Palm Branches" by Faure.
Friday, 3 P.M., "Thee We Adore" by Theodore Dubois, "In the Upper Room" by Russell Nagy, "I Think I Heard Him Say" by Martin/Pugh, "O Vos Omnes" by Tomas Luis de Victoria, "Here Yet Awhile" from Bach's "St. Matthew Passion." Saturday, 8 P.M., "Gloria" by Mozart, "Sing Alleluia" by McCabe, "Dextera Domini" by Franck, "All the Ends of the Earth" by Joncas, "Hallelujah" from the "Messiah." Next Sunday, 11:30 A.M., repeat of Saturday's program.
Frederick Tripodi, music director.
DARIEN -- First Congregational Church, Brookside Dr.
Next Sunday, 9 and 11 A.M., "Canzoni" by Gabrieli, "Christ Lag in Todesbanden" by Samuel Scheidt, "Easter Carillon" by John Beck and excerpts from Bach's "Easter Cantata No. 4." Thomas Crawford, music director.
DARIEN -- St.
Luke's Parish, 1864 Post Road.
Today, 9:15 and 11:15 A.M., "Let This Mind Be in You" by Amy Beach, settings of Psalm 22 by Hallock and by Alma Hamilton.
Friday, 11:50 A.M., "Die Sunde" by Robert Puleo, with Arden Broecking, mezzo-soprano.
Next Sunday, 9:15 and 11:15 A.M., "Festival Intrada" by Richard Strauss, C. S. Lang's "Christ the Lord Hath Risen," two versions of "Christ Our Passover" by Everett Titcomb and by Alec Wyton, "Easter Carol" by Gordon Young, "Exultation for Easter" by Arnold Sherman.
Gordon Dean, music director.
DARIEN -- Noroton Presbyterian Church, 2011 Post Rd.
Today, 9 and 10:45, "The Swan" by Saint-Saens, with Victoria Drake, harpist; Mary Constanza, cellist; "Cantique de Jean Racine" by Faure.
Next Sunday, 9 and 11 A.M., "My Dancing Day" by Daniel Cherwein, Libby Van Cleve, oboist; Tony Steve, percussionist.
Michael Strain, music director.
EASTON -- Congregational Church, Westport and Center Rds.
Today, 10:30 A.M., "Fugue in G Major" by Handel, "Make Way" by Russell Nagy, Faure's "Palms," with JoAnn Rice, soprano.
Thursday, 8 P.M., "Lord of Lords, Adored by Angels" by Vajda/Bouman.
Next Sunday, 8:30 A.M., "O Morn of Beauty" by Sibelius, "Christus Resurrexit" by Gordon Young.
At 10:30 A.M., "For God So Loved the World" arr. by Dale Grotenhuis, "O Sons and Daughters" by Robert Powell, Adam's "Holy City" and works by Bach.
Jeanne Millett, music director.
ESSEX -- First Congregational Church, 33 Prospect St.
Today, 10 A.M., "Hosannah to the King" by Larson, "Fear Not, Ye People of Zion" by John Paige.
Next Sunday, 9 and 11 A.M., "Easter Celebration" by Don Besig, "Alleluia, Jesus Is Risen" by Sandy Wilkinson.
Barry Asch, music director.
FAIRFIELD -- Black Rock Congregational Church, 3695 Black Rock Tpke.
Thursday, 7:45 P.M., "My Faith Has Found a Resting Place" by Betsy Read, "Were You There?" by Peggy Gunter, "Nearer, Still Nearer" by Martin Pinner, "In This Cup," text by Gloria Gaither, music arr. by Mark Hayes.
Next Sunday, 9:30 and 11 A.M., "Up From the Grave" by Timothy Howard, "Christ the Lord Is Risen Today" by Lyra Dazidica, "Allelujah" by William Boyce, "And God Cried" by Robert Sterling and Chris Machen, "Hallelujah" from the "Messiah," with Ceci Ingrim, alto.
James P. Marshall, minister of music.
FAIRFIELD -- First Church Congregational, Beach and Old Post Rds.
Thursday, 8 P.M., "Tantum Ergo" by Faure, "Ubi Caritas" by Durufle.
Friday, 8 P.M., "Were You There?" with David Winkworth, baritone.
Next Sunday, 9:30 and 11 A.M., "Blessed Be the God and Father" by S. S. Wesley, with Mr.
Winkworth; Ann Davin, soprano; Mark Richards, trumpeter.
"Carillon de Westminster" by Louis Vierne, for organ.
K.
Bryan Kirk, music director.
FAIRFIELD -- St.
Paul's Episcopal Church, 661 Old Post Rd.
Next Sunday, 9 A.M., "Hallelujah" from the "Messiah," "Christ the Lord Is Risen Again" by John Rutter.
At 11 A.M., "Light's Glittering Morn Bedecks the Sky" by Horatio Parker, "Our Lord Is Risen With Flag Unfurled" by Hugo Distler.
Alice Caldwell, music director.
GREENWICH -- First Congregational Church, 108 Sound Beach Ave.
Today, 9:15 and 11 A.M, Stephen Adams's "Holy City," Gounod's "Gallia," "Rejoice Greatly" by Johannes Petzold, "The Palms" by Faure, Bach's "Toccata and Fugue in D Minor," "Processional" by William Matthias, with Dora Koutelas, soprano.
Friday, 8 P.M., music of Daniel Pinkham, Kenneth Leighton, Liszt, Schubert, Langlais and Randall Thompson, with Victoria Drake, harpist.
Next Sunday, 9:15 and 11 A.M., "Forth the Conqueror Has Gone" by Dale Wood, "Hilariter" by Richard Dirksen, "Alleluyas" by Simon Preston, "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony.
Outdoor musical preludes 15 minutes before each service.
Richard Stansell, organist; Richard Vogt, music director.
GREENWICH -- Christ Church, 254 East Putnam Ave.
Today, 9 and 11:15 A.M., "At the Name of Jesus" by Vaughan Williams, "Ave Verum" by Mozart, "Les Rameaux" by Langlais, Introits and Kyrie from Mozart's Requiem, "Vexila Regis Prodeunt" by David Koehring, "Hosannah to the Son of David" by Thomas Weelkes.
Thursday, 7:30 P.M., "Mein Junges Leben Hat Ein End" by Jan Paieter Sweelinck, "Ubi Caritas" by Durufle, "In Manas Tuas" by John Shepperd, "Si Iniquitates Observaveris" by Samuel Wesley.
Friday, noon, "Pie Jesu" from Faure's Requiem.
GREENWICH -- St.
Mary Church, 178 Greenwich Ave.
Today, 10:30 A.M., "O Bone Jesu" by Palestrina, "The Palms" by Faure, "Hosannah to the King of Kings" by Larson, "Lift High the Cross" by Carl Schalk.
Thursday, 8 P.M., "Stay With Us" by Walter Pelz, "In the Upper Room" by Nagy, "Ubi Caritas" by Laurence Rosania, "Song of the Body of
GREENWICH -- Second Congregational Church, 139 East Putnam Ave.
Today, 10:30 A.M., "Hosannah," by Christian Gregor, arr. by Roberta Bitgood, "Sanctus" from Durufle's Requiem, "Entry Into Jerusalem" from Randall Thompson's "Passion According to St. Luke," "Festival Amen" by Gounod.
Thursday, 7:30 P.M.
Brother James's "Air," "The Father's Love" by Simon Lole, "God So Loved the World" from John Stainer's "Crucifixion," Harold Fredell's "Jesus So Lowly," with Richard Kuelling, bass, "If Thou Hadst Known," from Thompson's "St. Luke Passion." Next Sunday, 7 A.M., outdoors, traditional hymns and fanfare music of Handel, with Patricia Hurley, trumpeter.
At 10 A.M. indoors, Vivaldi's "Concerto for Two Trumpets," excerpts from the "Messiah," "Lo the Bright Seraphim" and "Let Their Celestial Concerts All Unite" from Handel's "Samson," with Laura Danehower, soprano, Roberta Bitgood's "Joy Dawned Again," "Hallelujah" from the "Messiah," with Ms.
Hurley and Ron Carson, trumpeters; David Perlman, timpanist, and "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony.
Lowell Lacey and Ann Carter Cox, music directors.
GREENWICH -- St.
Catherine of Siena, 4 Riverside Ave.
Today, 10:30 A.M., "Hosannah" by Ronald A. Nelson, "Improperium" by F. X. Witt.
Thursday, 8 P.M., "In Remembrance" by Allan Koepke, "Wondrous Love" by Marty Haugen.
Friday, 3 P.M., "Adoramus Te Christe" by Theodore Dubois, "God So Loved the World" by John Stainer, "When I Survey the Wondrous Cross" by Lowell Mason.
Saturday, 8 P.M., "I Am the Resurrection and the Life" by Nelson, "Song of the Risen One" by David Haas, "Hallelujah" from the "Messiah." Next Sunday, 10:30 A.M., repetition of Saturday program, Randall Thompson's "Hallelujah." J. Niles Saxton, music director.
GUILFORD -- First Congregational Church on the green.
Today, 11 A.M., "The Merchant's Carol" by Arthur Frackenpohl.
Thursday, 7:30 P.M., "Ave Verum Corpus" by Byrd.
Friday, 7:30 P.M., "Tenebrae Factae Sunt" by Michael Haydn, "Salvation Is Created" by Tschesnokoff, "O Wondrous Love" by Bach, "Ah, Holy Jesus" by Steven Stukey, with Martha Oneppo, soprano; Kyle Pruett, tenor.
Next Sunday, 9 and 11 A.M., "Christ Is Now Risen Again" by Alan Wilson, "Magdalene" by Brahms, "Alleluia" by Thompson, "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony.
James Gower, music director.
HARTFORD -- Immanuel Congregational Church, 10 Woodland St.
Next Sunday, 10 A.M., "Hilariter" by Alex Wyton, "Spice She Brought, and Sweet Perfume" by McNeill Robinson, "Hallelujah" from the "Messiah," "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony.
Larry Allen, music director.
HARTFORD -- Cathedral of St.
Joseph, 140 Farmington Ave.
Tuesday, 11 A.M., "Kyrie, Christe, Kyrie" from Bach's "Clavierubung, Part III," "The Lord Is My Shepherd" by Thomas Matthews, "Ave Verum Corpus" by William Byrd, "Resurrection" from "Symphonie Passion" by Dupre.
Thursday, 7:30 P.M., "Ubi Caritas" by Durufle, Byrd's "Ave Verum Corpus." Friday, 3 P.M., "Christus Factus Est" by Felice Anerio, "Vere Languores Nostros" by Tomas Luis de Victoria.
Saturday, 7:30 P.M., "Gloria" from David Hurd's "Intercession Mass," "Jubilate Deo" by Johann Kasper Aiblinger, "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony.
Next Sunday, 9 and 11 A.M., Saturday's program repeated.
James Biery, music director.
HARTFORD -- South Congregational Church, 277 Main St.
Today, 10 A.M., Sonatas for piano and harpsichord by Busoni and Scarlatti, "Fugue in B Minor for Organ" by Bach, "Praise the Lord, Ye Congregation" by Joe E. Parks, "Hosianna" Swedish folk tune.
Thursday, 7:30 P.M., "Wouldst Thou Love One?" by James Audlin, "My Days Are Gone Like a Shadow" by John Blow.
Next Sunday, 10 A.M., "Ricercare III" by Julio de Modena, "Adagio" by Albinoni, with George Sanders, trombonist; "O How Amiable" by Vaughan Williams, "Laudate Dominum" by Hans Hassler, "Jesus Christ Is Risen" by Alan Hovhaness, "Hallelujah" from the "Messiah." Richard Donohue, music director.
HARTFORD -- First Church of Christ, 60 Gold St.
Today, 11 A.M., "Shout Hosannah" by Russell Nagy, Psalm 98 arr. by Margaret Marshall, "He Beheld the City" by George Jeffrey.
Thursday, 7:30 P.M., "Lagrimoso" from Haydn's "Stabat Mater" with Pamela Frigo, mezzo-soprano; "Ubi Caritas" by Durufle, "O Vos Omnes" by Victoria.
Next Sunday, 11 A.M., music by Vivaldi, hymns arr. by James Biery, selections from "Five Mystical Songs" by Vaughan Williams, with Mark Womack, baritone.
Marilyn Perkins Biery, director of music ministries.
HARTFORD -- Asylum Hill Congregational Church, 814 Asylum Ave.
Friday, 7:30 P.M., two versions of "The Seven Last Words of Christ" by Schutz and by Theodore DuBois, with Asylum Hill Oratorio Choir; Iva Petersen, soprano, Wayne Rivera, tenor, Jonathan Hays, baritone. $8.
Richard Einsel, music director.
NEW BRITAIN -- South Congregational-First Baptist Church, 90 Main St.
Today, 10:30 A.M., "Lift Up Your Heads" and "All We Like Sheep" from the "Messiah," "O Sacred Head" by David Hurd.
Thursday, 7:30 P.M., "Ah, Holy Jesus" by Roger T. Petrich, "Jesu, Grant Me This, I Pray" by Christopher Robinson, "Abide With Me" Mormon hymn.
Next Sunday, 10:30 A.M., "Communion Service in D Major" by Gerald Near, "O Sons and Daughters of the King" by Eric Thiman, "Mary Magdalene" by Brahms, "Christ Is Arisen" by Jerry Wesley Harris, with Deborah Kamm, soprano; Frank Tamburro, trumpeter.
Richard Coffey, music director.
NEW BRITAIN -- South Congregational-First Baptist Church, 90 Main St.
Today, 4 P.M., Woodland Concert Series of Hartford and Music Series of New Britain, "Missa Brevis" by Kodaly, "Messe Cum Jubilo" by Durufle, "Missa Brevis" by Britten, "Mass in G Minor" by Vaughan Williams.
Richard Coffey and Larry Allen, conductors and organists, David Westfall, organist.
Offering.
NEW BRITAIN -- St.
Peter Roman Catholic Church, 98 Franklin Square.
Today, 10 A.M., "Hosannah, Filio David" Gregorian chant, "Adoramus Te" by Josef Rheinberger, "Ave Verum" by Mozart.
Thursday, 8 P.M., "Nos Autem" Gregorian chant, "Ubi Caritas" by Durufle, "God So Loved the World" by John Stainer, "Pange Lingua" Gregorian chant, "Tantum Ergo" by Jose Beobide.
Friday, 3 P.M., "O Bone Jesu" by Palestrina, "Adoramus Te" by Orlande de Lassus, "Popule Meus" by Victoria.
Saturday, 8 P.M., and next Sunday, 10 A.M., "Missa in G Minor" by Rheinberger, "Christ the Lord Hath Risen" by Harold Gear, "Cantique de Paques" by Honegger.
Christopher Schaefer, minister of music.
NEW CANAAN -- St.
Mark's Episcopal Church, 111 Oenoke Ridge.
Next Sunday, 9:15 and 11:15, "The Heavens Declare the Glory of God" by Benedetto Marcello, "Canzon a Quatro" by Frederico Guami, "Festival Procession" by Richard Strauss, "Exultation for Easter" by Arnold Sherman, "Easter Carol" by Gordon Young, "Hallelujah" and "I Know That My Redeemer Lives" from the "Messiah," "On That First Bright Easter Day" by C. T. Lang, with Megan Yost, soprano, "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony.
Hedley Yost, music director.
NEW HAVEN -- Trinity Church on the green.
Today, 11 A.M., Thomas Weelkes's "Hosannah to the Son of David," "Lift Up Your Head" from the "Messiah," Edward Bairstow's "Lamentation of Jeremiah." Thursday, 8 P.M., "Ubi Caritas" by Durufle.
Friday, noon, John Ireland's "Ex Ore Innocentium," with Trinity Singers and organ.
Saturday, 7 P.M., Bairstow's "Sing Ye to the Lord," "Rise Up My Love, My Fair One" by Healy Willan, with Trinity Singers.
Next Sunday, 11 A.M., Richard Dirksen's "Christ Our Passover," Horatio Parker's "Light's Glittering Morn Bedecks the Sky," "Hallelujah" from the "Messiah," "Improvisation on the Te Deum" for organ by Charles Tournemire.
Walden Moore, music director.
NEW HAVEN -- St.
Mary's Church, 5 Hillhouse Ave.
Today, noon, Orlande de Lassus's "Missa Quati Toni," Victoria's "Pueri Hebraeorum," Jacopo de Mantua's "O Jesu Christe," de Lassus's "Improperium Expectadit" and Gregorian chants.
Friday, 3 P.M., "Improperia" by Victoria, "Christus Factus Est" by Anerio, "Adoramus Te Christe" by Jacobus Gallus, Victoria's "Vere Languores Nostros" and Gregorian chants.
Saturday, 9 P.M., "Missa Regina Coeli" and "Sicut Cervus" by Palestrina, de Lassus's "Suegens Jesus," "Regina Coeli" by Cristobal de Morales.
Next Sunday, noon, Mozart's "Missa Brevis in C Major," "Regina Coeli," "Ave Verum Corpus" and Church Sonatas for Organ and Strings, Easter hymns and Gregorian chants.
The Schola Cantorum of St.
Mary's, Julia Blue Raspe, soprano; Blanche Porto, mezzo-soprano; David Finley, tenor; Howard Foster, bass, and Britt Wheeler perform in all programs.
Nicholas Renouf, music director.
NEW HAVEN -- Sacred Heart Church, Columbus Ave. at Liberty St.
Today, 2 P.M., "Missa Il Me Suffit" by Orlande de Lassus, motets by Victoria, Jachet de Bercham and de Lassus, Gregorian chants.
Friday, noon, "Improperia" by Victoria, motets by Jakob Handl, Victoria and Palestrina, Gregorian chants.
Next Sunday, 2 P.M., "Missa Regina Coeli" by Palestrina, motets by de Lassus and Cristobal de Morales, Gregorian chants.
All programs performed by the Schola Cantorum of the St.
Gregory Society, Nicholas Renouf and Britt Wheeler, directors.
NEW HAVEN -- Church of the Redeemer, Whitney and Cold Springs Sts.
Friday, 8 P.M., "Messiah" sing-in with Julia Blue Raspe, soprano; Howard Foster, bass; Rodney Ayers and Vincent Edwards, organists.
Next Sunday, 10 A.M., excerpts from Handel's "Messiah," with Claire Newbold, trumpeter.
Marguerite Brooks, music director.
NEW HAVEN -- Center Church on the green.
Today, 10 A.M., "Voluntary in G" by John Stanley, "Draw Nigh to Thy Jerusalem," "Palm Branches" by Faure, "Ride On in Majesty" by Jack Litten, "Toccata in E Minor" by Pachelbel.
Thursday, 7 P.M., "O Mensch, Bewein Dein Sunde Gros" by Bach, "Ach, Golgotha" from Bach's "St. Matthew Passion" with Blanche Porto, mezzo-soprano, "Crucefixus" from "Mass in B Minor" by Bach, "O Sacred Head, Sore Wounded" by Michael Hurd, "Pie Jesu" by Andrew Lloyd Weber, with Judith Strang, soprano.
Next Sunday, 9:45 A.M., "Toccata and Fugue in D Minor" by Bach, "Christ, Our Passover" by Litten, "Laudate Pueri" by Mozart, "Hallelujah" from the "Messiah." Jack Litten, music director.
NEW HAVEN -- United Church on the green.
Today, 10:30 A.M., "Chorale in A Minor" for organ by Franck, "Hosannah to the Son of David" by Gibbons, "Christus Factus Est" by Bruckner.
Next Sunday, 10:15 A.M., music by the Colonial Brass Quartet, solos and choruses from the "Messiah" Part III, with Kathryn Thomas, soprano; Marilyn Newman, alto; Dennis Titley, tenor.
Mark Brombaugh, music director.
NEWINGTON -- Church of St.
Mary, 626 Willard Ave.
Today, 11:30 A.M., Gregorian Passion, "Wilt Thou Forgive" by Ladislaw Pfeifer.
Thursday, 7:30 P.M., Nutmeg Children's Chorus performing Casals, Bach and traditional Gregorian chants.
Friday, 7:30 P.M., 16th- to 20th-century anthems and chants.
Saturday, 8 P.M., "Laudate Dominum" by Mozart, "Hallelujah" and "The Trumpet Shall Sound" from the "Messiah." Ladislaw Pfeifer, music director.
NORWALK -- First Congregational Church on the green.
Today, 10:30 A.M., "Blessed Is He That Cometh in the Name of the Lord" by Gounod, "Jerusalem" by Volpius, "Thy Glory Dawns, Jerusalem" by C. M. Lockwood, "March Pontificale" from Symphony No. 1 by Widor, with Grace Kane, soprano; Meredith Fischer, alto; William Bray, baritone.
Next Sunday, 11 A.M., "Sing Ye to the Lord" and "The Promise Was Made" by Bairstow, "Magnificat in C Major" by Charles Stanford, "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony, with the same soloists.
Joseph MacFarland, music director.
SOUTH BRITAIN -- South Britain Congregational Church, Rte. 172.
Next Sunday, 10:10 A.M., fanfare and seasonal music on the green, with Royal Brass Quartet.
At 10:25 indoors, "Grand Choeur Dialogue" by Gigout, "Alleluia" from "Cantata 207" by Bach, "Jubilate Deo" by Kurtwright, "Seasonal Alleluia" by Leisring, "Voices Unite in Joyful Praise" by Volpius.
Maria Coffin, music director.
SOUTHPORT -- Trinity Episcopal Church, 651 Pequot Ave.
Today, 4 P.M., "Rejoice in the Lamb" by Britten, "Missa Brevis" by Kodaly, with Trinity Chorale, and Rayanne Dupuis, soprano; Mary Phillips, mezzo-soprano; Richard Appelgren, tenor; Phillip Cutlip, baritone, works by Hindemith and Vierne, with Edward Thompson, organist. $8.
Next Sunday, 9 and 11 A.M., ceremonial music by Purcell for organ and trumpets, "Easter" and "Let All the World in Every Corner Sing" from "Five Mystical Songs" by Vaughan Williams, with Mr.
Cutlip.
Charles Dodsley Walker, music director.
STAMFORD -- St.
John's Episcopal Church, 628 Main St.
Today, 10:15 A.M., "Prelude and Fugue in D Major," "Jesus, I Will Ponder Now on thy Holy Passion" by Bach, "Christus Factus Est" by Bruckner, "O Sacred Head Now Wounded" by Bach.
Next Sunday, 8 and 10:15 A.M., "Grand Choeur Dialogue" by Gigout, "Hallelujah" from "Mount of Olives" by Beethoven, "My Beloved Spake and Said Unto Me" by Patrick Hadley, "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony.
Curtis Pierce, music director.
STAMFORD -- St.
John's Lutheran Church, 884 Newfield Ave.
Today, 10:30 A.M., "Valet Will Ich Dier Geben" by Bach; "Surely He Hath Borne Our Grief," "With His Strife We Are Healed," and "All We Like Sheep" from the "Messiah." Friday, 7:30 P.M., "Seven Last Words of Christ" by Knut Nystedt, with a cappella choir, "The Crucufixion" and "Lord Jesus Christ" byBarber, with Jonathan Goodman, tenor; "Were You There?" arr. by Harry Burleigh.
Next Sunday, 8:30 and 10:30 A.M., "Canzona for Four Trumpets" by Samuel Scheidt, "Concerto for Three Trumpets" by Telemann, Symphonia to Bach's "Easter Oratorio" with Douglas Myers, Richard Clymer, Thomas Jordan, Linda Isermann, trumpeters; "Fanfare for Easter" by Paul Fetler, "Hallelujah" from the "Messiah," "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony.
Stephen Rapp, music director.
STAMFORD -- First Presbyterian Church, 1101 Bedford St.
Fri., 8, "Dona Nobis Pacem" by Vaughan Williams, "Organ Symphony No. 3," by Saint-Saens with the Wilton Singers.
Next Sunday, 9 and 11 A.M., "Fight the Good Fight" by John Gardner, "Contrapuntas" by Bach, C. Harry Causey's "Processional Hallelujah," with the New York Brass Quintet.
James Wetherald, music director.
WALLINGFORD -- Most Holy Trinity Church, 68 North Colony St.
Today, 10:30 A.M., "God So Loved the World" by Stainer, "Christus Factus Est" by Anerio.
Thursday, 7 P.M.
"Pange Lingua" by Peeters and by Philip Kreckel, "Ubi Caritas" by Durufle.
Friday, 2:30 P.M., anthems by Richard Farrant, Victoria, Claudio Casciolini, Palestrina, Oldroyd, Drozdov, Anerio, Stainer and Roselli as well as Gregorian chants.
Saturday, 7 P.M., "Exultet" by Everett Frese, "Vidi Aquam" by Thomas Stockton, "O God Beyond All Praising" by Proulx, "Christ Our Passover" by Victoria, "Laudate Dominum" by Mozart, "Carillon" by Vierne.
Sunday, 10:30 A.M., "This Is the Day" by Stockton, works by Mozart, and repeat of Saturday's selections, with Nancy Gustafson, soprano; Karen Ripa, alto; Brendan Goodrich and Fred Stockton, baritones.
Thomas Stockton, music director.
WATERTOWN -- First Congregational Church, 40 DeForest St.
Today, 10:30 A.M., "Prelude II in B Minor" by Hermann Schroeder, "Processional" by William Mathias, "Hosannah" by Schubert, "Could Jesus Hear the Sounds to Come?" by Lee Harvey Bristol, "Benedictus" by Couperin, "Prelude VI in C" by Schroeder.
Thursday, 7:30 P.M., "In Bread and Wine" by John Carter, "See Gethsemane" by Lloyd Larson.
Friday, 7:30 P.M., "The Holy Lamb of God" by K. Lee Scott, "God So Loved the World" by John Stainer.
Next Sunday, 9:15 and 11 A.M., "Toccata in F Major" by Bach, "A Repeating Allelujah" by Calvin Hampton, "Magdalene, Cease from Sobs and Sighs" arr. by Peter Hurford, "Worthy Is the Lamb" from the "Messiah," "Toccata" from Widor's Fifth Symphony.
Robert Havery, music director.
WESTPORT -- Unitarian Church, 10 Lyons Plains Rd.
Next Sunday, 10:30 A.M., "With Cheerful Notes" by Handel, "Arise and Hail" by William Billings.
"Contrapunctus" by Bach, William Holbornes's "Pavanne," "Sharagan Fugue" by Alan Hovhaness.
Edward Thompson, music director.
WESTPORT -- St.
Luke's Roman Catholic Church, 84 Long Lots Rd.
Friday, 8 P.M., choruses from the "Messiah," and from Bach's "St. Matthew Passion" and "St. John Passion," selections from "The Seven Last Words of Christ" by Theodore Dubois, with Linda Collins and Stella Hartel, sopranos; Leon Bernard, organist; John Hanulik, oboist; Brian Chamberlin, trumpeter; Paul McKenna, timpanist.
Next Sunday, 10:30 A.M., "Hallelujah To the Triune Majesty" arr. by Ross Hastings, "Thine Is the Glory" from "Judas Maccabaeus" by Handel, "Ye Watchers and Ye Holy Ones," "Hallelujah" from the "Messiah." John Hanulik, conductor; Father Pierre Botton, music director.
WETHERSFIELD -- First Church of Christ, 250 Main St.
Today, 7 P.M., Bach's "St. John Passion," with ; Brian Meneely, tenor; Howard Sprout, baritone; Thom King, bass-baritone; Paul Anderson, bass; Nancy LaMarch Andersen, soprano; Cherry Duke, mezzo-soprano; Christopher Dukes and Mark Lubas, tenors. $8, students and elderly $7.
Friday, 2 P.M., "Crucifixion" from Dupre's "Symphonie Passion" for organ, with dramatic portrayal of Good Friday.
Next Sunday, sunrise service in the cemetery.
Indoor services, 7:30, 9, 10:30, 12, music by Dale Wood, Jacob Handl, Mikhail Ippolitov-Ivanov.
David Spicer, music director.
WOODBRIDGE -- Trinity Evangelical Free Church, Center Rd.
Today, 7 P.M., "The Victor" music and drama of the Crucifixion by David T. Clydesdale, Tim Shepherd, David Mullin and Jim Owens.
Colleen Smith, music director.
WOODBURY -- St.
Paul's Church, Main St.
Saturday, 4 P.M., "Worship the King" by William Funk, with children's choir; "O Lord, My Love" by Beth Nathan with Linda Sims, soprano and piano.
Next Sunday, 8 and 10 A.M., excerpts from Vaughan Williams's "Pilgrim's Progress" with Ashley Nichols, soprano; Douglas Sims, tenor.
Linda Sims, music director.


Fumes Injure 14
Fourteen people were injured last night when carbon monoxide, apparently from a faulty boiler, spread throughout an apartment building in Harlem, the authorities said.
Firefighters evacuated about 20 families shortly after 7:30 P.M. from 6 East 132d Street.
The victims were taken to four hospitals, an official said.
One victim was in serious condition, while the rest were stable, she said.


Avert Chimney Fires by Cleaning Out the Creosote
FIREPLACES, wood stoves and chimneys require annual inspections and cleaning, especially if used regularly.
Promptness is crucial.
Burning wood produces creosote, a tarlike substance that lines a chimney with a sticky flammable coating.
If allowed to cool until the next heating season, the creosote hardens to form a glassy layer that resists removal.
Thick deposits of creosote can crack masonry and loosen stovepipes.
More important, allowing creosote to build up can lead to a chimney fire.


F.Y.I.
No Dogs Allowed Q.  Many people bring their dogs into delis and other stores freely these days.
But aren't pets prohibited in stores of all kinds?
I think food stores may even now be forbidden to have a resident cat.


Corrections
An article today about skin care, on page 18 of Men's Fashions of The Times, misidentifies a product and its active ingredient.
The product is Aramis's Lab Series Lift Off, not Aramis's Lab Series Face Off.
It contains alpha hydroxy acid, not salicylic acid.


St. Thomas Dining
To the Editor: We recently returned from St.
Thomas and want to thank James Cobb ("What's Doing on St. Thomas," Jan. 23) for leading us to the Agave Terrace restaurant.
What a superb meal we enjoyed.
The wide range of preparations, including heart-healthy ones, was astounding and somewhat unusual for St.
Thomas.
I'm still thinking about the teriyaki-mango sauce over a local white fish.
And the conch chowder was the best I ever tasted.
We met and thanked the executive chef, Joseph Sassine.


The World: Politicking in Sharpeville; Where Blood Ran And a Tide Turned
This is the campaign venue from hell, a place to make advance men swallow their tongues and reporters think fondly of more sedate ways to earn a living.
You enter Sharpeville past smoldering garbage heaps and tumbledown homes, past graffiti screaming of race war against "settlers," meaning whites, through an angry, gun-crazy town that is a testimonial to breakdown.
Public services, which were never much, are at the moment nonexistent.
Violence, which in Sharpeville is discussed as a mysterious commonplace of nature, like the weather, has rendered the township unserviceable.
No electrician or grocery truck or sewer repair crew is willing to brave the wild frontier just now.


Boston U. Stifles Wisconsin And Harvard Roars Forward
The team from Boston University, the best in the nation according to the polls, conducted a clinic in defensive hockey tonight at the expense of Wisconsin.
The Terriers shut down hard on the Badgers from the Western Association and beat them, 4-1, in the National Collegiate Athletic Association East Regional tournament at the Knickerbocker Arena.
The shots-on-goal figure told the story.
Boston U. had 31 and Wisconsin, regarded as a good offensive team, had only 14, just 7 in the last two periods.


Rabbit Is Naked
The Disney empire was built on mice, rabbits, ducks, dogs and every other variety of animated creature imaginable.
And now it has moles.
Well, mischief-making saboteurs of some sort.
Someone at Disney inserted images of Jessica Rabbit completely naked into laser disks of "Who Framed Roger Rabbit." They also added a telephone number for the fictitious brothel of Madam Allyson Wonderland -- actually the home number of Michael Eisner, the head of Disney.


Sports of The Times; The Big Men Can Compare Their Diets
THERE will be no fat-man jokes about the two earnest college students who will guard each other in the East Regional this afternoon.
Dametri Hill of Florida, weighing 286 pounds, down from a high of 351, will lean against Danya Abrams of Boston College, weighing 268 pounds, down from 326.
Abrams sounds almost reverent when he remembers the boxes of cereal he used to ingest when he lived at home, and Hill takes on a dreamlike smile when he remembers the late-night snacks.
Those were the ultimate sacrifices each made to reach the doorstep of the Final Four.
They made them proudly and gladly.


Rise of a New Style
REINCARNATION
Call it reincarnation or renaissance, but the way a city renews itself is nowhere better seen than in the terra cotta, cast-iron world along Sixth Avenue above 14th Street, a strip that cruising cabbies can no longer dismiss as dead zone between the Village and Herald Square.
There, and to the east, an alchemy of forces has created a distinctive mix of strolling, dining and shopping in a turn-of-the century environment, a hybrid of urban funk and surburban discount shopping that allows one to eat lunch in style at the Union Square Cafe, buy organic preservative-free bacon at the Greenmarket, pick up a dog-eared copy of "Steal This Book" on 18th Street and a cat hair dust mop at Bed Bath and Beyond.
Starting on April 5 add a Barnes &amp; Noble to the mix with a recipe of live theater, live music, author readings and books, 35,000 square feet worth.


Drug Report on Mayor-Elect
Mayor-elect Marc Morial, who denied during the campaign that he had been treated for drug abuse, sought treatment at a hospital emergency room in 1986, a newspaper reported today.
The newspaper, The Times-Picayune, said Mr.
Morial had told medical personnel that "he had 'snorted cocaine' earlier that evening" and that his heart was "racing out of chest."


Dying of Thirst: Reviving your skin.
DIDN'T THINK IT MATTERED, did you?
You washed, you dried and you were out.
Your skin?
It looked okay.
You scrubbed.
Used a clean blade.
Even that nice after-shave balm you got for Christmas.
What more did you have to do?
Wear that gunk she wears?
Eye creams?
Sun block?
You always wear a hat.
Besides, you don't burn, you tan.
And then the mirror stopped saying, "Hey, kiddo." The media harangues about ozone layers, UVA rays, Retin-A and the dramatic rise in melanoma got to you.
Your skin's flaking.
Sometimes it's a little itchy.
You burn.
Face it.
You're getting older.
She is, too.
But she's getting better.
You?
You're not so sure.


Kara B. Kerker, David M. Ritchie
Kara Betsy Kerker and David Michael Ritchie, managers at the Hewlett-Packard Company, were married yesterday.
Judge Thomas L. Moultrie of Multnomah County District Court in Portland, Ore., officiated at the Jenkins Estate in Aloha, Oregon.
The bride, 30, is the market development manager for the Deskjet marketing center in Vancouver, Wash., where the bridegroom, 41, is a product manager in the printer division.


Your I.Q.: Answers to the Quiz
Wherein Also Lies a Reader's Guide to the City's Literary Societies
Here are the answers to the quiz on pages 1 and 9, along with the names and available information about local societies devoted to each.
1. SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE


Dispatches From the Remodeling Front
THERE is a lot of drama in buying an apartment: Making your first bid and finding that someone else bid one hour earlier and got it.
Making your second bid, and discovering that the owners have decided not to sell.
Making a bid way beyond your means and, luckily, losing out to someone who could pay much more.
But after a year of looking, when we finally went to contract on a large Upper West Side wreck, we thought the drama was over.


Finn's Glass Designs On Tour of U.S.
A retrospective of the work of the Finnish designer Timo Sarpaneva has begun to make its way around the United States.
Glass will be the focus of the exhibit by Mr.
Sarpaneva, who originated the "i-line" series for the Finnish glassworks company Iittala.
Among the more than 80 works on display are "Kayak," a 1953 glass sculpture shaped by hand and steam-blown; the 1954 "Orchid" glass sculpture, and "Marcel" clear-glass stemware, designed in 1992 for the President of Finland.
The retrospective will also include works in wood, metal and porcelain.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-16  SERBS PRESS ON IN BANJA LUKA  The Bosnian Serbs' campaign to drive out Muslims and Croats is growing in the Banja Luka region of northern Bosnia, while attention is focused elsewhere.  1  U.N.
TROOPS DESTROY BUNKER  United Nations troops destroyed a Bosnian Serb bunker near Maglaj with cannon fire after an exchange of gunfire with Serbian attackers that lasted for hours.  16


Chill in Manila
Certainly there are Holocaust images in Steven Spielberg's film "Schindler's List" that a protective parent might wish to shield a young child from.
But could it be too sexy?
That's what an official board of censors in the Philippines ruled -- ordering that a love scene involving the protagonist, Oskar Schindler, and his mistress, and two other brief shots of a woman's breasts be deleted from the film.


March 20-26: Seeking Clues in New Jersey; The Day of the Metallurgist: Bits of Shattered Pipeline Are Gathered for Evidence
First came the boom, and then the fire, and now there is forensic metallurgy.
A subterranean pipeline three feet wide and carrying natural gas under pressure of 900 pounds per square inch let go early Thursday in Edison, N.J., spawning a fireball that incinerated three apartment buildings.
Nobody knows why, and the explosion, which created a 60-foot deep crater, may have destroyed the evidence.
But there are numerous bits of pipe, two-thirds of an inch thick from a stretch 80 feet long, and investigators are trying to piece them back together.


A Tribute to a Past Master
THE NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC has been systematically collecting documents, scores and artifacts since 1842, according to its archivist, Barbara Haws, mostly out of public view.
But on Thursday the orchestra will unveil a permanent display area, the Bruno Walter Gallery, in the orchestra-level promenade of Avery Fisher Hall.
The first exhibit is devoted to Walter, who was associated with the orchestra for many years, as guest conductor from 1923 to 1960 and as musical adviser from 1947 to 1949.
It is titled "Bruno Walter: Theme and Variations," after Walter's autobiography.
The theme, Ms.
Haws said, is the conductor's musical life; the variations stem from what she called his "unintentional political life," especially with respect to the Nazi regime.


In the Space of 1 Restaurant, 2 Cuisines
RESTAURANTS open and close all the time, but they rarely split in half.
That is what Millie's, a 17-year-old standby in Great Neck, will be doing next month.
The 170-seat restaurant will become two separate 85-seat restaurants with a single entrance.
Millie's, the landmark bistro, will continue to be one of them.
The newcomer is My Mediterranean Cousin, which will offer an array of Spanish-, Greek- and Italian-influenced dishes from its grill and brick oven.


Can Boeing's New Baby Fly Financially?
IN two weeks, tens of thousands of people will crowd onto a cavernous factory floor here, 25 miles north of Seattle, to watch the Boeing Company introduce its new wide-body jetliner, the 777.
What they will see on April 9 is a stunning physical and technological achievement.
The 777, the largest twin-engine plane ever built, sports the biggest, most powerful aircraft engines ever made -- the housing around each is as wide as the fuselage of a 737 or 757.
Designed entirely on computer screens and assembled without mockups, it is the first "paperless" jetliner.
And because it has just two engines, and needs only two pilots, it should cost 25 percent less to operate than older models of the four-engine 747, which it is meant to eventually replace.
Just 22 feet shorter than the 747, the new plane can carry up to 440 passengers, as many as some 747's.
And while its range is now about 4,600 miles, that will go up to 7,250 miles before long, matching the 747.


Knicks' Defense Looks For Something Special With O'Neal and Magic
The Knicks' defense loves a challenge. And Shaquille O'Neal will provide one.
The latest chapter of the Knicks-Orlando Magic rivalry will unfold Sunday afternoon, when the two teams square off in a nationally televised game at the Orlando Arena.
And there will be enough subplots to entice even the casual fan's interest, including these:


Irgun Takes the Gotham And Gazes at the Derby
After the most ruinous winter in memory, spring came rushing onto the New York racing scene yesterday with warm breezes and a strapping chestnut colt from California named Irgun who blitzed 11 rivals in the Gotham Mile at Aqueduct and established himself as the latest traveler on the road to the Kentucky Derby.
He also put New York back onto the Derby map after a winter of snowstorms and the migration of horse talent to warmer parts.
And with Jerry Bailey riding, Irgun did it with style and command as he drew clear of the pack heading for home and won by six lengths over Bit of Puddin, who in turn had two and a half lengths on Jesse F.


SURFACING
CELEBRITY  "What's on your Power Book?" Frances Lear and Tama Janowitz, above, and a number of other demi-celebrities answer this question in an advertising campaign for Apple Computer's Power Book.
Could these advertisements displace Gap ads as "the ones to be in"?
LANGUAGE  More coffee talk: The hip ways to ask for a decaffeinated cappuccino with skim milk are to call it a "double no fun" or an "unleaded skinny cap."  COLLECTIBLES  X-Men trading cards: If you want to trade Cyclops for Magneto or any of the other characters featured in the 150-card 1994 edition of X-Men trading cards, it may not be so easy.
Children seem to be buying up the cards at superhuman speed.


Frequent Fliers
To the Editor: Regarding the letter by Otto Quittner on Feb. 20 about difficulties in having frequent flyer miles credited from partners in United Airlines' Mileage Plus: I had a completely different experience with USAir.
My husband and I traveled to Australia this fall.
Our flight began in Islip, L.I., with a transfer in Philadelphia before taking an Air New Zealand flight from Los Angeles International nonstop to Sydney.
At the L.A.
Airport there was a form to fill out with our names, addresses and frequent flier numbers as well as the flight numbers.
On the return flight from Sydney the form was sitting on the counter for us to fill out.
The flights were made in October, and both segments of the overseas partner miles had been credited by the end of December as well as the USAir miles for travel in the United States.
We have been USAir frequent flyer members since 1987 and have never had a problem with miles being credited.


Corrections
A brief report on March 13 with the At Work column, about employment newsletters, misstated the date of the death of Dan Lacey, the editor of Workplace Trends.
It was Sept. 21, 1992, not early last year.


Style Down Under
To the Editor: Your article "Adelaide Sets the Style" (Choice Tables, Jan. 23) by Barbara Santich could have included three items of interest to readers, which she probably didn't think of mentioning because she lives in Australia.
Visiting Australia, and Adelaide specifically, for the first time in November and December, I enjoyed meals at two of the restaurants she wrote about -- the Mona Lisa and the Red Ochre Grill.
At these, faced with a very extensive, and unfamiliar, Australian wine list, we had several open bottles offered to us for sampling.
This seemed to be the practice in most restaurants and wine bars, whether you were ordering a bottle or a glass.


Dana L. Bunker, Stephen DiPrima
Dana Lynn Bunker, the daughter of Barbara Bunker of Chapel Hill, N.C., and Leonard Bunker of Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., was married yesterday to Stephen Richard DiPrima, the son of Frank DiPrima of Chatham, N.J., and the late Mary Louise DiPrima.
The Rev.
Joseph Nerad, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Hillsborough House Inn in Hillsborough, N.C.
Ms.
DiPrima, 26, is an evaluator with the General Accounting Office in New York.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where her mother is an associate professor of nursing.
The bride is also the stepdaughter of Dr.
Norman T. Boggs 3d of Laurinburg, N.C., where he is the chairman of the chemistry department at St.
Andrews Presbyterian College.


From Tchaikovsky to Shostakovich
IT was called the Soviet Emigre Orchestra when Lazar Gosman founded the ensemble in 1979, but gradually the maestro, himself a musical refugee from Russia, integrated American players into what is now the Tchaikovsky Chamber Orchestra.
The 8 P.M.


RECORD BRIEFS
Koechlin: 'Le Livre de la Jungle,' 'Les Heures Persanes' Rheinland-Pfalz Philharmonic conducted by Leif Segerstam.
Marco Polo 8.223484 ('Livre'), 8.223504 ('Heures'); CD's.


Cone Gearing Down In Order to Gear Up For the New Season
Not that he has kept count, but David Cone figures that over the last few years, "I've probably thrown more pitches than some pitching staffs." He is determined this season to shed that distinction.
Toward that end, he is listening to and recalling the thoughts of others.


Walle J. H. Nauta Is Dead at 77; Helped to Establish Neuroscience
Dr.
Walle J. H. Nauta, an authority on the anatomy and functions of the human brain, and a founder of the field of neuroscience, died on Thursday in Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 77 and lived in Newton, Mass.
The cause was a blood infection, said his daughter Tjalda Belastock.


Corrections
A front-page chart last Sunday about the health-insurance coverage of workers on Long Island reversed the identifications of the uninsured and those covered by public insurance (Medicare and Medicaid).
A corrected chart appears today on page 4.


'The Language Instinct'
To the Editor:
Noam Chomsky's revolutionary "generative" grammar was not entirely ignored by textbook publishers.
In the 1960's, a man named Paul Roberts, a disciple of Mr.
Chomsky's, wrote an entire elementary grammar series for Harcourt Brace.
The series was given a lavish send-off in a nationwide sales campaign, but was found by teachers to be too difficult.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BIOGRAPHY  THE AMBASSADOR  FROM WALL STREET  The Story of Thomas W. Lamont,  J. P. Morgan's Chief Executive.
By Edward M. Lamont.
Madison, $24.95.


Ex-Warden Is Woman of Year
YVONNE M. POWELL is 5 foot 10 and has a way of entering a room.
She doesn't walk in so much as she arrives, moving unhurriedly with her head held high.
Her great aunt, who raised her, taught her that walk, said Ms.
Powell, the newest member of the Westchester County Women's Hall of Fame.
The walk, and the imposing carriage, came from standing with her back against a wall for 10 minutes a day to learn posture and a sense of discipline.


Retraining to Earn Less
To the Editor:
When politicians and economists speak of retraining people who lose jobs that pay well, whom do they have in mind?


If You're Thinking of Living In/Northwest Yonkers; River Views and Restored Victorians
EVERY summer, Kate and Paul Goodspeed join neighbors in their 60-unit co-op to cook out and watch the sunset through the trees along the Hudson River.
After work, they visit one another's apartments, Ms.
Goodspeed said.
"We have a glass of wine or a seltzer and maybe watch a movie together," she said.
"The whole building is home."


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
New-home sales, Jan., thous., ann. rate
695
710
Consumer confidence index, Feb.
80.8
81.0
Wednesday
Factory-goods orders, Feb., pct. change
2.1
-1.1
Thursday
Chicago purchasing managers index, Mar.
60.3
60.3
Gross domestic product, 4th qtr., pct. chg.
7.5
7.4
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
340
337
Friday
Nonfarm payroll, Mar., chg., thousands
217
200
Unemployment rate, March, percent
6.5
6.5
Personal income, Feb., percent change
-0.3
0.5
This Week's Developments
Tuesday
Japan expected to announce market changes.
Friday
Good Friday holiday


When Did the President Eat?
The press was in full cry at Thursday evening's news conference with President Clinton: terriers, every last one, running this Whitewater thing to ground.
On national television, and in prime time, too.
As this selection from a briefing last week by the White House press secretary proves, it doesn't matter if the cameras are on or off.
The topic could be something as trifling as a spur-of-the-moment decision, at the request of Representative Tony Hall of Ohio, to skip a day's meals in recognition of world hunger.


Eric Show's Solitary Life, and Death
The patient had not appeared for breakfast, and so at 8:05 A.M. on March 16, according to the log of the Rancho L'Abri Drug and Alcohol treatment center in nearby Dulzura, a civilian assistant named Keith Langhorn "entered room #6 of the lodge to check on Eric S."
"Observed patient lying on his bed and noted no rise and fall of chest," Langhorn noted.
"Went for help from graveyard staff member Brent S. We checked the pulse and tried to wake patient. No response. Noted eyes were dilated and body cold. I left staff member with the body to call executive director, who instructed me to call medical director. Instructions given to call 911. Which was done immediately. Checked for heartbeat. None detected."


The Seven-Month Effort to Rescue NY 1078-93 Is Nearing a Nervous Ending
YOU wonder if she knows, this whale that swims round and round a tank in the aquarium at Coney Island.
Can she sense that the people poking her with needles and rubbing zinc all over her skin to protect it from sunburn are preparing her for a journey?
A journey to freedom.
Born free, the whale could again live free if the people who saved her life can produce one more wonder.
In a seafaring plan worthy of the invasion of Normandy, scientists, military personnel and animal lovers are preparing for a release that could happen next week.


Avert Chimney Fires by Cleaning Out the Creosote
FIREPLACES, wood stoves and chimneys require annual inspections and cleaning, especially if used regularly.
Promptness is crucial.
Burning wood produces creosote, a tarlike substance that lines a chimney with a sticky flammable coating.
If allowed to cool until the next heating season, the creosote hardens to form a glassy layer that resists removal.
Thick deposits of creosote can crack masonry and loosen stovepipes.
More important, allowing creosote to build up can lead to a chimney fire.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 27, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
2
2
LORD OF RAVEN'S PEAK, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) Romance and adventure among vikings in 10th-century Britain.
3*
12
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
4
4
WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lucas Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in Wisconsin's cold woods.
5
1
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a killer.
6
1
HOMELAND, by John Jakes. (Bantam, $6.99.) The fortunes of a German immigrant family in late-19th-century Chicago.
7
7
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A servant hopes to win an heiress's heart in Victorian-era Minnesota.
8
5
THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran solve a mystery.
9*
3
THE THROAT, by Peter Straub. (Signet, $6.99.) The vicious attack on a woman in a small town leads to the reappraisal of past crimes.
10
9
PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of murders in a small California town vexes a temporary district attorney.
11*
10
WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The families of law officers are besieged by violence in Los Angeles and Montana.
12
5
SAVING GRACE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) The romantic problems of a 13th-century English widow.
13*
6
JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star Wars" saga.
14
1
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
15
13
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
11
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
542
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
58
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
4*
11
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
5
3
CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture and murder.
6
128
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
43
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
8
21
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
9*
28
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
10*
142
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
11
141
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
12*
17
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy.
13*
8
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day battle in Vietnam in 1965.
14*
9
A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine, $8.99.) More examples of Government waste, and how to stop it.
15*
46
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
16*
15
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
158
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
2
3
MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $11.) Ways to teach children about spending and saving money.
3
165
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
23
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales, for the week ending March 12, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Truth by Consensus
TELLING THE TRUTH ABOUT HISTORY By Joyce Appleby, Lynn Hunt and Margaret Jacob. 322 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $25.


Asians Fear a Police Setback
Just as the police were beginning to win the cooperation of Asian-Americans in their fight against crime, the campaign has experienced a major setback, community leaders in Flushing say.
The cause is something that at first seems like an ordinary bureaucratic shift: the decision to move the Queens Robbery Squad, with its Asian Crime Investigation Team, from the 109th Precinct in Flushing six miles away to Long Island City.
Local Chinese, Korean and other Asian business owners say that moving the Asian crime team, which has three Chinese-speaking detectives and one Korean-speaking officer, will discourage Asian business owners from reporting extortion and robberies.
Now in the 109th Precinct station house on Union Street between 37th and 38th Avenues, in the heart of the Asian business district, the team is within walking distance for many Asian business owners, who have traditionally been reluctant to involve police.
It can respond within minutes to reports of extortion and robbery.


One Moment Please, Before Digging In
NOW that spring has come, gardeners are eager to get outdoors and begin.
But patience is necessary.
Winter was long.
The melting snow has been seeping into the ground and making it very wet.
Don't forget, too, the old rhyme that "April showers bring May flowers." The next few weeks may be tricky.
Heavy rainfall could cause even soggier soil.
Any wet soil can be ruined by carelessly treading on it.
The tracks made on wet lawns, which are especially vulnerable, are difficult to wipe out.
Heavy foot marks from too eager gardeners or even youngsters at play can damage a lawn because the soil becomes compacted and the tiny wisps of new grass have a difficult time emerging.


Staying Well Abroad
With chapters on cholera, diarrhea and tuberculosis, the table of contents for a newly revised travel book is enough to make readers stay at home.


Preserve the Hudson Piers, History and Sanity Suggest
To the Editor:
The Soapbox essay "Missing the Boat on the Waterfront" (March 20) recommends major changes for lower Manhattan's Hudson River shoreline but fails to recognize the need for saving existing open piers.


Giuliani Plan On Budget To Be Tested
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani reaches what could be a make-or-break point this week in closing a $2.3 billion budget gap, and there are indications that some of his intricate plans may be in trouble a month before he must complete the New York City budget.
The budget proposal is a harbinger of the Mayor's ability to carry out the sweeping changes that he envisions in the city's government.
He faces two crucial tests this week, as negotiations with the city's unions on a severance program to cut 7,600 jobs accelerate and as lawmakers in Albany decide whether the city receives $275 million in new aid.


Test Your Literary I.Q.: Level I
Each of these writers is the hero, or heroine, of a literary society in New York.
Read the clues and guess who they are.  1.
Elementary  2.
Ghostswriter  3.
One playwright in search of an I.D.
4. The feminist muse of Mankato, Minn.  Feeling smug? For Level II, read on.


Polar Opposition
Seattle may be the Nashville of alternative rock, but local politicians are fighting the Grunge City label.
The City Council recently banned handbills from utility poles, forbidding new bands' main form of advertising.
The poles in Seattle's bohemian neighborhoods are plastered with fliers.
In fact, over the years a few poles have accumulated an inch-thick mummy wrap.
Dig deep enough and you'll find a poster from Nirvana's bar-band days.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today:  Men's Fashions/Magazine Part 2


Scholar Sees 4 Views of Jesus in Accounts of Death
It is arguably the most famous case of capital punishment in history -- the execution of Jesus.
To most Christians the story is a familiar one, a blend of the accounts found in the four Gospels.
But those accounts differ in striking ways.
Did Jesus, for example, say from the cross, "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?" as Mark and Matthew have it?
Did He plead, "Father, forgive them," as Luke recalls?
Or did He proclaim, "It is finished," as John relates?


Stop Pounding The Eardrums
To the Editor:
Whoever wrote the headline for Greg Tate's article "Above and Beyond Rap's Decibels"  [ March 6 ]  has it backwards.
Whatever the ethnic background of the performers, there is nothing above and beyond that can justify performing at a volume level that hurts the ears and may permanently damage the hearing of the audience.
Only after the volume is lowered will I be willing to listen to the music and judge it on its artistic merits.
HAROLD SALWEN  Teaneck, N. J.


Sound Bytes; An Electronic Salon, in N.Y.
AS a graduate student in New York City in 1989, Stacy Horn discovered the Well, a computer conferencing system based in Sausalito, Calif.
She was so smitten with the virtual community created by the Well that she decided to found her own on-line community in New York the same year.
Using two personal computers as "hosts" and a handful of telephone lines to receive calls from other computers, she began with 20 people and five areas of discussion.
Since then Echo -- the system name she chose, which she later decided stood for East Coast Hang Out -- has attracted more than 2,000 members in 50 discussion groups.


The Executive Life; Preparing for Battles Outside the Boardroom
MOST of the time, James Benjamin thinks about how to sell financial derivative products to small banks.
But on a recent Thursday he could be found lunging fiercely at Michael Schwartz with a knife.
As Mr.
Benjamin's personal trainer, Mr.
Schwartz sidestepped the attack, deflected the (dulled) blade, then yanked Mr.
Benjamin's arm forward and twisted it back, stopping just shy of doing any damage.
Next, he hustled Mr.
Benjamin across his loft to a heavy bag and directed him in a sequence of careful punches and kicks and then in a more predictable series of fitness maneuvers: jumping rope and lifting weights.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
104.95
106.15
116.55
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6670
1.6947
1.6340
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3758
1.3693
1.2444
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4969
1.4910
1.4865
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$390.80
$386.90
$332.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Review/Dance; A Wanderer Among the Crowd, Alone but Not Lonely
By offering the world premiere of Garth Fagan's "Never No Lament" on Saturday night at the Joyce Theater, the Limon Dance Company brought a work of quiet joy into its repertory.
"Never No Lament" abounds with the knotted and gnarled phrases for which Mr.
Fagan's choreography is known.
But the knots are gently untied to the recorded accompaniment of an excerpt from Dvorak's Serenade for String Orchestra in E, Op. 22, and the Kronos Quartet's interpretations of pieces by the African composers Foday Musa Suso, Dumisani Maraire and Hamza El Din.


Yeltsin Returns to Moscow, Ending Rumors of Coup


Patents
THE multimedia revolution promises to put news, information and entertainment at America's fingertips.
It will also earn a lot of money for the companies whose programming fills interactive television screens, computer bulletin boards and computer disks.
Yet many of them are just beginning to discover that the path to an interactive future is littered with copyright land mines.
This is not an inexperienced group.
The businesses include the country's largest communications companies, television networks, film and video producers and software developers.
Yet they are finding that copyright agreements that cost small fortunes to obtain may not protect them when their materials are put to new uses on the national information infrastructure.


Winnipeg Knocks Rangers Down a Peg
A little road-weary and frustrated by a hot goalie, the Rangers had their recent streak of modest successes ended this afternoon as they fell to the Winnipeg Jets by 3-1.
Hours later, the Devils, who had been chasing the Rangers for the top point total in the Atlantic Division and the National Hockey League, finally drew even with them at 99 points when they defeated the Quebec Nordiques.


Critic's Notebook; When Even Victimizers Say They Are Victims
Surprised at the juries' failure to convict Eric and Lyle Menendez of the murder of their parents, I sought enlightenment in the afternoon talk show, the nation's picture window onto domestic dysfunction.
No week passes that Oprah or Phil or Sally Jessy or Geraldo or Montel or one of the lesser practitioners does not conduct a public examination of private abominations like wife beating, husband slashing and, most relevant to the Menendez case, child abusing.
I was particularly interested in what Oprah Winfrey and Sally Jessy Raphael had been doing on the subject of child abuse for the last year or two.
These performers bring a somewhat maternal persona to their jobs -- Ms.
Raphael being the softer and more solicitous -- and their programs balance exhibitionism with edification.
On many days, it's like taking a Psych 1 field trip to Tobacco Road.


The Nets Can Triumph, Even Without Anderson
Night after night, Kenny Anderson comes in and leads the Nets in minutes played and assists and often in scoring.
So it was a nice change for the third-year pro and first-time All-Star to see New Jersey win a game without his doing a lot of the heavy lifting.
Anderson got into foul trouble against the Washington Bullets in Landover, Md., Saturday night and finished with only 14 points and 3 assists and committed a team-high 4 turnovers in his 30 minutes of play.
Still, the Nets rallied from a 17-point deficit in the third quarter to win, 103-100.


Libya Blinks on Lockerbie
There finally seems a way to break the deadlock over Lockerbie.
Libya has until now resisted a U.N.
Security Council demand to surrender for trial two of its citizens charged with planting the bomb that in 1988 felled a Pan Am airliner over Lockerbie, Scotland, killing 270 people.
Only a month ago, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi again rejected a trial in Scotland or the U.S., insisting that the suspects could be prosecuted only by Islamic lawyers in an Islamic court before an Islamic jury.
But Libya's eccentric tyrant is urgently seeking a face-saving exit.
He can no longer look to the Soviet bloc for support.
Tough U.N. sanctions have increased domestic discontent.
And so, reversing itself, Libya says for the first time that the much-wanted pair could be tried before Scottish judges at the International Court of Justice in The Hague.


Former Chief of NBC News Finds New Life at Iowa Daily
At the Subway sandwich shop near his newspaper office in this small town, Michael G. Gartner, who may have been the least-liked network news chief in years, was talking about his experiences running two news organizations.
One was NBC News, with its millions of viewers.
He ran that one until he resigned -- or was pushed -- from his job a year ago this month.


Publishing
WHILE no one in traditional book publishing seems certain what electronic publishing really is or might turn out to be -- books on line, books on CD-ROM or books in some totally new format -- publishers and authors know they want to be able to exploit it.
What this means now, at a particularly queasy time for the industry, is that publishers are fighting as never before with authors and the literary agents who represent them about who will control the electronic rights to books, and for what price.
But because of the uncertainty over the direction of the medium, the groups are essentially arguing over the unknown.


Parker Hannifin (N)
COMPANY REPORTS ** Parker Hannifin (N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1991
1990
Sales
558,676,000
571,519,000
Net inc
b14,676,000
b11,989,000
Share earns
.30
.25
Shares outst
48,429,079
48,231,717
6mo sales
1,196,850,000
1,145,182,000
Net inc
30,704,000
c24,969,000
Share earns
.63
-
Shares outst
48,420,706
48,220,461
b-Included provisions for restructuring charges, primarily involving aerospace operations.
The provision for the latest quarter was $ 3,013,000, compared with $ 1,340,000 in year-ago period. c-Net loss and reflected an extraordinary charge of $ 60,619,000 for change in accounting for post-retirement benefits other than pensions, and also reflected extraordinary income of $ 8,358,000, or 17 cents a share, from change in accounting for income taxes.
The provision for restructuring charges was $ 3,945,000 for the latest 6 months, compared with $ 2,665,000 in year-ago period.


Aid for Russia, at Last
Can the West provide more aid to help Russia with its crushing economic crisis?
Officials at the International Monetary Fund have been agonizing about this for months.
The fund has strict guidelines that demand concrete evidence of fiscal responsibility from any nation as a prerequisite for aid.
Negotiations between Russia and the I.M.F. over a second large loan have been in deadlock, while the economy spirals dangerously downward.
Now that deadlock may be broken.
The $1.5 billion the I.M.F. has promised -- after months of delay -- is much too little to turn the economy around.
But the agreement is still crucial because it paves the way for Russia to receive other international help.
Without I.M.F. approval, Russia would have little chance to attract foreign investors, loans from the World Bank, debt relief or the balance of the $43 billion aid package industrialized countries promised last year but refused to deliver.
With I.M.F. approval, Russia has a chance.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
New Federal Reserve figures show a weak spot in the recovery: a heavy burden of debt on the working middle class.
While the household finances of the rich and the elderly have returned to normal levels, middle-class families remain stuck with unusually high debt payments as a portion of their income.  [ Page A1. ]


Giuliani Tries to Allay Visitor Fear
After visiting a hospitalized British man who was wounded on Saturday in the second shooting of tourists in four days, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani tried to allay fears by saying he did not believe New York City was getting more dangerous for visitors.
In Saturday afternoon's shooting, Peter Cooper, 46, of Bournemouth, Dorset, was shot in the left shoulder when he encountered a burglar on entering his room in the New York Hilton in midtown Manhattan, the police said yesterday.


Logibec Groupe
COMPANY REPORTS ** Logibec Groupe
Year to Sept 30
1993
1992
Sales
6,784,847
8,946,796
Net inc
929,933
465,075
Share earns
.23
.12
Results are in Canadian dollars.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT C. WOOLLEY, Sotheby's senior auctioneer, conducts three or four dozen charity auctions a year.
"I almost do as many for charity as I do for business," he said as he prepared the exhibition for tonight's fund-raising auction at Sotheby's, on York Avenue, for the Gay Men's Health Crisis.
So what could possibly make tonight's sale distinctive?


Accounts
*
Sprint Corp., Kansas City, Mo., to Grey Advertising, New Yirk, to handle its business services group, after a review that included Wells Rich Greene BDDP and Lintas , both in New York.
Billings on the account are estimated at $30 million.


How to End Impasse On RU-486 Patent
To the Editor:
In "RU-486, Made in America" (Op-Ed, March 17), Lawrence Lader, president of Abortion Rights Mobilization, suggests turning to legislation to break the stalemate that has kept RU-486, the "abortion pill," unavailable to American women for years, although it has long been available to women in Europe.
Specifically, Mr.
Lader writes of the leeriness by the current patent holder, France's Roussel-Uclaf, to introduce the product into the United States market for fear of a consumer boycott of its other products by anti-choice groups.
In that light, Mr.
Lader suggests legislation to make it possible to strip the patent holder of the patent, so that any pharmaceutical company would be free to manufacture and sell RU-486.


Review/Music; A Pianist's Performance Moves Beyond the Keyboard
The pianist Cecil Taylor likes the grand gesture.
He comes out on stage chanting poetry in darkness.
He'll wear long robes and play in socks.
And he rolls around on stage before getting to the piano: it's his version of modern dance.
At 65, Mr.
Taylor is an extraordinarily vital performer.
The grand gesture comes out in his music as well, and on Saturday night at Alice Tully Hall, which was only little more than half full, he threw himself at the piano with romantic violence.
Mr.
Taylor presents himself as the artist lost in passion, taken by some higher power, the god of improvisation.
He pummeled the keyboard, unleashing great waves of sound.
He moved quickly from deep introspection to fury.
And it all seemed trancelike.
Moderation was the enemy.


METRO DIGEST
PRISONS OVERFLOW INTO WORK RELEASE
Work release, a program allowing some inmates a large measure of freedom before parole, is increasingly being used in New York State to relieve prison overcrowding, officials acknowledge.
As a result, prisoners who would not have been eligible five years ago are enrolled, including some who have repeatedly been denied parole.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  TUNNEL DWELLER SEEKS THE LIGHT
Homeless, stoned and dirty, Bob Kalinski hit bottom in 1986.
Then he went deeper, into the dark.
For eight years he lived underground in a train tunnel.
He came out only in the early morning when most of the city was asleep, to pick up aluminum cans to sell for food.
Now, after more than 2,000 nights under a concrete sky, he realizes that the only thing he found down deep in the Amtrak tunnel at 95th Street and Riverside Drive on the Upper West Side was a place to hide.
B3.
A BITTER BUSINESS COMMISSIONER
Rudy Washington, New York City's new Commissioner of Business Services, sat in his spacious downtown office in the Battery Maritime Building recently and mused -- sometimes bitterly -- about the three months since he left the world of entrepreneurship and joined ranks with the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, describing it as a period both confounding and arduous.
B3.
MAYOR SAYS CITY IS NOT MORE DANGEROUS
After visiting a hospitalized British man who was wounded at his midtown hotel on Saturday in the second shooting of tourists in four days, Mayor Giuliani tried to allay fears by saying he did not believe New York City was getting more dangerous for tourists.
In Saturday afternoon's shooting, Peter Cooper, 46, of Bournemouth, Dorset, was shot in the left shoulder when he encountered a burglar.
B3.
REGION  FILES CHECKED IN BLAST INQUIRY  Combing through decades of records, Federal investigators began trying to pinpoint when there was construction activity around an asphalt plant in Edison, N.J., that may have caused a gas pipeline to burst last week, in a thunderous explosion and fireball.
The investigators were seeking to capitalize on their discovery on Saturday that fragments of the pipeline found near the Durham Woods apartments had deep scratches that may have been made by construction equipment.
B4.
MINORITY DISTRICTS PART OF NASSAU PLAN
The creation of two minority-dominated districts is at the heart of a plan for a new 19-member Nassau County Legislature that is meant to assure fair representation for Long Island's growing number of minority residents.
A preliminary map outlining the 19 districts is expected to be adopted in East Meadow by a county commission.
B4.
TEEN IN SHOOTING CASE ARRESTED
Howard Caesar, a Newark teen-ager whose shooting by a police officer after a carjacking led to an investigation of police handling of the incident, was arrested with four other Newark residents after a carjacking and spree of robberies and shootings, the police said.
Mr.
Caesar, 19, was being held on charges of carjacking, aggravated assault of a police officer, and several counts of aggravated assault, possession of a handgun, possession of a handgun for unlawful purposes and other charges.
B4.
NEW TRIAL FOR TROOPER IN TAMPERING CASE
A New York State police investigator who was acquitted on evidence tampering charges last year is scheduled to go on trial on charges that he faked fingerprint evidence in a separate case.
The trooper, David M. Beers, who was assigned to the criminal investigation unit of Troop C in Sidney, is accused of fabricating fingerprint evidence in a 1991 narcotics and weapons case.
B5.
MEASLES SHOTS REQUIRED AT RUTGERS
Students and faculty at Rutgers University, which faces the first outbreak of measles at a United States college in three years, will be required to get measles shots or leave campus, school officials said this weekend.
B6.
Chronicle B6


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Amer Express Co BellSouth Corp Geo A Hormel &amp; Co Unocal Corp WEDNESDAY  Gencorp Inc Morrison Restaurants Pep Boys Washington Gas Lt Co THURSDAY  Clarcor Inc Delmarva Pwr &amp; Light FRIDAY  Jackpot Enterprises National City Corp Nevada Pwr Co


In Houston, a Monthly Magazine Finds a Home in a Sunday Newspaper
The recent marriage of a Houston life style magazine and The Houston Post is being watched closely as a possible new way to shore up regional magazines while increasing newspaper circulation.
Houston Life, an independently published, glossy magazine filled with features about the city, is now distributed with The Houston Post on the third Sunday of each month.


Stanley Is Playing the Game for Two People: Himself and His Dad
Mike Stanley knows the sofa in the family room will be empty, he knows the satellite dish will not be used too often, he knows his friends will not be calling three or four times a day to talk baseball with the old man that he misses and he knows this year will be different, very different.
Charles Stanley will not be watching his youngest son play for the Yankees.
How do you react when your 4-year-old son stops playing Nintendo and starts discussing his grandfather's death with his 5-year-old friend?
You listen, you listen closely, and you hope he understands.
What do you do with the videotapes your father dutifully made, the ones that featured only your finest moments because he erased any forgettable ones?
You cherish them, but you realize future tapes will not be the same.
They will not be edited by your father.


INSIDE
Seeking Answers After Blast
Federal investigators sought to question the owners of an asphalt plant whose excavation work may have caused a gas pipeline to burst last week in Edison, N.J.
Page B4.
A Watershed in Italy
Italians began voting in a two-day national election widely depicted by politicians and commentators as a watershed.
But many voters are not so sure a new era is at hand.
Page A3.
No Room for Jane Bond?
Women at the C.I.A. division where the spies work say they have been denied jobs as covert operatives because of their sex.
Page A10.
A Big Day for Arkansas
With President Clinton watching, Arkansas beat Michigan to gain the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament Final Four.
Florida advanced by topping Boston College.
SportsMonday, C1.


World Economies


Britons Try All Contraptions To Halt Rampant Car Theft
When Sinclair Seymour bought a new Ford Mondeo station wagon two months ago, he took no chances.
Not only did he make sure his car had a factory-equipped antitheft system, including deadbolts inside the doors, an alarm and a high-tech device that electronically locks the engine, but he also asked the dealer to install a backup alarm and mount a thick steel padlock over the gearshift.
Then, for extra peace of mind, he spent $225 more for a yellow wheel clamp, similar to the heavy metal boots some American police departments use to immobilize parking scofflaws.
Now, whenever Mr.
Seymour leaves his new car in a public parking lot he takes the clamp out of his trunk and locks it over his front wheel.


Boston University and Harvard Coast Into National Semifinals
Boston University and Harvard, the East's two best hockey teams all season, exceeded expectations at the National Collegiate Athletic Association regional tournament in Albany.
The Terriers, ranked the nation's No. 1 team in various polls, displayed smothering defensive teamwork in defeating a feisty Wisconsin squad, 4-1, on Saturday night.


Political Memo; Silence Within Party Forces Clintons' Hand
Speaker Thomas S. Foley's energetic defense on television this morning of President Clinton's involvement in the Whitewater case was notable not for what he said but that he said it.
Though Democrats have not been reticent about condemning Mr.
Clinton's Republican accusers, few party members outside the White House have been willing to speak out strongly on behalf of the President and his wife, Hillary.
For all the White House efforts to paint Whitewater as a partisan battle, the oratory has been much more spirited from the Republican side of the aisle.


This Time, the Knicks Command Respect
At times, the Orlando Magic have not shown the Knicks much respect.
So today, the Knicks showed no mercy.
Playing the most-inspired game of their 13-game winning streak, the Knicks dominated the Magic, 111-90, sending much of the capacity crowd at the Orlando Arena home early.


From Russia With Endorsements
To the sound of pulsing rock music, a shiny red Jeep Wrangler was driven into the rink that belongs to the legendary Central Red Army hockey team of the former Soviet Union.
A few minutes later, after a dizzying "Let's Make a Deal" style elimination contest on the ice -- as well as a photo session with the corporate sponsor that donated the jeep, Aviatika Motors -- one lucky Russian spectator drove away with the prize.


Market Place; Newly Rich Detroit May Conserve Cash and Scrimp on Dividends
Investors who were counting on the Big Three auto makers to pay generous common stock dividends after regaining healthy balance sheets could be disappointed in this season of prosperity in Detroit.
Despite recent increases in sales and cash flow, which have propelled the common stocks of Ford, Chrysler and General Motorsto new highs, several auto industry analysts expect auto makers to increase dividends more conservatively than has been their custom.


Ed Zern, 83, Writer and Artist Who Took Irreverence Outdoors
Ed Zern, an author, conservationist, outdoorsman and illustrator, died on Friday at Stamford Hospital in Stamford, Conn.
He was 83 and had been a longtime resident of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The cause of death was Parkinson's disease, said Sandra Weiner, his companion.


Doing a 'High-Wire Act' On Minority Contracts
Rudy Washington, New York City's new Commissioner of Business Services, sat in his spacious downtown office recently and mused -- sometimes bitterly -- about the three months since he left the world of entrepreneurship and joined ranks with the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, describing it as a period both confounding and arduous.
The owner of a bridge, road and tunnel construction company based in Queens, Mr.
Washington placed his interest in the company in a trust and joined the administration of the man he has come to consider among his closest friends.
Since then, he said, he has been misunderstood, abused by the news media and eyed suspiciously by many of the black politicians in whose ranks he once fit comfortably.


Women, Citing Bias, May Sue the C.I.A.
The Central Intelligence Agency's operations directorate -- where the spies work -- has long been one of Washington's classic "old boy" networks.
But it may not be much longer.
Roughly 200 women in the directorate are saying that they have been deprived of promotions and power.
They are considering filing a class-action suit, charging that they have been blocked from posts as covert operatives, case officers and station chiefs, said lawyers and women involved in the case.


Chairman Will Resign From Mentor Graphics
Tom Bruggere, who helped found Mentor Graphics in 1981, said last week that he would step down as chairman at the company's annual meeting on April 26.
Mr.
Bruggere said his replacement would not be named until the meeting.
Until then, he said, his agenda includes a family reunion in Las Vegas and "large bodies of water and blue skies."


We Can't Show Weakness to North Korea
To the Editor:
Re "Beware the Hawks on Korea" (editorial, March 22): Critics of the Clinton Administration's concession-laden response to North Korea's violation of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, among whom I number myself, have earned your contempt for our efforts.
You chastise us for "rashly calling for military action" and for offering "glib advice," which might, if the President should be so foolish as to heed it, cause the United States to "stumble into war."
I am a retired naval officer and a veteran of America's longest war.
What are today horribly compelling televised images for most Americans were once the whole of reality for me.
The terrible human losses incurred in war were once for me an experience so intensely personal that I will remember them all my life.


Mexican Suspect Is Portrayed By Authorities as Obsessed
The mystery over the motive behind the assassination of the leading presidential candidate is deepening as the Government releases information that depicts the suspect as an obsessed zealot who once set his sights on President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
Only part of the transcript of the police interrogation of the suspect has been released.
That information focuses on signs of instability in the man charged in the shooting death of the governing party candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta.


During a Greek Celebration . . .the Band Played On


Wachovia Corp. (N)
COMPANY REPORTS ** Wachovia Corp. (N)
Qtr to March 31
1993
1991
Net inc
121,600,000
106,100,000
Per share
.69
.61
Per-share figures reflected a 2-for-1 stock split effective April 1, 1993.
Per share earnings are fully diluted.


Warrantech
COMPANY REPORTS ** Warrantech
Qtr to March 31
1993
1992
Revenue
10,280,520
11,688,331
Net inc
165,592
420,353
Share earns
.01
.03
Yr rev
43,841,017
50,692,389
Net inc
1,061,471
1,219,387
Share earns
.08
.10


A Rate Hike for Empire?
Salvatore Curiale, the New York State Insurance Superintendent, says he is unlikely to grant Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield the full 8.8 percent rate hike it has requested.
That may sound like good news to Empire's customers.
But it would threaten the company's solvency just when a new management team is desperately struggling to put Empire's finances in order.
Empire's reputation has disintegrated over the past few years, with good reason.
The company, under inept but lavishly paid management, ran up huge losses, provided poor service to key corporate clients and handed sweetheart contracts to directors.
And as documented in a report released earlier this month by the State Insurance Department, Empire repeatedly misled state examiners.


Wrestling Private Demons; Driver in Crash That Killed Priests Kept Problems to Herself
In the photograph her mother and father cling to now, Lisa Bongiorno is wearing a black, sleeveless, floor-length dress, holding a bouquet of flowers and half-turning with a little girl's impish smile.
She is pretty, in a shy way, with dark hair and a slender neck, and she seems to be gliding away from the camera, off the edge of the picture.
This was last November at her sister's wedding.
There were little sparks of excitement dancing in the centers of Lisa Bongiorno's eyes.
Now her shattered parents, eager to recall their daughter's joyfulness, cannot stare at the picture hard enough.
It is a lonely keepsake.
What was behind those eyes?
What inscrutable sadness did the parents miss?
What more could they have done?


Red Tape and Green Hydrants
There are some 3,500 obsolete, unused fire hydrants blocking off precious space for parking in New York City.
They have been obsolete for years, but only now are city bureaucrats starting to do something about them, thanks to needling by a member of the City Council.
Hydrant removal is the responsibility of the Department of Environmental Protection, which manages the water supply.
There are 2,400 dead hydrants in lower Manhattan and 1,100 in downtown Brooklyn, decommissioned when the high-pressure system in those sectors was converted to the low pressure used elsewhere.
But the folks who write parking tickets did not convert.
A hydrant is a hydrant, dead or alive, and parking closer than 15 feet is illegal.


Mexican Old Guard Fights Salinas on a New Candidate
As President Carlos Salinas de Gortari works to build consensus on choosing a replacement for the slain candidate who was to succeed him, he has come up against an unusually open challenge from members of the old guard of his governing party.
After reports that Mr.
Salinas might select Ernesto Zedillo, 42, the economist and former minister who was managing the campaign of Luis Donaldo Colosio, the governing-party candidate slain on Wednesday, party members began lobbying intensely on Saturday for favorites of their own.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  New-Home Sales . . .
Feb.
Consumer Confidence . . .
March  Wednesday  Farm Prices . . .
March  Factory Orders . . .
Feb.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  G.D.P.
Revise . . . 4th Qtr.
Friday  Employment . . .
March  Personal Income . . .
Feb.
Construction Spending . . .
Feb.


Critic's Notebook; Questions of Scale in Grand, Yet Intimate, Opera
Buried under the weight of last week's main operatic event, a faint, fragile voice (in Swedish) can still be heard.
The Metropolitan Opera's mammoth new "Otello" made a performance last Sunday of "Don Carlos," one of a series by the Swedish Folkopera at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, seem small indeed.
What an odd reversal of values the two Verdis made: Otello's matrimonial agonies set against the hugeness of the Met's resources; the panoramic Paris-Opera ambitiousness of "Don Carlos" shrunk to the size of a parlor.


'Middlemarch' Braves an Atlantic Crossing
It salvaged the BBC's reputation for costume drama, converted unknown actors into stars and lofted George Eliot onto the best-seller list for the first time in more than a hundred years.
This winter, "Middlemarch" -- the mini-series -- mesmerized millions of viewers here, setting off a mini-craze for Victorian fiction.
In its wake there were "Middlemarch" lectures, "Middlemarch" comics, even a wave of "Middlemarch" debates.
Authors and columnists argued in the London papers over whether Dorothea would, in fact, live happily ever after, whether Casaubon, if left alone, would have finished his great work and finally whether Will Ladislaw entered his marriage bed a virgin.


Malcolm R. Hobbs; Newspaper Publisher, 77
Malcolm R. Hobbs, a newspaperman who for almost 40 years was editor and publisher of The Cape Codder in Orleans, Mass., died on March 15 at his home.
He was 77 and lived in Orleans.
The cause was complications of bone disease, said his wife, Gwendolyn.


Books of The Times; A Policy Maker on the Subject He Knows Best
Diplomacy  By Henry Kissinger  Illustrated. 912 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $35.
With Henry Kissinger's "Diplomacy," the reader actually gets two books in one.
On one level, the volume is an elegantly written study of Western diplomacy, from Richelieu down through Metternich and Bismarck to modern times.
This book tries to give the reader an understanding of four centuries of Western politics and history, as well as an appreciation of the highly divergent traditions in statesmanship found in Europe and the United States.
Like Henry James, Mr.
Kissinger contrasts European cold-bloodedness and sophistication with American innocence and naivete; like Tocqueville, he wants to examine the consequences that American optimism and democratic ideals have had on the country's practical conduct.


Under a Big Tent in Dallas, Roger Clinton Marries
The groom was nervous, bouncing around, breathing heavily, stammering and missing his cues.
The bride was serene, wearing a long white maternity wedding dress as she followed four small flower girls in white straw hats, her nieces, down the aisle.


Mulholland Looks Fine
On a day when Terry Mulholland and Sterling Hitchock were supposed to be scrutinized for their pitching in the final spring game between the Mets and Yankees, the Yankee offense commanded considerable attention by pummeling Eric Hillman and Dave Telgheder in a 9-2 victory at Thomas J. White Stadium.


Plan to Revamp Nassau Legislature to Create 2 Minority Districts
The creation of two minority-dominated districts is at the heart of a plan for a new 19-member Nassau County Legislature that is meant to assure fair representation for Long Island's growing number of minority residents.
A preliminary map outlining the 19 districts is expected to be adopted on Tuesday by a county commission, which then is required to submit the plan to a Federal court judge by Friday.


Preparing the Way of the Cross


Snip, Snip, Snip, Unheralded Duke Is on the Road to Charlotte
Bobby Hurley and Christian Laettner left Duke for the National Basketball Association, and everyone thought that the Blue Devils were supposed to fold their Final Four road maps and be content to sit out the fun of the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship.
But there they were Saturday night, cutting down the nets at Thompson-Boling Arena in Knoxville, Tenn., as the champions of the Southeast Region headed for the Final Four in Charlotte, N.C., -- for the seventh time in the past nine years.
With Durham up the road from Charlotte, Duke (27-5), which plays Florida (29-7) in the semifinals, will have what amounts to a home-court advantage for a national championship run.


N.C.A.A. TOURNAMENT: Sports of The Times; The Long Shoits Take Brown Close to Home
THE confidence to take over a game did not come from nowhere.
The confidence Craig Brown felt yesterday on a basketball court stemmed from the confidence he felt in choosing the University of Florida four years ago.
He called his own shot then; he called his own shot now.
Florida was a long-range shot for the high school player from Steelton, Pa.
How fitting that Craig Brown would take his college to the Final Four with three consecutive long-range shots, all delivered while he was falling backwards from the physical effort of hoisting up the long ball.


Joy Ride on Astoria Boulevard: Greece Is Finally in the World Cup
The photograph of the soccer team, with the Greek flag over the heart of each player, graces the wall near the cash register of just about every diner, tavern, grocery store and butcher shop in Astoria, Queens, the heartland of Greek immigrants in North America.
Sitting in the front row, in the center of the picture, is the coach, Alketas (Alkis) Panagoulias.
He started his coaching career in Astoria and led the New York Greek-Americans to three national championships by winning the United States Open Challenge Cup in 1967-69.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
AK Steel Holding Corp., Middletown, Ohio, an initial public offering of 15.75 million shares.
CS First Boston.


Islanders' Hopes Going Poof!
No team can win games without scoring.
Midway through today's game, Buffalo had 20 shots on goal compared with the Islanders' 9.
When a team is that flat on offense, it should be no surprise that the Sabres defeated the Islanders, 4-1, at the Aud.
Any playoff hopes for the Islanders were diminished this weekend.
After a 3-1 loss Saturday to Florida and the loss today, the Islanders now have to win a lot of road games and hope that Washington, Florida and Philadelphia lose.


Local Elections in Turkey May Set Fate of Sagging National Cabinet
About 32 million Turks cast their ballots today in local elections that took on the significance of a national vote because of rapidly sagging confidence in the Government of Prime Minister Tansu Ciller.
The Government is in trouble with the electorate because of a drastic decline in Turkey's economy and a wave of political corruption scandals.
President Suleyman Demirel, in an interview in the newspaper Hurriyet today, said the governing coalition could not survive if its total share of the vote dropped below 40 percent in today's election, in which voting is compulsory.
Final results are not expected for several days.


Revenues on the Rise For Several Media
Advertising revenues are on an upswing, according to reports from several media.
Richard Amann, the publisher of Boating magazine, announced that linage was up by 17 percent for the first third of 1994 compared with the same period a year ago.
That represents an increase of 98 pages.


Far North in Russia, the Mines' Fatal Blight
The snow falls black in this city 200 miles above the Arctic Circle, big flakes of freezing ash covering the ground, the rivers and what little is left alive.
Once a place of unparalleled beauty, in just 30 years this stark region, the Kola peninsula, has become one of the most poisoned spots on earth -- relentlessly transformed by Russian industry into a laboratory of ecological destruction.


Review/Rock; Celebrating Bass Guitar And Those Who Play It
A sardonic Lou Reed, growling iconoclastic versions of "The Tracks of My Tears" and "One for My Baby," was the high point of a nearly three-hour benefit concert at the Beacon Theater on Saturday evening.
Intoning these classic songs, along with originals like "Dirty Blvd.," in an impassioned monotone, Mr.
Reed demolished and reconstituted them in his own image.
Lovelorn ballads became minimalist rock anthems whose tearful emotions were transmuted into a more generalized, barely suppressed rage.
The concert, organized by Rob Wasserman, a West Coast bass player who recently released "Trios" (MCA), a collection of collaborations with rock and jazz luminaries, benefited the Rex Foundation, an organization serving the homeless.
Mr.
Reed was the evening's final guest in a lineup of more than a dozen musicians, including Bob Weir of the Grateful Dead, Bruce Hornsby, Little Jimmy Scott, Chris Whitley, Victoria Williams, David Sanborn and the evening's master of ceremonies, David Johansen.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about a family services center set up after the pipeline explosion in Edison, N.J., referred incorrectly in some editions to the woman shown.
She was Carol Birardi, a Red Cross volunteer, not Lillie Washington, a victim awaiting assistance.


Review/Pop; Reflective Young Singer With a Maturing Style
Halfway into her concert at Town Hall on Friday evening, the Canadian singer and songwriter Sarah McLachlan introduced a recent song called "Ice" and explained that it was inspired by a trip to Thailand and Cambodia.
The spectacle of widespread poverty, prostitution and AIDS, she said, saddened her and at the same time left her feeling blessed about her own comfortable circumstances, which until then she had taken for granted.
"Ice," the most striking song on Ms.
McLachlan's new album "Fumbling Towards Ecstasy" (Arista) is a sober folk-rock ballad that evokes the numbness of sexual slavery in language that is mostly indirect.
"The only comfort is the moving of the river," sings the narrator, who describes her soul as anchored in pain.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT F. KENNEDY JR.  and his wife, EMILY BLACK, divorced in the Dominican Republic, a newspaper there reported.
Mr.
Kennedy, 40, the son of the slain Senator Robert F. Kennedy, flew in on Thursday for a 9 A.M. divorce hearing in Santo Domingo, then left on Friday, the daily El Listin said.


Port Hope Journal; Writer Turns Tables: It's U.S. That's Non Grata
Wearing the faded red and blue parka with a jammed zipper that served him faithfully on many trips to the Arctic, Farley Mowat, Canada's most widely read author, was tramping along the frozen shores of Lake Ontario.
The creator of such classics as "Never Cry Wolf" and "People of the Deer" climbed one of the conelike ice extrusions on the lake and peered toward a land he could not quite make out some 35 miles to the south.
It is the land that barred his entry as a subversive nine years ago because he had jokingly threatened in an interview to shoot at American military aircraft flying overhead.


Fleeing the World Underneath
Homeless, stoned and dirty, Bob Kalinski hit bottom in 1986.
Then he went deeper, into the dark.
For eight years he lived underground in a train tunnel, safely away from the lights of Manhattan that bored straight through his closed eyelids.
He came out only in the early morning when most of the city was asleep, to pick up aluminum cans to sell for food.
Then he would scurry back into his hole.


Top Clinton Aide Gains Defender in Odd Quarter
A leading Republican critic of the Administration's handling of the Whitewater matter today offered an unexpected defense of a senior White House aide who complained to Treasury officials about the appointment of a political foe to oversee part of the case.
The critic, Representative Jim Leach of Iowa, has been among the most vocal Republicans asserting that President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, behaved unethically in the investments they made in the Whitewater real estate venture.
But today, Mr.
Leach said he considered it "pretty natural" for the aide, George Stephanopoulos, to display anger over the hiring of a former Republican prosecutor, Jay B. Stephens.
Mr.
Stephens is looking into Madison Guaranty, a failed Arkansas savings and loan whose owner was a partner with the Clintons in Whitewater.


Norman Leaves the Players About 9 Holes Behind
Under all the spectator mounds, lakes, humps and hollows of the minefield that is the Stadium Course, Greg Norman buried the last skeleton today.
Finally and with authority, he laid to rest the one remaining censure that had haunted him like Marley's ghost -- the one that held he could not win with the lead.
With a singular performance in the final round of the Players Championship, Norman turned the proceedings into the Player Championship.
He was alone in this one.
With his third straight round of 67, he obliterated the tournament scoring record and the best field of the year, cruising to a mind-boggling total of 24 under par and a four-stroke victory over Fuzzy Zoeller, who also shot 67.


MIDDLE-CLASS DEBT IS SEEN AS HURDLE TO ECONOMIC GAINS
New figures from the Federal Reserve show a weak spot in the economic recovery: the heavy burden of debt being carried by the working middle class.
While the household finances of the rich and elderly have returned to normal levels, middle-class families remain stuck with unusually high debt payments as a proportion of their income, according to the Fed figures.
Families that are not rich or old are paying nearly a quarter of their income to creditors, up substantially from levels in previous economic recoveries.


Oakley Now Living on the Edge
The Knicks' Charles Oakley committed his fifth flagrant foul of the season today, bringing him perilously close to a suspension.
Under new rules being enforced this season, Oakley will receive a one-game suspension for each basic, flagrant foul he commits the rest of the season.
For each flagrant foul II -- the league's term for a more unnecessary and excessive foul -- Oakley will serve a two-game suspension.


PULSE: Courts
According to the American Bar Association, civil cases should be settled or decided within 24 months, and felony cases should end withing one year.
Around the country, these standards are not being met.
Of the 181,526 civil cases pending in New Jersey last year, 15 percent were more than two years old.In Connecticut, almost half of the criminal cases pending last year were more than two years old.
In Connecticut, almost half of the criminal cases pending last year were considered backlogged, and the median age of these cases was 6.8 months.
Efforts are periodically made to chop away at the problem.
The Brooklyn District Attorney has been enforcing strict time lines for felony cases since the beginning of last year.
In 1990, New Jersey's Chief Justice ordered 17 judges transferred from civil to criminal courts.
That speeded up criminal cases but worsened the civil court backlog.


Patients' Lawyers Lead Insurers To Pay for Unproven Treatments
Pamela Schmale, a 39-year-old bookkeeper, says she felt that her only hope of surviving advanced breast cancer was to have a bone marrow transplant.
But her insurance company said it would not pay for the expensive and risky procedure, which is still undergoing clinical testing.
In desperation, Mrs.
Schmale and her husband, Arthur, mortgaged their house in Boring, Ore., to raise the $100,000 or more they would need for the transplant.
And her doctors recommended lawyers who might fight their insurance company for them.
Cost of Legal Advice
The Schmales hired Sheldon Weinhaus, a lawyer in St.
Louis who persuaded Mrs.
Schmale's insurance company to pay the full cost of the transplant, which Mrs.
Schmale had in January.
Although Mrs.
Schmale said her doctors told her it was too soon to know whether she would be helped, she was confident she had done the right thing.
"I think it saved my life," she said.


Vina Appears to Be Mets' Ace in the Hole
Fifteen months ago, Fernando Vina was so expendable that the Mets left him unprotected in the Rule 5 draft and lost him to the Seattle Mariners.
This spring, the Mets are turning him into their starting shortstop.


Medical Companies Berate Japan
Medtronic Inc. of Minneapolis had high hopes when it received approval from the Health and Welfare Ministry in 1982 to sell an implantable pain-killing device in Japan.
But the joy proved short-lived when another division of the ministry ruled that Japan's national health insurance system would not reimburse patients who used such a technically advanced product.
"Without reimbursement you can't sell the unit," said Lowell Jacobsen, chairman of Medtronic Japan.
It took 10 years until reimbursement was approved and Medtronic could begin active sales.


No Headline
On the Norwegian side of the border they have a sight-seeing post.
It says, 'Come see the dirtiest place on the globe.' They could be right. - ALEKSEI V. YABLOKOV, environmental official, on Nikel, Russia.  [ A1:4. ]


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Andrews Stays Steady  Donna Andrews sank a 6-foot birdie putt on the final hole yesterday to win the Dinah Shore, her second victory this month and her first in a major.
Playing on the Mission Hills course in Rancho Mirage, Calif., Andrews overtook Laura Davies, who was one shot ahead going into No. 18 but bogeyed to finish one shot behind.
Andrews herself had bogeyed No. 17 to fall a shot back of Davies.
Andrews finished with a 70 that put her at 12-under-par for the tournament.
Davies also shot a closing 70. (AP) Wargo Gets a Break: Taking advantage of the disqualification of the second-round leader, Tom Wargo shot a par-72 to win the Senior PGA Doug Sanders Classic yesterday in Kingwood, Tex., by one stroke over charging Bob Murphy. (AP) TENNIS  U.S.
Gains in Davis  Jim Courier and Todd Martin put the finishing touches on India in first-round Davis Cup play yesterday.
Completing the 5-0 sweep, Courier lost a first-set tie breaker but came back to defeat Leander Paes, 6-7 (5-7), 6-1, 6-4, on a grass court in New Delhi.
Martin later beat Zeeshan Ali, 6-2, 7-5.
The United States will travel to the Netherlands, a 5-0 winner over Belgium, for the second round in July.
At Graz, Austria, the German team, tied 2-2 after its inspirational team leader, Michael Stich, lost a five-and-a-half-hour duel with Thomas Muster, advanced when Marc-Kevin Goellner came from behind to beat Horst Skoff.
Muster, No. 11 in the world rankings, outlasted the No. 2-ranked Stich, 6-4, 6-7 (8-10), 4-6, 6-3, 12-10, on the indoor clay court.
It was then up to Goellner, who lost to Muster on Friday, to pull off a 3-6, 6-4, 7-5, 6-1 victory. (AP) Hack Rides a Breeze: Seventh-seeded Sabine Hack, needing some time to get her game going in the strong winds, beat Mary Pierce, 7-5, 6-4, to win the Virginia Slims of Houston. (AP) N.H.L.
Detroit Moves to First  In Chicago, Bob Essensa made 24 saves and won his first game for Detroit as the Red Wings beat the Chicago Blackhawks, 3-1, yesterday and moved into a first-place tie in the Central Division.
Sergei Fedorov scored his 52d goal for the Red Wings, who tied idle Toronto for first place in the division and first over all in the Western Conference (92 points). (AP) Sharks 4, Blues 3: Sergei Makarov's power-play goal with 11:35 left in the game gave San Jose its first-ever victory over St.
Louis. (AP) N.B.A.
Celtics Hold On  Dino Radja scored 36 points and grabbed 11 rebounds as the Boston Celtics held off Philadelphia, 124-122, in overtime yesterday in Hartford.


New Chief Wants to Widen NPR's Financial Base
Delano E. Lewis wants to turn National Public Radio -- the network that has brought the nation innovative programs like "Morning Edition" and "All Things Considered" -- into a paying proposition.
To reach his goal, Mr.
Lewis, NPR's new president and chief executive, wants new kinds of programming and new kinds of listeners for the network, which is sometimes viewed as the champagne of radio.
He also wants more support from companies for programs related to their industries.


Classical Music in Review
Kyung-Wha Chung, violinist, Peter Frankl, pianist  Carnegie Hall
In a delightful departure from the usual mixed-bag approach to recital programming, Kyung-Wha Chung and Peter Frankl devoted Thursday night to Brahms's complete music for violin and piano.
If there were eccentric doubters in the audience who thought three Brahms sonatas in a row to be excessive, let them know at once that there's no such thing as too much Brahms.


Teen-Ager in Shooting Case Arrested in Carjacking Spree
Howard Caesar, the teen-ager whose shooting by the police nearly two years ago after a car theft caused an uproar, was arrested Saturday night in Newark and charged with involvement in a string of crimes, including a carjacking, two shootings, multiple robberies and the ramming of a police car.
Mr.
Caesar, 19, one of five youths arrested, was charged with aggravated assault on a police officer, possession of a weapon -- the car he was driving -- and several counts of robbery, and he is to be arraigned today, said Detective Derek Glenn of the Newark police.
He was not charged in either of the shootings.


Dance in Review
'De Querer Amores'  Maria Elena Anaya Spanish Dance Company La Mama
There are theaters of many sizes at La Mama, that lively cultural center in the East Village.
The Maria Elena Anaya Spanish Dance Company appeared in a large one on Thursday night.
Even so, it seemed too small for Miss Anaya, who danced as if performing in a vast arena.


A Tide of Violence Swells In Zulu Area as Vote Nears
The unusual thing about the ambush, Adrian Pole said as he watched the men assembling on the bluff, was that it was so brazen.
Not long ago, the men clustered behind bushes overlooking the route to KwaMashu township would have been deterred by Mr.
Pole's car, with its conspicuous turquoise "Peace Monitor" flag, parked across the road.


Smith (A.O.) (A)
COMPANY REPORTS ** Smith (A.O.) (A)
Qtr to June 30
1993
1992
Revenue
315,802,000
286,804,000
Net inc
15,077,000
12,137,000
Share earns
1.44
1.19
Shares outst
10,453,236
10,212,461
6mo rev
611,900,000
539,986,000
Net inc
28,103,000
b27,674,000
Share earns
2.69
-
Shares outst
10,443,541
10,188,215
b-Net loss and after a charge of $ 46,122,000 to reflect a change in method of accounting for postretirement benefits and before preferred dividends of $ 856,000.


Bridge
There are times when a defender has to put himself in declarer's shoes, understanding that he cannot afford a certain play.
A good example is the diagramed deal from a New Jersey Grand National B qualifying contest eight days ago.
South was Joel Steinberg of East Brunswick, N.J., who landed in three no-trump after an odd-looking auction.
West's one no-trump was the weak variety, and his partner's redouble was a conventional demand that West bid two clubs.


Time to Get Out of Your Car and Walk Around; Inadequate Belts
To the Editor:
Re "New Injury Pattern Linked to Air Bags" (Health page, March 16): The severe injuries being sustained by car crash occupants wearing so-called automatic shoulder belts with no lap belts are the consequence of poor design and marketing choices by automobile manufacturers.
For optimal occupant safety, every car should be equipped with air bags and three-point manual lap-shoulder belts.
This is by far the best combination of restraint systems.
It has been technologically feasible for more than 20 years, but only recently made available on new cars as a result of Federal safety regulations.
As the marketplace is now proving, it is immensely popular.


KEY TRIAL TO BEGIN ON HOUSE DISTRICTS
A lawsuit that could affect the shape of Congressional districts nationwide goes to trial here on Monday, when white voters will argue that North Carolina's Congressional districts are the result of illegal racial gerrymandering.
The trial is the result of a much-debated Supreme Court ruling last June in the case, Shaw v.
Reno.
The Court, ruling that designing "bizarre" districts to increase black representation might violate the constitutional rights of white voters, sent the case back to a three-judge Federal panel.
The state's task now is to defend two new majority black districts, especially the 12th District, which snakes across 160 miles of the state.
In 1992, Mel Watt, a Democrat, was elected from that district; he and Eva Clayton, who was elected in the First District, became the first black members of North Carolina's Congressional delegation since the turn of the century.


Rutgers Orders Measles Shots After Outbreak
Rutgers University faces the first outbreak of measles at a United States college in three years, and everyone on campus will be required to get measles shots or leave, university officials said this weekend.
Beginning on Monday, free immunization is to be available at three student centers for the 35,000 to 40,000 students, teachers and staff members on the New Brunswick and Piscataway campuses.
Students have until April 8 to get their shots, either on campus or from an outside physician, said Dr.
Robert H. Bierman, director of student health services.
After that, he said, they will be barred from classes and dining halls and will be asked to leave campus.


Thanks to Come
To the Editor:
Attacks on the First Lady do not surprise me.
I am old enough to remember when Eleanor Roosevelt was ridiculed week after week.
She lived by her principles and was undeterred.
Indeed, the greater the attacks, the taller she stood.
Today I say my thanks to her each month when I receive my little Social Security check.
Not much, but it makes all the difference.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A clothing retailer mixes attitude, and some self-deprecation.
IT could well be that alternative culture, as defined by men's fashion, has been around long enough to be considered somewhat mainstream.
That could pose a problem for merchandisers, unsure how to distinguish themselves among males in their 20's for whom image is a crucial slice of life.
The answer for Oaktree, a national chain of men's clothing retailers and a division of Edison Brothers Stores Inc., was simple: attitude with a dash of self-deprecation.


Minister Who Sought Peace Dies in a Botched Drug Raid
The Rev.
Accelynne Williams, who for decades had comforted and counseled people throughout the Caribbean, retired to Boston six years ago to be near his daughter and to study the Scriptures.
On Friday a police SWAT team searching for drugs broke down his apartment door without warning and handcuffed him.
Minutes later, the 75-year-old minister was dead of heart failure.
The police, it turned out, had misread a floor plan provided by an informer; they had intended to raid an apartment on the floor above Mr.
Williams.


Corrections
A listing of the winning lottery numbers yesterday misstated the supplemental number for Saturday's New York Lotto drawing in some copies.
The number was 39, not 59.


Essay; Reading Hillary's Mind
They were dead wrong, all of them, when they talked Bill into appointing special counsel.
I knew it; I told him, when we were off in Moscow, that starting a criminal investigation would come back to haunt us.
But they all thought it was so smart to raise the standard of judgment to a criminal level.
That would be a way of hiding under a subpoena all the documentation that made me look like a greedy, unethical lawyer, keeping it from Congress and the press.


Building History Is Focus Of Pipeline Investigation
Combing through decades of records, Federal investigators today began trying to pinpoint when there was construction activity around an asphalt plant here that may have caused a gas pipeline to burst last week in a thunderous explosion.
The investigators were seeking to capitalize on their discovery on Saturday that fragments of the pipeline found near the Durham Woods apartments had deep scratches that may have been made by construction equipment from the plant.
Officials were still searching for representatives of the plant's owner, Quality Materials; the plant operates seasonally and had not yet opened for the year.


Arkansas Bids Fab Four A Final Four Farewell
Michigan's bid for a third consecutive Final Four appearance came to an end this afternoon, and the final chapter of the Fab Five may have also been written as the new kids on the block -- Arkansas's tough, young Razorbacks -- upended the Wolverines, 76-68, at Reunion Arena.
Arkansas (29-3) will face Arizona (29-5) in the National Collegiate Athletic Association semifinals Saturday in Charlotte, N.C.
The Final Four will have two Southeastern Conference teams for the first time, with Florida facing Duke in the other semifinal.


Review/Music; Virtuoso Singers Tackle A Complicated Program
The mainstream of choral singing still flows toward amateurs with semiprofessional skills.
Church choirs with paid soloists on every part and choral societies whose members themselves often pay for the privilege of performing are the current bulwark for the literature.
The handful of fully professional groups, operating mainly in a few major cities, are a decided anomaly.
The larger mass deeply influences how composers write for vocal ensembles.
At Alice Tully Hall on Wednesday night, for example, the New York Virtuoso Singers attacked with some relish Louis Andriessen's "Flora Tristan," a many-layered tribute to the early French feminist.
In it, different time schemes, different ideas of speed and different languages operate concurrently.
Harold Rosenbaum's 24-person group is hardly amateurish, but even these first-rate pros seemed tense in the face of so much complication.


Tax Cut Plans Prompt Fight In Albany
After three months the debate over Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposed budget has finally swung full circle to where it was expected to conclude all along: an election-year scrap over how much to reduce taxes.
Late last week, the Republicans who control the State Senate threw the budget talks into disarray by calling for tax cuts, mostly for businesses, totaling $700 million in the fiscal year that begins on Friday.


Italy Votes in What May, or May Not, Be a New Era
Italians began voting today in a two-day national election widely depicted by politicians and commentators as a watershed between the old and the new -- indeed, as the dawning of a new republic.
As she voted in Rome this morning, Luciana Vagnetti was not so sure.
"There is a saying that in Italy, everything should change so that nothing will change," the historical researcher said, citing the most-quoted aphorism from "The Leopard," a 1958 novel by Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa.


Room at Top: Devils Catch the Rangers
The Devils' intense pursuit of the Rangers reached a fruitful conclusion last night when their 5-2 victory over Quebec tied them with the Rangers for the most points in the National Hockey League.
With the Rangers' 3-1 loss at Winnipeg yesterday, the two Eastern Conference rivals are now tied at 99 points with 8 games left for each in the regular season.
One of their remaining games is against each other Saturday night at the Meadowlands, which might determine the winner of the President's Trophy, awarded to the N.H.L. team with the most points in the regular season.


Whirlwind of a Manager Runs A Village's Daily Operations
Christopher Russo likes to say that he learned how to run a village government during an after-school job as a delivery boy at a produce market in Scarsdale.
"They wanted the best quality," he said of his customers.
"They wanted efficiency. They wanted the best price. Who does that sound like?"


Dance in Review
Dance Theater of Harlem  New York State Theater
Arthur Mitchell and Dance Theater of Harlem seem intent on convincing audiences, new and experienced alike, that ballet can be as much pleasurable entertainment as enlightenment.
"I usually don't like dance, but this was terrific," one audience member said leaving the theater on Thursday night after the fifth program of the company's just-ended 25th-anniversary season.
And it was terrific.


An Inflation Illusion?; The Latest Fears May Be Groundless In a Global Economy With New Rules
The Federal Reserve is putting interest rates on an upward path, for the first time since 1989, with the stated aim of controlling inflation and quelling the market's fears that it will surge in the near future.
But those fears may be groundless, based as they are on theories that have worked in the past and may now be outdated.
There is little argument over the present: inflation is rising at an annual rate of only 3 percent, as measured by the Consumer Price Index, which is as mild as inflation has ever been over most of the last 15 years.
But the mild inflation rate today has not quieted the fears that the country will soon be operating at full capacity, running short of factory space, materials, machinery and workers to produce all that people want to buy.


Dance in Review
'Fiesta Andaluza'  Carlota Santana Spanish Dance Company Dimson Theater The Vineyard
The Carlota Santana Spanish Dance Company knows how to put on a show.
Its "Fiesta Andaluza," presented on Saturday night, was a whirl of colorful skirts, outsize passions and chattering, thudding feet.


Ugandans Relish the First Chance at a National Vote in 14 Years
The trees and lampposts along Uganda's highways are plastered with campaign posters, the stern looking faces faded by the rain.
From the muddy villages to the capital's slums and middle class neighborhoods, candidates are beating the turf in a fevered final campaign pitch.
On Monday, March 28, Ugandans will vote in the first national election in 14 years.
But diplomats and many Ugandans say it is the first opportunity for free and fair elections in three decades and a critical turning point for the country.


Siena Battling Injuries, Plus Rigors of Big Time
Siena Coach Mike Deane has a major problem.
"I've got half a team and I've got to play Villanova," Deane said as his starting forward hobbled past, with a wad of tape holding his ankle together.


Transfers By Insurers Under Fire
Bernie and Glennie Epland of Minneapolis were planning for their future in 1979, when they bought insurance to cover some nursing home expenses from the Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Company, a large, financially sound insurer in Illinois.
What they could not plan for was the transfer of their policy in 1990 to the National Financial Life Insurance Company of Waco, Tex., a small, poorly rated company that Texas examiners found to be insolvent at the end of 1990.
While the company soon restored itself to solvency, Texas examiners criticized it for improperly keeping records of loans and for failing to keep records of customer complaints.


CHRONICLE
"I'm furiously rereading 'Middlemarch,' " PEGGY NOONAN, the former Bush and Reagan speechwriter, said the other day.
"Have you noticed that everyone rereads these days? No one ever says I'm reading Trollope. They're always rereading Trollope."
Ms.
Noonan says she did read George Eliot's "Middlemarch" in college.
She's reading it again as a favor, in part, to Harold M. Evans, the president of Random House, which has just published its new Modern Library edition of "Middlemarch" and will publish Ms.
Noonan's new book, "Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness," in May.
Mr.
Evans has invited Ms.
Noonan -- along with BROOKE ASTOR, ERICA JONG, SUSAN CHEEVER, GAIL SHEEHY and SISTER SOULJAH -- to discuss "Middlemarch" and attend a screening of a BBC adaptation of the novel, at the Museum of Broadcasting, on April 4.


New York Widens Work Release To Reduce Prison Overcrowding
Work release, a program allowing some inmates a large measure of freedom before parole, is increasingly being used in New York State to relieve prison overcrowding, officials acknowledge.
As a result, prisoners who would not have been eligible five years ago are enrolled, including some who have repeatedly been denied parole.
As the state's Correction Commissioner makes room for newcomers in a prison system 29 percent over capacity, he says he is being forced to take too many chances with work-release participants.
"We've expanded the work-release program to greater numbers than I feel comfortable with," said the Commissioner, Thomas A. Coughlin 3d.
"We used to err on the side of conservatism. We now are forced to err on the side of liberalism."


Volcker Seen Among Choices for New UAL Board
United Airlines and its pilots' and machinists' unions are expected to announce today that Paul A. Volcker, the former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, and John Van de Kamp, a former California state Attorney General, will sit on the board of the airline if shareholders approve a $5 billion buyout proposal this summer.
They are two of the four so-called independent directors whose names will be included in the final paperwork outlining the unions' concessions-for-equity swap, according to people familiar with its contents.
Documents are expected to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission today.
The names of the other two independent directors could not be learned last night.


Brown Transforms Gators Into Victors Over Eagles
This deep into March, the buzzers are more than final.
The one that sounded this afternoon catapulted Florida into the Final Four for the first time.
The Gators' 74-66 victory over Boston College in the East Regional final is the biggest achievement in the 75-year history of a program once known more for its rules violations.
It began a celebration that was understandably imperfect for a school that had never before reached the final eight.
After the Gators had climbed a ladder and claimed a net for their own, Lon Kruger, the Florida coach and team architect, had pointed out to his players that there was another net left.


Mets Land First Baseman in Trade for Orioles' Segui
Two days after failing to obtain California's J. T. Snow to fill their hole at first base, the Mets managed to complete a trade that brings them David Segui from Baltimore and does not cost them a player currently in their major league camp.
The Mets obtained Segui, a switch-hitting first baseman, for two Class AAA players -- right-hander Tom Wegmann and shortstop Kevin Baez.
In addition, the Mets released Glenn Davis, who had come to camp as a non-roster invitee and had been competing for the first-base job.


Wrestling Private Demons; Driver in Crash That Killed Priests Kept Problems to Herself
In the photograph her mother and father cling to now, Lisa Bongiorno is wearing a black, sleeveless, floor-length dress, holding a bouquet of flowers and half-turning with a little girl's impish smile.
She is pretty, in a shy way, with dark hair and a slender neck, and she seems to be gliding away from the camera, off the edge of the picture.
This was last November at her sister's wedding.
There were little sparks of excitement dancing in the centers of Lisa Bongiorno's eyes.
Now her shattered parents, eager to recall their daughter's joyfulness, cannot stare at the picture hard enough.
It is a lonely keepsake.
What was behind those eyes?
What inscrutable sadness did the parents miss?
What more could they have done?


Centex Says No to MFS
Directors of Centex Telemanagement yesterday voted to reject an unsolicited buyout offer from MFS Communications Company, calling the $9-a-share bid inadequate.
Centex, based in San Francisco, said it was exploring other alternatives "to maximize shareholder value."


On the Hebron Frontier, Hate vs. Hate
Shani Horowitz, a mother of six who grew up in the Bronx, does not think much of her neighbors.
"Do you know what Arabs do when they kill Jews?" she asked, looking out her door to an Arab home across the street.
"They scream, 'God is Great!' This is their religion, to kill. You don't see Jews screaming 'God is Great!' and killing people. We are not murderers."


Nuclear Waste, With Nowhere to Go
After three decades of looking for a place where waste from the nation's nuclear reactors could someday be disposed of, that someday has arrived.
The two reactors in Red Wing have run out of storage space and no place has been found to put the waste.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Traded David Segui, first baseman, to the New York Mets for Kevin Baez, shortstop, and Tom Wegmann, pitcher.


New Campaigns For a New Season
New campaigns are springing up all over.
Tonight, BMW will begin a campaign for the 1994 318i convertible on cable television and selected spot markets.
The commercial compares the value of several classic BMW convertible models from years going back to 1938 (a model from that year is worth $180,000) with the current model, priced at $29,900.


Should Only Blacks Make Movies About Blacks?
Martin Scorsese once had the rights to make "Schindler's List." But as an Italian-American Roman Catholic, did he have the right?
That question, and the premise behind it, loomed large in a panel discussion, "Whose Black Cinema Is It, Anyway?," held on Friday night at New York University as part of a weeklong program on black film at the Tisch School of the Arts.
The discussion was moderated by Kinshasha Holman Conwill, the director of the Studio Museum in Harlem, and the panelists were the film makers Spike Lee, Jonathan Demme, Bill Duke and Michael Roemer, the writer Ishmael Reed, the film critic Joel Siegel and the screenwriter Anna Hamilton Phelan.


At Home Abroad; No Turning Back
The South African Defense Force will soon move into KwaZulu to protect campaigning and voting in the upcoming national election.
That is the prediction of people close to both President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela of the African National Congress.
The troops would not unseat Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi as South Africa has replaced the rulers of other black homelands in recent weeks.
Their purpose would be to put down the gangs of murderous ruffians from Chief Buthelezi's Inkatha Party who are killing and intimidating people to obstruct the election.


DOZENS IN SOUTH DIE IN TORNADOES
The children of the congregation were in the middle of a Palm Sunday play this morning when a tornado ripped into their small church in northeastern Alabama, wrenching the roof apart and toppling a wall onto the children.
At least 18 worshipers, among them six children, were killed, and almost 100 others were injured.
"It is the most horrible thing I've ever seen," said Leon Smith, one of more than 100 rescue workers who responded to the calls for help after the tornado hit the Goshen Methodist Church at about 11:30 A.M.


Classical Music in Review
Sonia Rubinsky  Pianist Weill Recital Hall
Some of the qualities of Sonia Rubinsky's playing that have found praise in the past were evident on Thursday evening in a mostly satisfying recital.
In particular, Ms.
Rubinsky's affinity, as a Brazilian, with the music of Heitor Villa-Lobos served her well in his "Prole do Bebe" No. 1.
She rendered these delightful doll portraits with warmth and clarity.
She also gave nice, robust treatment to Mendelssohn's "Variations Serieuses."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-9 AUTO THEFT PLAGUES BRITAIN  With drivers in England and Wales almost twice as likely as those in the United States to become victims of car theft, antitheft technology has become a kind of national obsession in Britain as people try to stay one step ahead of the thieves.
A1  RUSSIA'S POLLUTED NORTH  Once a place of unparalleled beauty, the Kola peninsula, has become one of the most poisoned spots on earth -- relentlessly transformed by Russian industry into a laboratory of ecological destruction.
A1  A NEW ERA FOR ITALY?
Italians began voting in a two-day national election widely depicted by commentators as a watershed between the old and the new.
A3  CHALLENGING MEXICO'S PRESIDENT  As President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico works to build consensus on choosing a replacement for the slain candidate who was to succeed him, he is being challenged by members of his own party.
A2  The mystery over the motive behind the assassination is deepening.
A2  SOUTH AFRICA'S RISING VIOLENCE  Outbreaks of killing have erupted in KwaZulu over the last two weeks since the Zulu nationalists of the Inkatha Freedom Party called on their followers to defy the country's first nonracial vote in April.
A6  UGANDA'S CRUCIAL ELECTION  On Monday, Ugandans will vote in the first national election in 14 years after decades of civil war.
Many see the vote as a critical turning point for the country.
A7  HATRED BOILS IN HEBRON  Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, criticized both by militant settlers and by Palestinians, has found himself between groups that define their existence in conflict.
A6  TURKS VOTE AS FAITH IN CHIEF SAGS  Turks cast their ballots in countrywide local elections that took on national significance because of sagging confidence in the Government of Prime Minister Tansu Ciller.
A3  FIRST FREE ELECTIONS IN UKRAINE  Turnout was high as Ukrainians voted in their first free parliamentary elections as an independent country.
But the secessionist President of the Crimea called for a boycott.
A8  Port Hope Journal: A naturalist author shuns the United States.
A4  Violence flares in Somalia two days after American forces left.
A7 National A10-13 DEBT COULD HURT RECOVERY  Middle-class families remain stuck with high debt payments as a proportion of their income, and economists worry that the families could cut their spending, hindering the economic recovery.
A1  DOZENS KILLED BY TORNADOES  Tornadoes struck the Southeast, killing dozens, including 18 worshipers attending services at a church that collapsed.
A1  GETTING THE TREATMENT  Patients are threatening lawsuits to pressure insurance companies to pay for risky or experiment procedures that are not covered.
Critics say the practice is unfair because the rewards go to those with the means to hire a lawyer.
A1  DEADLY MISTAKE IN BOSTON  A retired minister died of a heart attack after the Boston police mistakenly raided his apartment, raising questions about the department's procedure in drug raids.
A1  BIAS AT C.I.A.?
Women at the C.I.A.'s Directorate of Operations, the clandestine service that conducts espionage abroad, say they have been blocked from top jobs because of their sex.
A10  THREAT TO NUCLEAR PLANTS  A nuclear plant in Minnesota may have to close next year because it has no place to store nuclear waste.
If the plant closes, opponents of nuclear power will try the same tactic elsewhere, and experts say more closings could result.
A10  THE LONELY WHITE HOUSE  Few Democrats outside the White House have been willing to speak out strongly on President Clinton's behalf in the Whitewater matter, forcing the White House to to retreat to the garrison mentality of the 1992 Presidential campaign.
A12  A NEW MRS.
CLINTON  At a wedding in Dallas on Saturday, the bride wore white, the groom looked nervous -- and the best man was the President.
A12  Republicans offer an unexpected defense of White House aides.
A12  REDISTRICTING ON TRIAL  A lawsuit that could affect the shape of Congressional districts nationwide is going to trial in North Carolina.
A group of white voters there say that an oddly shaped district is unconstitutional because it was drawn to guarantee the election of a black representative.
A11 Metro Digest B1 PRISON RELEASES QUESTIONED  New York State is increasingly using work-release programs to relieve prison overcrowding.
The state Corrections Commissioner says he is taking too many chances with prisoners, and the escape rate is up.
A1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  "Middlemarch" on PBS.
C11  Conference on black cinema.
C11  Music: Critic's Notebook C11  Cecil Taylor, pianist.
C12  Sarah McLachlan.
C13  A showcase for bass guitar.
C14  New York Virutoso Singers.
C14  Dance: The Limon company.C14  Books: "Diplomacy," by Henry Kissinger.
C16  Television: Talk shows on abuse.
C14  Sports C1-9  Baseball: Yanks' Stanley remembers father.
C4  Mets get Orioles' Segui.
C4  Basketball: Arkansas turns back Michigan.
C1  Florida beats Boston College.
C1  Knicks pound Magic.
C1  Oakley on edge of suspension.
C3  Columns: Vecsey on Florida's victory.
C7  Golf: Norman wins Players Championship.
C5  Hockey: Red Army team gets Western pizazz.
C8  Rangers lose in Winnipeg.
C8  Devils win and tie for lead.
C8  Soccer: Greece's debut excites Astoria.
C2  Business Digest D1  Obituaries B8  Domenick L. Gabrielli, veteran New York jurist.
Ed Zern, outdoorsman and humorist.
Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  Aid for Russia, at last.
A rate hike for Empire?
Red tape and green hydrants.
Libya blinks on Lockerbie.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: No turning back.
William Safire: Reading Hillary's mind.
Emile Habibi: Massacre and redemption.
Robert A. Berenson: The single-payer trap.
Bridge C13 Chronicle B6 Crossword C16


Ukrainians Vote in Their First Elections Since Independence
Millions of Ukrainians voted today in their first free parliamentary elections as an independent country.
Turnout was generally high, but in Crimea, where ethnic Russians are more than 70 percent of the population, the number of valid ballots could end up below the 50 percent of registered voters required.


Lawyers Have a Right to Protect Interests of Corporate Clients
To the Editor:
Contrary to the impression given in your March 21 report on a brief filed in the appeal of the fraud conviction of Armand P. D'Amato, brother of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York State Bar Association does not support the right of lawyers to submit false billing statements to clients.
However, we vigorously support the right and obligation of any attorney to protect a corporate client in sensitive business and personnel areas (such as employee investigations, trade secrets and potential takeovers) by allowing the clients to provide the lawyer with billing instructions on legitimate fees for services rendered, thereby not divulging the client's proper secrets.


Treasury Auctioning Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings is confined to bills this week, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
On Tuesday, the Treasury will auction a 21-day cash-management bill, followed on Thursday by a 52-week Treasury bill.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.47 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.79 percent.
The rate for the one-year bill was 4.17 percent.


Trooper Goes on Trial on Charge Of Faking Fingerprint Evidence
A New York state police investigator who was acquitted on evidence tampering charges last year is scheduled to go on trial today on charges that he faked fingerprint evidence in a separate investigation.
The trooper, David M. Beers, who was assigned to the criminal investigation unit of Troop C in Sidney, is accused of fabricating fingerprint evidence in a 1991 narcotics and weapons investigation.
He had previously been charged with helping a colleague fake evidence in another 1991 criminal investigation, but was acquitted of those charges in September.


Making AIDS Worse
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's stated intention to privatize New York City's Division of AIDS Services is a shortsighted attack on some of the city's most vulnerable residents.
Without the division, thousands of AIDS sufferers who cannot maintain steady employment or get health insurance would be left without housing, health care and other essentials.
Everyone decries the homeless crisis; however, the effect of gutting AIDS services will be to create a new class of homeless people.
Homeless people carrying a deadly, contagious virus who, despite Mr.
Giuliani's denial, will require social services.


Domenick Gabrielli, 81, Ex-Judge On New York's Top Court, Is Dead
Domenick L. Gabrielli, a prominent upstate jurist who served for a decade as an associate judge of the New York Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, died last Friday at Villa Mary Immaculate Nursing Home in Albany.
He was 81 and lived in Albany.
Judge Gabrielli, who was stricken with pneumonia and admitted to St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany a month ago, entered the nursing home last Tuesday to convalesce and died of complications arising from the pneumonia, his daughter, Veronica Dumas, said.


Time to Get Out of Your Car and Walk Around
To the Editor:
Russell Baker's assessment of the very serious plight of the disenfranchised nondriver in the United States in "Get a Horse, Maybe?" (column, March 19) is right on target.
But his assumption that it's too late to do anything about the situation is not.
Today, Americans are waking up to the automobile's dark side: its time and energy costs, environmental damage and harm to community life.
With recent Federal legislation (the Clean Air Act, the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act) supporting reduced driving, we can begin right now to reverse the favor-the-auto trend.


Ouster Sought Of Lead Doctor In Cancer Study
Citing a new discrepancy in a breast cancer study, Federal health officials asked the University of Pittsburgh last night to replace the principal investigator of an influential series of studies to which a researcher from a Montreal hospital had earlier submitted falsified data.
The study in which the first falsifications were found said that lumpectomy was as effective as radical mastectomy, a more disfiguring operation, for certain small breast cancers.
The new discrepancy involves data from another hospital in Montreal apparently submitted to a different breast cancer study.
Health officials declined to describe the specifics of the case.


Olajuwon Suspended
HAKEEM OLAJUWON of the Houston Rockets, the league's third-leading scorer and rebounder, was suspended by the National Basketball Association yesterday for one game for hitting Referee BILL SPOONER in the stomach during Sunday night's game in Phoenix.
Olajuwon will miss Houston's game tonight in Sacramento.
The center was gesturing at Spooner over what he thought should have been a foul on the Suns' A. C. GREEN when he struck the official. (AP)


Johnson, Jones Talk But No Answers Yet
Jerry Jones, the owner of the Dallas Cowboys, and Jimmy Johnson met for more than two hours this afternoon, both refusing to say whether Johnson was still the team's coach but adding that they would meet again Tuesday morning.
The two spoke at the team's offices here amid speculation that their five-year union, which revived the Cowboys and led them to the last two Super Bowl championships, might be over.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday on the Evening Hours pages of Styles of The Times, about an opening at the American Crafts Museum, confused the identities of four people.
The picture showed, from left, Shimoda; Dubaka Leigh; and Kate Carmel.
Marcella Welch was not pictured.
A correction in this space, also on Sunday, referred incorrectly to Dubaka Leigh.
He is a man.


Review/Film Festival: Everything I Like; A Wistful Slovakian Slant on the Perplexities of the Ordinary
Martin Sulik's "Everything I Like" begins and ends at the same spot, a serene waterfront setting where Tomas (Juraj Nvota) pauses to collect his thoughts.
Using these scenes as visual bookends, Mr.
Sulik's rueful, quixotic film spends the rest of its time identifying the major landmarks in Tomas's life.
This appealing Slovakian film is more wistful than dramatic, but Mr.
Sulik's direction recalls the poetic delicacy of Czechoslovak cinema at its best.
"Don't play what I sing, I haven't got a good ear," Tomas tells his son, summing up the film's intuitive spirit.
"Play what's in my head."
Tomas's head is filled with a lifelike array of unmade choices and unresolved family problems.
The very ordinariness of the issues he contemplates gives them a certain inviting familiarity, which Mr.
Sulik explores with quiet precision.
"Everything I Like" offers a drily witty amalgam of minor crises, tied together by the director's eccentric overview and by Tomas's bemused outlook on his own troubles.
When he decides to stop eating during the period spanned by this story, Tomas is tackling the situation about as actively as he knows how.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Rule On 2d Appeals Of State Inmates
Revisiting the question of when Federal courts must open their doors to state prison inmates with delayed claims of innocence, the Supreme Court agreed today to hear the appeal of a Missouri prisoner who has strong evidence that he did not commit the murder for which he has been sentenced to die.
The inmate, Lloyd E. Schlup Jr., had come within nine hours of execution in November when Missouri's Governor, Mel Carnahan, granted a stay of execution and ordered a special panel to investigate evidence of Mr.
Schlup's innocence.
The inmate's original lawyers failed to put that evidence before either the jury that convicted him or the Federal judges who rejected his earlier petition for review.


Judge Resigns Job, Signaling Interest In Run for State Post
Karen S. Burstein, a Family Court judge in Brooklyn, submitted a letter of resignation to state and city officials today, signaling that she is virtually certain to run this year for Attorney General.
Ms.
Burstein, 51, who has held a number of elected and appointed posts in state and city government during her 20-year political career, said in an interview that the odds of her running are "favorable, if I were a betting person."


Chess
Gary Kasparov played a sprinkling of bright games in the Linares International Tournament in Spain, which ended on March 14, but that was nowhere enough to equal Anatoly Karpov's high-level grinding down of almost everybody.
In fact, Kasparov was lucky to gain a draw against Karpov.
And in other games, he had trouble getting up a full head of steam.
But it was not just the unaccustomed drabness that knocked Kasparov out of contention but also two damaging losses, to his own Russian protege, 18-year-old Vladimir Kramnik, in Round 10, and to the 20-year-old Frenchman Joel Lautier, in Round 13.


Dare Will Turn Pro
YINKA DARE, the 7-foot-1-inch center who led George Washington to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament during the past two years, is leaving to pursue an National Basketball Association career.
The Washington-based university said yesterday that the sophomore withdrew from classes and left campus after informing Coach MIKE JARVIS of his intention. (AP)


Florida Makes No Plans to Put 'Extra' With 'Ordinary'
Do not expect the University of Florida team that plays Duke on Saturday in the National Collegiate Athletic Association semifinals to make a habit of physically spectacular play, Florida Coach Lon Kruger said today.
"Relative to Final Four teams, this group is fairly ordinary with their basketball skills," Kruger said.


Pritzker vs. Trump, and Vice Versa
The china is smashing against the walls again in one of New York's rockiest corporate marriages -- the partnership between Jay Pritzker, the Chicago financier, and Donald J.  Trump, the Manhattan developer, who jointly operate the Grand Hyatt Hotel.
In a lawsuit filed yesterday in United States District Court in Manhattan, lawyers for Mr.
Pritzker accused Mr.
Trump of violating their partnership agreement in three ways: by failing to remain solvent; by pledging his stake in the hotel as collateral for bank loans, and by refusing to pay his share of repairs that Mr.
Pritzker says are necessary to restore the grandeur of the midtown hotel.


Mandalay Journal; Burmese Cry Intrusion (They Lack a Great Wall)
U Aung Than is putting the finishing touches on the Great Wall of China.
The six-foot-high outdoor mural he is painting smack in the middle of this most Burmese of cities will greet guests to Mandalay's newest high-rise hotel, the Great Wall Inn.
Unlike many of his neighbors, the 41-year-old painter has no thoughts -- or at least none he cares to share with a stranger -- about what they are calling here the "Chinese invasion" of Myanmar, the nation still better known to the outside world by its former name, Burma.


Trenton Acts on a Wide Range of Bills
In a rush to clear the legislative decks for the budget debate, the Assembly today dealt in swift order with potholes and llamas, unauthorized nude photos and presidential primaries, and a bill that would require public schools to teach about the Holocaust and other forms of genocide.
With scant debate and wide bipartisan support, the legislators gave their approval to a range of bills with potential national impact, such as legislation to move forward the state's presidential primary to the local and politically popular issue of pothole repairs.
After today, legislative attention will be focused on budget matters, including more than a dozen public hearings.


Review/Film Festival; Frustrations of Two Artists in China
Who knew there were slackers in China?
"The Days" examines the personal boredom and professional frustration of two painters in their 20's, an unmarried couple who have been together since art school.
Now teachers, they still live in a tiny apartment in Beijing more suited to students than adults, and are stymied about the future.
Xiaodong is an intense-looking man, with large glasses and a roomful of paints and canvases.
But as the narrator says, "He dreamed of nothing but being rich," and the fantasy paralyzed him.
"He couldn't even paint." Xiaochun is so ready to leave the relationship and the country that she writes to relatives in New York and hopes to join them.
The film is most intruiging when it becomes a window on aspects of Chinese culture rarely depicted on screen.
Some early-morning sex between Xiaodong and Xiaochun is discreet by American standards, but the scene is long and emphatic enough to be unusual in a Chinese film.
And at times "The Days" effectively suggests the tension between an awful past that the characters want to forget and a present that seems cut off from all meaning.
Xiaochun's parents had been persecuted by her entire school when she was 16.
There is no need for the film to belabor the point that when she finally goes to New York, she writes to Xiaodong without reference to their life together.
In the words of the narrator, she acts "as if the past had evaporated."


Accounts
*
J.
M.
Smucker Co., Orrville, Ohio, to Leo Burnett, Chicago, to handle advertising for its Smucker's jams, jellies and preserves and Mrs.
Smith's frozen foods.
The Smucker's account, which was previously handled by Wyse Advertising, Cleveland and New York, was placed in review when Smucker acquired Mrs.
Smith's in February.
Burnett handled Mrs.
Smith's when that company was owned by Kellogg.
The finalists in the review, in addition to Burnett and Wyse, were Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago, and Ally &amp; Gargano, Bozell and Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG, all of New York.
Combined billings were estimated at $15 million to $20 million.


Economic Protest Seen in Ukrainian Election
Parliamentary elections in Ukraine on Sunday, which have yielded only patchy results so far, have demonstrated a sharp desire for change among Ukrainian voters angry about the economic morass that has followed independence under President Leonid M. Kravchuk.
That anger expressed itself first in the turnout of nearly 75 percent nationwide after predictions of apathy, and second in the support in eastern Ukraine and Crimea, which are dominated by ethnic Russians, for closer economic and political relations with Russia, as well as for neo-Communist candidates who promise an increase in production in association with Moscow.


Oil Prices Sink After OPEC Meeting
Oil prices cascaded downward yesterday, dragging oil company stocks with them, after Saudi Arabia refused to cut its oil production at OPEC's weekend meeting.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, light sweet crude oil for May delivery plunged $1.05, or 8 percent, to settle at $14.08 a barrel, after dipping briefly below $14.
The sharp decline puts crude oil near its five-year low of $13.75 a barrel.


Review/Music; The Russian Iago Takes A Busman's Holiday
Ensconced as Iago in the Metropolitan Opera's current production of "Otello," the greatly gifted Russian baritone Sergei Leiferkus took time off for a solo recital at Tully Hall on Sunday afternoon.
The program was Schumann's Eichendorff Lieder (Op. 39) and Mussorgsky's "Rayok" and "Songs and Dances of Death," none of which range too far from the dark world of Shakespeare's master villain.
These are songs Iago might have liked.
Schumann's Opus 39 cycle, his second "Liederkreis," expands on the bleak world of Schubert's "Winterreise." The poems by Josef von Eichendorff draw on conventional idyllic images of German Romanticism, but a layer of dread hovers over them.
Even the glacial serenity of "Mondnacht," married to one of Schumann's greatest melodic inspirations, is marked by an "as if" locution that gives its contentment an unreal sheen.
"Zwielicht," close to the end of the cycle, is a harrowing cry of paranoid pain; Schumann's tonally disconnected harmonies deepen the horror.
Only in the final song, "Fruhlingsnacht," does the spirit of love abruptly triumph.


Tele-Communications Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


2d Man Held in Mexican Assassination
Heightening speculation that the man charged with assassinating the governing party's presidential candidate last week may not have acted alone, Government officials said today that they had arrested a security guard who was next to the candidate when he was shot.
Officials said tonight that the guard, Tranquilino Sanchez Venegas, was detained by federal agents before dawn on Sunday in Tijuana and would soon be charged in connection with the shooting there of the candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio.
However, they said it was uncertain whether he would be accused of direct involvement in the killing.


A Scandal That Doesn't Exist Fills the News; Commodities Roulette
To the Editor:
The March 18 front-page article about Mrs.
Clinton's making $100,000 in commodities on the advice of a lawyer is confusing.
I am an expert in commodities, and I know that this is hardly possible.


Brown's Board Game Is Helping Nets Gain in Standing
Sometimes P. J. Brown of the Nets comes down with a rebound and looks around nervously for someone to pass the ball to rather than shoot it.
And that is how the 6-foot-10-inch rookie out of Louisiana Tech picked up the nickname Cage from his teammate, Derrick Coleman.
It seems Coleman saw Michael Cage of the Seattle SuperSonics do the very same thing after coming down with a rebound this season.
Coleman turned to someone and said, "Who does that remind you of?" The answer was Brown, and thus was born the sobriquet.


A Scandal That Doesn't Exist Fills the News; The People's President
To the Editor:
"The Circus That Is Whitewater," Bob Herbert's March 20 column, suggests that unless the Clintons can convince the electorate that they represent them, not the big money interests, there will be a crisis of confidence that will make it impossible to enact President Clinton's programs.


For Tartabull, a Special Time Off the Field
Danny Tartabull is excited about something that will transpire off the field on Tuesday, excited in a manner he cannot really explain.
It is a feeling that he expects will evolve into tears, hugs, countless stories, more tears and more hugs.
It is when he will meet his 72-year-old grandfather for the first time.
His name is Mr.
Mora and he is scheduled to arrive here from Cienfuegos, Cuba, on Tuesday night to see his 50-year-old daughter, Maria, for the first time since she left the country as a 19-year-old bride and to finally meet his grandson, who is a famous baseball player.
Tartabull would not reveal Mora's full name, partly because he wants to remain private and partly because he said the rest of it is too complicated.
Besides, Tartabull simply has to call him grandpa.


Medicare Claim May Be Rejected, It's Found, Depending on the State
Federal investigators said today that they had found huge variations in the approval and denial of Medicare claims for the same services in different states.
And they said there were no obvious reasons for the disparities.
Auditors from the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, examined claims that Medicare rejected on the ground that the services were unnecessary.


Russell W. McFall, 72, Western Union Leader
Russell W. McFall, who led Western Union's transition from an outmoded telegram delivery service to a modern telecommunications giant, died on Saturday at his home in Ormond Beach, Fla.
He was 72.
Mr.
McFall became the chief executive of Western Union in 1965.
He took the company out of the telegram business almost completely and moved it into mailgrams and satellites.
He was by training and disposition more a technician than a marketer, and in the 14 years of his leadership Western Union saw many important technical advances.


COMPANY NEWS: Judge Draws Line on Fees; Not a Case for the Image Of Investment Bankers
As far as excesses go, National Gypsum's bankruptcy case had it all.
Out-of-town lawyers who expected the company in bankruptcy to pick up the costs of their dry cleaning and movie rentals.
A well-known investment banker who failed to show up for a crucial hearing -- and then billed for the time just the same.
Steven A. Felsenthal, the judge who is presiding over the case in the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Dallas, laid down the law earlier this month, when he reined in some of the fees that the professionals had hoped to take home.
So are they contrite?
Not exactly.


ITALY'S RIGHT WING HEADS FOR VICTORY IN LANDMARK VOTE
Italy's right wing, led by the media magnate Silvio Berlusconi, headed for victory early today in national elections that are being depicted as the harbinger of renewal after years of corruption.
If computer projections are borne out in final returns, the right-wing alliance will have a majority in the lower house of Parliament and at least a plurality in the Senate.


Farrakhan Speaks at Kean College Amid Protests


Police Seek Suspect in Queens Sex Assaults
One man is believed responsible for a string of sex crimes in Jackson Heights, Queens, dating back to 1991, in which most of the victims were teen-age girls, the police said yesterday.
The nine incidents linked to the same man include the rape of a 15-year-old girl on Feb. 28 and sodomy of a 17-year-old girl on March 26.


Vandy and Villanova: The 'V' Is for Victory
Siena College had made a wonderful journey through the National Invitation Tournament, shocking Georgia Tech in the opening round, then beating Tulane and Bradley to make it to the semifinal against Villanova.
The ride came to an end last night at Madison Square Garden.
Villanova proved too big and too fast.
The Wildcats (19-12) defeated Siena, 66-58, to reach the championship game Wednesday night against Vanderbilt, which beat Kansas State, 82-76, in the other semifinal.


In Antarctica, More Perilous Expeditions and Difficult Rescues
THE icy plains of Antarctica, for the last half century the purview of scientists, have lately become popular with a new kind of adventurer, often backed by private sponsors.
As the expeditions become bolder, they also become more perilous.
And as American scientific support teams are increasingly called on to conduct search and rescue missions, the National Science Foundation says, scientific research may soon begin to suffer.


Who's Minding the Biotechnology Store?
To the Editor:
New research indicates that creation of genetically engineered virus-resistant crops could lead to new plant viruses.
Yet, no Federal agency intends to oversee commercialization of these bioengineered crops.


Patterns
The New Playboy Bunny
Plenty of collections may appear to be under its influence, but now Playboy Enterprises is investing in its first designer line.
Laura Whitcomb, the designer who made asexual Adidas track suits into steamy dresses for her company, Label, is licensed to work with the bunny logo.


Tommy Benford, Jazz Dummer, 88; Played With Stars
Tommy Benford, who played the drums for such early jazz stars as Jelly Roll Morton, Willie (The Lion) Smith, Fats Waller and Sidney Bechet, died on Thursday at Mount Vernon Hospital in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
He was 88.
Mr.
Benford was born in Charleston, W.Va.
He started playing in an orphanage band and in the early 1920's joined the Green River Minstrels with his brother, Bill, a tuba player and later a band leader.
For the next 60 years, Mr.
Benford undertook a jazz musician's odyssey.
In the 1920's he worked with the band leader Elmer Snowden and the pianist Charlie Skeete, and he played on some of Jelly Roll Morton's more famous recordings, including "Kansas City Stomp" and "Shreveport." He helped Chick Webb learn to play, and along with Sid Catlett shaped early jazz drumming.


Alvarado Is Grounded
Aqueduct stewards yesterday suspended jockey FRANK ALVARADO from March 31 through April 6 for careless riding.
The stewards cited his stretch run aboard All My Tricks during the ninth race last Saturday. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  RIGHTISTS LEAD ITALY VOTE  A media magnate who is a newcomer to politics and his right-wing allies appeared to be winning national elections in Italy that had been seen as a vehicle for renewal after years of corruption.
A1


At Least 31 Killed in Gun Battles in Johannesburg
Gun battles rattled incongruously through the high-rise canyons of downtown Johannesburg today as a protest by Zulu nationalists opposed to elections degenerated into the deadliest melee the city could remember.
Armed marchers, police officers and snipers hidden in the surrounding buildings blazed away at each other along several blocks of banks and offices, leaving at least 31 people dead and scores wounded.


Review/Television; With Freedom, Hard Times
In Czechoslovakia, as elsewhere in Europe, the intoxicating reappearance of freedom in 1989 has been followed by a severe hangover.
"After the Velvet Revolution," Tom Weidlinger's probing hourlong documentary, focuses on several families and individuals whose stories, affecting in their own right, illuminate much about the economic challenges and political perplexities of today's wishful democratic societies.
A farm family fights to regain the land taken from them by their Communist rulers.
People who fought for freedom now have trouble finding a place to live and raise a family.
A politically active rock-and-roll star becomes a millionaire entrepreneur.
The anti-Communist daughter of a man who prospered under Communism tries to come to terms with her own compromises.
A political leader in Slovakia loses the battle against Slovak separatism.
A former Communist official finds a place in the new system.


On My Mind; Always Believe Dictators
In his opening statement at the prime-time news conference last week, President Clinton spoke about the nuclear crisis with North Korea.
He spoke 10 words, adding up to nothing.
At that, he did better than the American press.
Until toward the end of the conference, nobody brought up a question about anything but Whitewater.


Giuliani Seeks Delay on Recycling Law
The Giuliani administration, in a move to reduce its fiscal headaches, is seeking to delay the deadline for meeting the requirements of the city's recycling statute, possibly for at least four years, arguing that complying with the law would cost $100 million.
Under a 1989 statute, the city was to have collected 4,250 tons of recyclable material a day, about 25 percent of the city's total waste stream, by next month.
Last month the state's highest court ruled that, by collecting less than 15 percent, the city had violated the law.
The city was ordered to devise a new timetable.


Classical Music in Review
Lindsay String Quartet Weill Recital Hall
The Lindsay String Quartet set the Tippett Quartet No. 5 next to Beethoven's C-sharp minor (Op. 131) on Friday night.
The latter discovers a world beyond accepted ideas of formal beauty, with music that is sudden and fragmented, alternately brutal and innocent.
Beethoven, with his enormous grasp of composition, points to inevitabilities no one knew existed.


Review/Dance; Experimental Works Of Oblique Expression
Nancy Meehan's experimental choreography is defined, unusually, more by its sensibility than by an idiom or a doctrinaire formula for composing dances.
The three works, including a premiere, presented on Friday night by the Nancy Meehan Dance Company at St.
Mark's Church in the East Village, were fine examples of the choreographer's originality.
The subjects of her works are open to interpretation, although Miss Meehan's fondness for nature imagery can offer a clue.
Like Erick Hawkins, in whose company she danced before 1970, Miss Meehan is drawn to the devices of haiku poetry, which often makes a point by using remote association rather than direct images.


Home Shopping Gets a Look From Turner Broadcasting
The Turner Broadcasting System is considering acquisitions of Home Shopping Network Inc. and Silver King Communications, people with knowledge of the talks said yesterday.
The possibility of a deal suggests to some the work of John C. Malone, the chief executive of Tele-Communications Inc.
Mr.
Malone is chairman of the Liberty Media Corporation, which owns 78 percent of the voting stock of Home Shopping Network.
Liberty Media also has the right to buy control by February of Silver King, which owns 12 independent television stations and has licenses for dozens of low-power television stations, for about $2 million.
Thus, Mr.
Malone could effectively control both Home Shopping and Silver King.


G.M. Plan to Shift Power To Outside Directors
In an effort to institutionalize sweeping changes in the governance of the General Motors Corporation during the last two years, G.M.'s board has published a series of guidelines aimed at shifting corporate power from the chief executive to nonemployee directors.
The guidelines, which are not binding, propose that the nonemployee directors have "complete access" to G.M. managers instead of having to go through John F. Smith Jr., the auto maker's president and chief executive; that Mr.
Smith undergo a formal annual evaluation by the nonemployee directors, and that those directors -- rather than the chief executive -- choose new directors.


I.R.S. Eases Mortgage Tax Rules
Handing legions of taxpayers a filing-season bonus, the Internal Revenue Service announced today that it would permit home buyers to deduct "points" charged on their mortgages even if these points were actually paid by the home seller.
Moreover, the deduction is retroactive to cover transactions since the beginning of 1991.


Scuttling of Police Academy Move Stirs Bronx Protest


A 25-Year Trail to 5 Murder Charges; Sudden Deaths of Her 5 Children Were Slayings, Police Say
For a quarter century, Waneta E. Hoyt lived here with the tragedy of her five children's deaths and basked in the comfort of her friends' sympathy.
"She'd see a little girl on the street, so pretty and beautiful, and she'd begin to cry," recalls her neighbor, Martha Nestle, who considers her as close as any sister.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BOGUS WATER BILLS INVOLVED IN SWINDLE
He preyed on the old and the poor in two Brooklyn neighborhoods, telling them he was a water marshal and would cut them off unless they paid their overdue bills.
But there are no water marshals, and in many cases, there weren't even any overdue bills.
By the time his victims realized what had happened to them, he was gone.
The police estimate he made $900 a week.
B3.


Charles Gulden, Mustard Executive, 83
Charles Gulden, former chairman and president of Charles Gulden Inc., the mustard company, died on Sunday after an extended illness at his home in Thompson, Conn.
He was 83.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Charles Gulden Jr. of Vero Beach.


Sabres Paid Fee
The Buffalo Sabres paid an "agent's fee" to the man accused of trying to extort $150,000 from ALEXANDER MOGILNY after he helped the Sabres wing defect in 1989, the team said yesterday.
Executive vice president GERRY MEEHAN said the Sabres paid SERGEI FOMITOV, also known as SERGEI PAVLOSKY, to be Mogilny's interpreter and personal representative.
"After the first season, though, we didn't see him ever," Meehan said.


India Watches in Vain for Migrating Siberian Crane Flock
EVERY day, Arvinder Singh Brar raises his binoculars to scan the sky above the wetlands here, India's best-known bird sanctuary, and swings them across the ponds, marshes and acacia tree groves where tens of thousands of birds feed, flutter, rest, fly and call to each other.
A few moments later, Mr.
Brar, the deputy chief wildlife warden at the Keoladeo National Park at Bharatpur, lowers his binoculars in disappointment: the majestic Siberian crane, for decades the star of the park's winged visitors from abroad, has not been sighted this season for the first time in more than 30 years, and ornithologists fear for its future.


Milton Greenebaum, Retail Executive, 98
Milton J. Greenebaum, former president of Kirby, Block &amp; Company, a cooperative buying service for department stores, died on Wednesday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 98 and lived in Manhattan.
Sixty years ago Mr.
Greenebaum helped organize P. A. Bergner's in Peoria, Ill., which became a national department store chain.
He remained a member of the board of directors until two years ago when the chain declared bankruptcy.
It was recently acquired by Carson, Pirie, Scott &amp; Company, a department store holding company.


Sports of The Times; Rangers Feel The Devils' Pitchfork
WHEN the Islanders won those four consecutive Stanley Cups, it was bad enough.
But in the early 1980's, the Rangers weren't a serious contender.
All those frustrated Ranger fans got away with pretending that those Islanders didn't really exist.
But it's different this time.
It's different because the New Jersey Devils have put a pitchfork into what the Rangers thought they had all but wrapped up: first place over all in the National Hockey League going into the Stanley Cup playoffs.


Researchers Closing In on a Single-Dose Vaccine for Children
RESEARCHERS say they are rapidly moving within reach of one of the long-standing goals of vaccine research: a single-dose inoculation that would protect infants against all major childhood diseases.
Spurred by advances in molecular biology and new methods of stimulating the body's defensive immune system, scientists say that finding childhood immunology's "Holy Grail" of a supervaccine could be possible within as little as five years.


Fireman Dies In Battling Blaze in SoHo
A wall of flame engulfed three firefighters as they searched for residents feared trapped in a SoHo apartment building last night, killing one fireman and critically burning the other two, Fire Department officials said.
The blaze in a three-story brick apartment house at 62 Watts Street, just off Canal Street, was the first in two years to claim the life of a New York City firefighter.


Corrections
An article yesterday about elections in Uganda misspelled the name of the President and referred incorrectly to one party in some editions.
The President is Yoweri Museveni; the party is the Uganda People's Congress.


Colts Release Banks
The Indianapolis Colts released linebacker CHIP BANKS yesterday.
Banks, who was on injured reserve for the entire last season because of a shoulder injury suffered during training camp, has been with the Colts since 1989. (AP)


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


6 Palestinians Are Shot to Death By Israeli Soldiers in Gaza Strip
Six Palestinians were shot to death by Israeli soldiers in the Gaza Strip today in the most severe violence in the occupied territories since the Hebron massacre a month ago.
The slain Palestinians wore uniforms identifying them as belonging to an armed wing of Al Fatah, the mainstream faction of the Palestine Liberation Organization led by Yasir Arafat.


The Targets Have Changed, but the Bite Is the Same
The morning news has thrown out a bizarre little factoid, and Mort Sahl, parked in front of a cup of coffee in a midtown restaurant, is trying to get his mind around it.
Howard Stern, morning radio's lord of misrule, has just declared that he is a candidate for Governor of New York.
Mr.
Sahl considers the proposition, his brow furrowed.
"The question is," he says, "is Albany far enough?"


Observer; Down And Whiskery
If you watched the Academy Awards show last week -- and if you didn't you're a poor excuse for an American -- you probably noticed a lot of the men looked like criminals.
Not high-class criminals, either, like the spiffily tailored politicians and corporate semi-giants who get sentenced to Florida to grow tomatoes and play tennis at that Federal prison for socially presentable felons.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Rubin and McNeil Out Chanda Rubin and Lori McNeil lost in the opening round of the Family Circle Magazine Cup at Hilton Head Island, S.C., yesterday, becoming the first seeded players to fall.
Rubin, an 18-year-old who was seeded 13th and is ranked 27th in the world, was stopped by Caroline Kuhlman, 6-1, 6-4.
Kuhlman, ranked 78th in the world, made 73 percent of her first serves.
McNeil, seeded 11th, was ousted by 59th-ranked Emanuela Zardo of Switzerland, 7-6 (7-2 ), 1-6, 6-4.


Wrong Candidate for the Archives
Finally the Clinton Administration seems poised to nominate the keeper of a billion official documents and manager of the Presidential library system.
But scholars and archivists are justifiably alarmed by the reported candidacy of Robert Hardesty, a Texan with no relevant professional experience.
If his name goes forward, and he is confirmed by the Senate, he would follow in the flawed tradition of the previous National Archivist, Don Wilson.
The minimally qualified Mr.
Wilson turned over tons of disputed records to George Bush -- and then became director of the Bush Center for Presidential Studies in Texas, at $129,000 a year.
The National Archives and Records Administration deserves better.
In 1985 Congress gave this precious memory bank independent status, ending its long captivity to the General Services Administration.
It was hoped that the post of National Archivist would assume a weight and status comparable to the Librarian of Congress and Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.
That would give the Archivist necessary clout against the official and partisan tendency to limit access to public records.


France Yields to Student Protests, Abandoning Cut in Youth Wages
Bowing to student protesters who have disrupted more than a dozen French cities during the last three weeks, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur today abandoned a Government decree that allowed young people to be paid less than the minimum wage.
After a hurriedly arranged meeting between Mr.
Balladur and student leaders this morning, a spokesman for the conservative coalition Government said the decree had been suspended for one week to give time for a new policy to be developed and "to put an end" to the so-called youth wage.


CHRONICLE
They may be out of the limelight, but former presidents and their families still slip into the news.
GEORGE and BARBARA BUSH, for example, spend most of their time in retirement being, as Mr.
Bush puts it, "little points of light," doing civic work in Houston.
But last week, they barnstormed in Florida for three days for their son JEB BUSH, who is seeking the Republican nomination for governor.


Hugo Castello, Coach At N.Y.U., Dies at 79
Hugo Castello, who coached New York University to 10 national championships in fencing, died yesterday of complications after surgery performed on Jan. 27.
He was 79.
The cause of death was cancer, said Mr.
Castello's son-in-law, Kevin McMahon.
Born in La Plata, Argentina, Mr.
Castello arrived in the United States with his family in the mid-1920's.
His father, Julio, was the N.Y.U. fencing coach from 1927 to 1947, during which time Hugo Castello won three National Intercollegiate Foil Fencing Championships (1935-37).


Books of The Times; Of an Erudite Sleuth Tracking a Madman
Books of The Times  The Alienist  By Caleb Carr  496 pages. Random House. $22.
You can practically hear the clip-clop of horses' hooves echoing down old Broadway in Caleb Carr's richly atmospheric new crime thriller, "The Alienist," set in 19th-century New York City.
You can taste the good food at Delmonico's.
You can smell the fear in the air.


Ukraine Looks to Sea for Oil Independence
To the Editor:
"In Russia, Turning Oil Into Money Is Actually Hard" (The Week in Review, March 20) states: "Other landlocked states, like Ukraine and Belarus, depend on Russian oil the way an intensive care patient might depend on oxygen."


Walgreen Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Long Neglected, Colombia's Blacks Win Changes
In this slow-moving river port, signs of abandonment are everywhere.
Unemployed men while away hours on front stoops, taxis jolt gingerly down pitted and muddy streets, and broken windows scar Government buildings that are dilapidated mementos of token national interest in a state where 95 percent of the population is black.
"The Government doesn't even send schoolbooks here," said Maria Luisa Restrepo Perea, a high-school teacher.
"Sometimes we have to help the children get pens, uniforms, notebooks."


News Magazine On Black Issues
A test issue of U.S.A.
Thisweek, a weekly news magazine aimed at black readers, is being introduced nationwide by James T. A. Babington-Johnson, a former trade magazine publisher.
The magazine, based in Los Angeles, will present current events "with an analysis and perspective reflecting the interests and concerns of African-Americans," Mr.
Babington-Johnson said.
"We are in media-driven times, and African-Americans have always had to sit frustrated as the news appears and other people put their spin on it."


Dow Is Near Year's Low as It Falls by 12.38
When the Federal Reserve Board raised short-term interest rates another quarter-point last week, something traders had spent weeks wishing for, there was hope on Wall Street.
Perhaps the stock market, which has almost slavishly tracked bond prices, would at last disentangle itself from the sinking bond market.
No such luck.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 yesterday set another record low for the year, falling to 460, in quiet trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average came close to its low for the year as well, closing at 3,762.35, a scant 8 points away from the opening price on Jan. 3, 1994.


A Scandal That Doesn't Exist Fills the News; Let Counsel Investigate
To the Editor:
Senators William S. Cohen, Alfonse M. D'Amato, Bob Dole, Phil Gramm, Representative Newt Gingrich and other Republicans in Congress should honor the request of Robert B. Fiske Jr., special counsel in the Whitewater investigation, to delay any Congressional hearings on the matter.


Ojeda Seems Set For Role As Starter
A parade of pitchers drifted in and out of Manager Buck Showalter's office today, opening the door and closing it behind them.
Seven days from the first game, Bob Ojeda, Melido Perez, Scott Kamieniecki and Sterling Hitchcock obviously were being told about their fate with the Yankees.
The clock on the clubhouse wall ticked.
Although Showalter first told reporters that nothing unusual had occurred in the meetings, he then revealed what was an unusually abundant amount of information for the Yankees.
Showalter indicated that Bob Ojeda would begin the season at Class AAA Columbus and is likely to be the fifth starter two weeks later, that Perez would be the fourth starter if his right shoulder is sound, that Kamieniecki would pitch relief and that Hitchcock was also on target to relieve.


Allied Products reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


For Alamo's Defenders, New Assault to Repel
Before there were oil wells, before Neiman Marcus, Texans built their fierce pride on tales of revolutionary valor at the Alamo.
But in recent years, a new generation of writers and politicians has taken another look at the Texas Revolution and called its leaders nuts, scoundrels and Anglo land-grabbers.
Davy Crockett, they say, did not wear a coonskin cap, and he tried to surrender at the Alamo rather than fighting to the death.
William Barret Travis, the Alamo's commander, crazed from drinking mercury to treat venereal disease, never issued his legendary challenge for the brave to join him across his sword-drawn line in the dirt.
Gen.
Sam Houston, who was at least wise enough not to send reinforcements to the besieged fort, was a girdle-wearing opium addict.


Suit Filer's Word Processor Loses Out in Court
The Dannon yogurt, the plaintiff claimed, had glass in it that cut his mouth, paralyzing his lip.
Revlon's Flex protein conditioner, he contended, burned his head.
A can of Rise shaving cream exploded in his face, he said, a Magnavox television set caught fire and burned his clothes, and a Nuprin tablet caused him "severe kidney damage" and left him in a coma.
All of which, as Ronald T. Williams put it in his repeated and various product-liability lawsuits, has caused him "irreparable injuries" -- an assertion the court found unbelievable.


OroAmerica Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Colombia's President to Seek Hemisphere Free-Trade Area
The Colombian President said today that his main objective as the new leader of the Organization of American States would be to create a single free-trade zone for countries in the Western Hemisphere.
President Cesar Gaviria Trujillo, who was elected Secretary General of the organization on Sunday, said in an interview today: "We want the different trade agreements in the continent to converge into one single process, under equal conditions. We want to create a single, larger free trade zone."


A Scandal That Doesn't Exist Fills the News; Pattern of Misconduct
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's attack on Whitewater cheerleaders (column, March 12) may be an accurate statement of the political gamesmanship involved, but I'm surprised that she displays such blind indifference to the seriousness of the alleged wrongdoing.


Arkansas Gets a Cue From Guys It Defeats
The significance of Arkansas's victory over Michigan Sunday was established a day earlier when the Razorbacks, mostly freshmen and sophomores, spoke admiringly of Michigan's Fab Four.
They were high school seniors and juniors when Michigan's five freshmen -- Jalen Rose, Chris Webber, Juwan Howard, Jimmy King and Ray Jackson -- reached the national championship game before losing to Duke in 1992.
Last year they watched as the Fab Five reached the championship game for a second time, losing to North Carolina.


American Playhouse Is Moving Into Film
American Playhouse, which over the last 14 years has produced nearly 200 original dramas for public television -- among them "Stand and Deliver," "The Thin Blue Line" and "Longtime Companion" -- will form an independent film company in partnership with the Samuel Goldwyn Company.
The new venture, to be called Playhouse Pictures, will make 15 commercial films over the next three years, at a projected cost of $70 million in financing from Goldwyn and other investors.
The decision is in part a response to a decline in Public Broadcasting Service funds for American Playhouse productions.
Once as high as $10 million a year, the figure is currently $6.6 million, and is projected to fall to less than a million in 1997.


Give Gay Rights a Chance
For the second year in a row, New York State's Democratic-led Assembly has approved a gay rights bill.
Like similar measures already on the books in New Jersey, Connecticut and six other states, the overdue law would bar discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in employment, housing, public accommodations, education and credit.
Since the vast majority of Senate Democrats support the bill, there is a good chance it will also pass the Senate.
The big question is whether the Republicans who run that chamber will summon the courage to allow the measure to reach the floor for an open public debate and a recorded vote.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN TELEPHONE AND DATA INC., Newport Beach, Calif., named Lindsay B. Semple chief executive, president and chief financial officer of the company and its subsidiary, T W Communications Inc., a telecommunications long-distance reseller in Phoenix.
COMPAQ COMPUTER CORP., Houston, appointed Hugh Barnes senior vice president and general manager of its portable PC division.


Killing of 2 Students in California Fans Japanese Fears of America
Walter F. Mondale, the American Ambassador here, today took the unusual step of going on national television to apologize for the killing over the weekend of two Japanese students in Los Angeles and to counter Japan's growing certainty that the United States is a nation of gun-wielding maniacs, unfit for tourism or study.
Yet to millions of Japanese, the scene from a Los Angeles suburb -- a late-night carjacking, two 19-year-olds shot in the head -- seemed so horrifyingly familiar that no one bothered to describe America with the usual Japanese term: a "gun society." This time, it was just assumed to be the case.
No Arrests
The police in San Pedro, a section of Los Angeles near Long Beach, said they had no suspects and few leads in the case.
The two students at Marymount College in nearby Palos Verdes had pulled into a shopping center at 11 P.M. on Friday and were apparently shot as they got out of their car.
The car was later found a few miles away.


By Design; Vinyl's New Shine
A vinyl minidress?
Yes, that was one of the surprises Gianni Versace unleashed on the Milan runways during the recent fall shows.
And it pointed fashion in a new direction.
Actually, not all of the dresses were made of vinyl.
Sometimes, they were made of glazed silk or leather, but the effect was the same: super shiny.


Smilovitz Addresses His Silent Majority
Bernie Smilovitz is on the phone.
Shouting.
Screaming.
What a meshuga.
Who knows if he's angry or just releasing his inner child?
All I know is that the WCBS-Channel 2 sports broadcaster talks too loudly.
I know.
I've got highlights.
He is defending himself against charges that after nearly three months on the air in New York, he's not funny, he offends sports purists and he sometimes doesn't let too many facts interfere with his pursuit of goofy clips.


A Scandal That Doesn't Exist Fills the News
To the Editor:
Re "Top Arkansas Lawyer Helped Hillary Clinton Turn Big Profit" (front page, March 18):


Olson Is Likely to Go as the Mets Prepare for Cutdown
With Tuesday set as Dallas Green's target date for roster cuts, Mets management met tonight to discuss player moves, and several are expected to be made by Tuesday afternoon.
One player likely to be released Tuesday is catcher Greg Olson, who signed with the Mets as a free agent out of Atlanta during the off season.
Considered the backup catcher heading into camp, Olson has hit .083 and fallen to the No. 3-catcher spot behind Kelly Stinnett, who is expected to be the surprise starter, and Todd Hundley.
Green has made it clear that he wants to carry just two catchers out of camp and his wishes are likely to be followed.


INSIDE
More Cancer Study Errors
Finding irregularities in another breast cancer study, Federal officials demanded replacement of the chief researcher in the studies, to which false data were submitted.
Page A18.
Japan Offers Trade Plan
To break a trade stalemate with the U.S., Japan announced a package of market-opening measures wide in scope but lacking some commitments sought by Washington.
Page D1.
Grumman Sets Auction Rules
The Long Island military contractor established guidelines governing the sale of the company to avoid a protracted bidding war between Martin Marietta and Northrop.
Page D1.
How to Remember the Alamo
A new generation of writers and politicians is portraying the leaders of the Alamo as cowards, drug-crazed nuts and Anglo land-grabbers, prompting a feud in Texas.
Page A18.
Giuliani and His Critics
Mayor Giuliani has adopted a style of responding swiftly and sharply to criticism or dissent, even when it comes from officials whose support he may need.
Page B1.
Firefighter Dies in SoHo
A wall of flame engulfed three firefighters in a SoHo apartment building, killing one and critically burning the other two, Fire Department officials said.
Page B1.


Q&amp;A
Pacific Depths
Q.  Why is the Pacific Ocean deeper at its deepest point than the Atlantic?


Supermarket Approach for Opening Day: It's Trout on Ice
During the past quarter of a century, there have been rare occasions when the April 1 start of New York State's trout season was without ice and snow and thaw-swollen streams, when, save for the high country of the Adirondacks, red-winged blackbirds caroled from streamside bushes whose leaves were already unfurling.
But that will not be so in 1994.
This year's opener is being preceded by a few mild springlike days, but they are coming too late, except on Long Island, to erase the bitter legacy of the winter just past.


Grumman Gives Its Suitors Thursday Deadline for Bids
Seeking to avoid a protracted and potentially costly bidding contest, the Grumman Corporation set auction rules yesterday governing the sale of the company, and set a Thursday deadline for final offers from its two suitors, the Martin Marietta Corporation and the Northrop Corporation.
Grumman laid out the guidelines to both companies in a three-page letter written on behalf of the board by its chairman and chief executive, Renso L. Caporali.
The letter said that Grumman's board had decided a free and open competitive bidding process was in the best interests of shareholders, customers and suppliers.


Mexico Won at the Alamo, But It Is Hardly Gloating
Telling the story of what really happened at the Alamo flusters Mexicans.
While they resent the version told in the United States, they are embarrassed by the dark side of their own account.
Mexicans won the battle, defending their own territory from rebels, but they cannot very well honor President Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna, who led the attack on the Alamo: he is one of most reviled characters in Mexico's long history of despots and exploiters.


Ikea Ads Feature Gay Customers
Ikea is introducing what is believed to be the first general advertising effort in the mainstream media to feature identifiably gay consumers.
A television commercial by Ikea's agency, Deutsch Inc. in New York, centers on a couple, portrayed by two male actors, who bought a dining room table at an Ikea furniture store.
The spot, part of a continuing campaign focusing on Ikea customers, treats their relationship matter-of-factly: One man talks about how the couple met and how they might add a leaf to the table "when we really start getting along."


Lilly Industries(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Japan to End Restraints on Auto Exports to U.S.
Japan announced today that it would discontinue its voluntary restraints on exports of automobiles to the United States when its fiscal year ends on Thursday.
The restrictions, an example of what is now called managed trade, were begun in 1981, at a time when American car makers were reeling from Japanese competition.
But the end of the program comes as Detroit's Big Three have narrowed the quality gap with Japan and are gaining more of the American market.


Lifetime Television Chooses Lois/U.S.A.
Lifetime Television, the cable network with programming aimed primarily at women, said yesterday that it had selected Lois/U.S.A. in New York to handle its account, which had been at Frankfurt Balkind Partners in New York for the last two years.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.


Daunting, Driven and (Yes) Dapper
Outside the Knicks' practice gym, in a warm but steady drizzle, Charles Oakley was providing a live medical update yesterday when the friendly neighborhood Doc rushed by with a dose of mock sympathy.
"Poor baby hurt, you O.K., Oak, poor baby?" Doc Rivers said.


Challenger to Cuomo Has a Dismal Abortion-Rights Record
To the Editor:
As leaders of New York State pro-choice organizations, we must comment on your March 15 report that State Senator George E. Pataki has declared his candidacy for the Republican nomination to oppose Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo next November.
You describe Mr.
Pataki as " 'pro-choice' even though he supports certain restrictions on abortion rights."


Lofty Standing Provides Special High for Devils
The music in the dressing room was blaring louder than usual today as the Devils prepared for a team picture at center ice before practice at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The jokes before and after practice were also more frequent, but no one laughed louder than when Bernie Nicholls asked John MacLean in the hallway outside the dressing room whether he had listened to a radio station that people call in with remarks and questions about sports.


American Medical Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Saturn is having a tough time growing up.
G.M.'s newest division is grappling with too many unsold cars, a three-year-old design and some new, attractive competitors entering the small-car market.
At the same time, Saturn must solve a related and even more difficult puzzle: how to fit in with the often fractious, cash-strapped G.M. family of automobile divisions.  [ Page A1. ]


What You Expect Is What You Get
IN its nearly 20-year history, the personal computer has radically changed what humans expect of one another.
We now ask most office workers to prepare their own documents, and mere typing is barely acceptable.
Readers expect clever letterheads, snappy text fonts and graphs or clip art for visual relief.
To keep their minds from wandering at business presentations, audiences expect computer-generated pie charts, drop-shadowed lettering, drop-dead video clips; they do not always help.
Instead of a busy signal, callers expect voice mail.
Urgent correspondents expect electronic mailboxes.
Employees are expected to lug laptop machines home and abroad, turning airplane seats and breakfast nooks into virtual offices.


People
*
George T. Hayes, senior vice president at McCann-Erickson New York, was named to the additional position of media director, succeeding Ira Carlin, who continues as executive vice president and worldwide media director and media director at McCann North America.


Islamic Party in Turkey Does Well in Local Voting
Prime Minister Tansu Ciller was reported by her staff to be confident today about staying in power after countrywide local elections on Sunday.
But she is unlikely to be pleased by the unexpectedly strong showing of the Welfare Party, an Islamic group.
The Prime Minister's True Path Party did not fare well at the polls, but her principal opponents, the conservative Motherland Party, also lost ground.


Clintons Start Week of Play at California Estate
President Clinton and his family began a spring vacation in Southern California today at the ocean-front home of M. Larry Lawrence, the Ambassador to Switzerland and the owner of a landmark hotel here.
After a busy month made burdensome by new scrutiny of the Whitewater affair, aides said Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, hoped to spend much of the week at play.
Jeffrey Eller, the senior aide traveling with the President, said the Clintons wanted to "take advantage of the sunshine in Southern California" with golf, jogging and other "fun, wholesome things."


Review/Television; For British Detectives, Crime Pays
For decades American television had a stranglehold on riveting crime dramas.
In terms of production energy and narrative drive, the commercial networks left much of the international competition looking lifeless.
Times have been steadily changing.
These days, it's the British sleuths who are likely to be high-powered and provocative, in mini-series like "Prime Suspect," starring Helen Mirren ("Prime Suspect 3" is coming up next month on public television's "Mystery"), and in series like "Cracker," beginning a three-episode run tonight at 9 on the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network.
Meanwhile, with the notable exceptions of "N.Y.P.D. Blue" on ABC and the periodically struggling "Homicide" on NBC, it's the American product that seems increasingly anemic.
Witness, Thursday night at 10 on CBS, the new series "Traps," starring George C. Scott.


1986 Test Did Not Find Pipeline Scar
The tiny gouge that officials believe weakened a 36-inch natural gas pipeline, causing it to explode in a thunderous fireball here last week, was most likely inflicted some time after an inspection in 1986, an official of the company that owns the pipeline said today.
The pipeline was examined in 1986 by a motorized device that moves through the pipe and uses magnetic instruments to detect any change in the pipe's thickness.
Any gouges, scrapes, corrosion or signs of weakness would be recorded electronically by the instrument, called a "smart pig," said James W. Hart, vice president of public affairs for Panhandle Eastern Corporation, parent company of the Texas Eastern Transmission Corporation, the operator of the pipeline.


Picky Eaters in Monterey Bay Who Dabble in Petty Theft
SUCKERFACE the sea otter prefers octopus and purple sea urchins for dinner.
Another otter, Flathead, likes to chew on crabs and suck the gonads of sea stars, while Nosebuster munches exclusively on turban snails.
Marine biologists at the Monterey Bay Aquarium in California have discovered that sea otters are picky eaters, generally preferring only 2 or 3 kinds of prey out of 30, and the preference is largely influenced by their mothers.
They also found that male sea otters are prodigious thieves that pilfer a third of their food from the females; the females seem to tolerate this peccadillo.


Help for Peso Rooted in Trade Debate
A secret multibillion-dollar deal struck last November, when passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement looked bleak, turned out to be a powerful factor in helping Mexico survive market instability after the assassination of its leading presidential candidate last week.
But the emergency plan to swap pesos for dollars, which has yet to be utilized, has left some Mexicans uneasy with the extent of United States involvement in Mexican politics that the deal suggests.


Suffolk Panel Assails County on Child Abuse
A Suffolk County legislative committee said today that it has found glaring deficiencies in the county's handling of physical and sexual abuse allegations involving children.
The committee said the problems resulted in part from a statewide system that moved too slowly and often let cases drop.
In a report released today, the officials said that the Suffolk findings suggested a large amount of child abuse is unchecked throughout the state, and they called for a State Senate investigation.


Across the Tornado Belt, the Rubble Is Real but the Losses Are So Hard to Grasp
There was Earl Abbott, who owned the convenience store down the street.
There was Michael Mode, a young Marine visiting a new church with his wife and son.
There were Cicero and Ruth Peek, brother and sister, who had come from their nursing home for Sunday services.
There was Hannah Clem, the pastor's 4-year-old daughter.
All came to worship on Palm Sunday at the Goshen United Methodist Church here, where 20 people were killed when a tornado reduced the church to rubble.
They were among at least 41 killed and 250 injured on Sunday as tornados battered five Southern states, leaving the numb survivors today to try to make sense of what often seems to be nature's most arbitrary fury.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In the quest for niches, some companies discover that good things can come from smaller packaging.
MARKETERS usually go to great lengths to establish their brand or corporate identities with consumers.
Sometimes, though, they take equally elaborate measures to cloak the origin of their products.
In "stealth parentage," companies promote their wares under the banners of subsidiaries or divisions, thus omitting the ultimate corporate ownership.
Some even create d.b.a.'s -- doing business as -- to serve as surrogate parents.


Broker's Suit Is Dismissed
A Federal judge has dismissed a suit filed by Jordan Belfort, the former head of the Stratton Oakmont brokerage firm, against the National Association of Securities Dealers.
The suit contended that the N.A.S.D. had acted illegally in refusing to list for trading companies in which Mr.
Belfort had a large stake.
At the time, civil charges filed by the Securities and Exchange Commission against Stratton Oakmont and Mr.
Belfort were pending, and the N.A.S.D. refused to list the stocks until Mr.
Belfort sold his stake.
The S.E.C. charges were later settled, under terms that included banning Mr.
Belfort from the securities business.


Eugene Ionesco Is Dead at 84; Stage's Master of Surrealism
Eugene Ionesco, whose wildly innovative plays, among them "Rhinoceros," "The Bald Soprano" and "The Chairs," overturned conventions of contemporary theater and had a profound effect on a new generation of playwrights, died yesterday in Paris, where he lived.
He was 84.
His death was announced by the French Cultural Ministry. The cause was not reported.


CHRONICLE
GIANNI VERSACE came to town yesterday, not to parade his fashion designs but to promote a book he has put together about them.
The coffee-table book, which features photographs of his glittering creations interspersed with essays, is called "Designs." It is being published by Abbeville Press at a haute-couture price -- $67.50.
Tomorrow, Mr.
Versace will autograph copies at Bergdorf Goodman before going to Barocco in SoHo for a dinner in his honor.
There was not even a touch of nervousness in Mr.
Versace's voice yesterday, a few hours before his scheduled appearance on "Charlie Rose" on PBS.
"I am always very cool and relaxed, and I love to speak about my work," he said.


Plan to Carve Up Ocean Floor Riches Nears Fruition
HALF the Earth is up for grabs in the culmination of a long-running dispute between rich nations and poor ones.
At issue is how the high seas will be developed in the decades and centuries to come, most especially their depths.
These areas of primal cold and darkness make up some 50 percent of the planet's surface, or nearly seven times that of the Moon's.
The vast majority are unexplored.
Valuable ores and exotic microbes have recently been discovered on volcanic rifts in the ocean and are being harvested to aid the biotechnology revolution.
Some experts believe the deep may eventually yield oil and gas.


Corrections
An article on March 14 about the number of holdover trustees of the City University of New York referred incorrectly to the status of a suit against the university by the John D. Calandra Italian-American Institute over the institute's location and financing.
A settlement was reached out of court early in January; the university is not appealing.


Slatkin New Director Of National Symphony
The other shoe finally dropped yesterday in Washington when the National Symphony Orchestra announced that the American conductor Leonard Slatkin would become its music director in September 1996.
The appointment had been widely expected even before the St.
Louis Symphony Orchestra disclosed last month that Mr.
Slatkin, 49, would give up his current post as music director at that time.
"It was actually a shorter process than most people think," Mr.
Slatkin said of his talks with the National Symphony, after the announcement yesterday.
He did not begin serious discussions in Washington, he explained, until after he had decided to leave St.
Louis, in January.
He is to remain as the director of the Blossom Music Festival of the Cleveland Orchestra.


Lamenting Lost Lives, Lost Dreams
Takuma Ito and Go Matsuura were enticed here from Japan by a promise that has lured countless others to Southern California: the prospect of making movies.
Now both are going home, victims at age 19 of what increasing numbers of Japanese have come to believe is as American as Hollywood: senseless, deadly violence dispensed with ubiquitous handguns.
Bouquets piled up in the supermarket parking lot in San Pedro, 15 miles south of here, where the two film students at nearby Marymount College were shot in the head late Friday by a gunman who then stole Mr.
Ito's white 1994 Honda Civic.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANNER AEROSPACE Inc., Cleveland, a supplier of aviation products, plans to sell two subsidiaries, Austin Jet Corp. and AJ Aerospace, Inc.
QANTAS AIRWAYS, said it would introduce a 12th nonstop weekly flight between Sydney, Australia, and Los Angeles on April 4.


Knicks' Version of 'March Madness'
Pat Riley walked into his office here this morning, closed the door behind him and tried to enjoy a few peaceful moments before putting the Knicks through another long practice.
Riley knew that soon enough reporters would surround him, asking about the Knicks' 13-game winning streak, their possibility of equaling the franchise mark of 18 consecutive victories set in the 1969-70 season, or their chances of finishing ahead of the Atlanta Hawks for the top spot in the Eastern Conference.


Commodore Int'l reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


24 Terms Are Enough, Harrison Mayor Decides
MAYOR Frank Rodgers made the announcement more than a week ago and Town Hall still hasn't calmed down.
The phone rings all day, every day, as if it were stuck.
People drop by, sometimes in waves, and always in a small, steady stream.
Others send cards and letters.
"Everything's been busy," said Marion Borek, the Mayor's secretary.
"Everything."


Joy Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Women's Coalition Rallies to Defend Mrs. Clinton
A group of Democratic women, tied by politics to the White House but purposefully steering clear of direct Administration influence, has begun a campaign to defend Hillary Rodham Clinton against attacks arising from her participation in the Whitewater land deal.
Dozens of women, some of whom have expressed frustration among themselves about Mrs.
Clinton's choice not to speak out vigorously on her own behalf, have been meeting for a month here to plot ways to strike back at what they consider unfair press coverage and partisan assault.


Kodak to Consolidate Units To Stress Electronic Growth
George M. C. Fisher, who became chairman of the Eastman Kodak Company in December, yesterday announced his first major organizational change, one that is intended to emphasize the company's growth in electronic photography.
To accomplish this, he said, a variety of operations will be grouped into a worldwide digital and applied imaging unit.
Among them are the company's photo CD operations, which store pictures on a compact disk, the printer products and the equipment and software operations.


Extra! Extra! Screen All About It!
NEWSPAPERS and magazines are dipping their toes into computer services, but not without problems.
For the reader, ease of access is one problem; a newspaper or magazine can be skimmed at the breakfast table.
For the publisher, protection of copyright is another; everyone has photocopied articles, but that violation is hardly comparable to making them available to millions of people.
Recently I explored the news on three services, spending about half an hour on each.
I would have gotten far more information in the same time from a printed source.
Of course, print is my medium; I did not grow up with computers or MTV.


GAPS IN COVERAGE FOR HEALTH CARE
Twenty-five percent of all Americans were without health insurance some time from February 1990 to September 1992, the Census Bureau said today.
The statistic helps explain the political appeal of President Clinton's proposal to guarantee "health care that can never be taken away." Even people who have health insurance through their employers may lose coverage when they lose or change jobs, the bureau observed.


Five Finalists Set In A.T.&amp; T. Review
A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that it had named five finalists in a review for its consumer long-distance direct marketing account, currently divided among several agencies.
Though billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age has estimated them at $200 million to $300 million.


Mantle's Reward and Regrets
Mickey Mantle never sensed what he meant to baseball fans until he checked into the Betty Ford Center in January for treatment of alcoholism, he told Bob Costas in an interview to air tomorrow night on the NBC news magazine "Now."
"I had teachers have their class, little kids, write me letters, you know," he said.
"Third and fourth graders, writing a letter, saying Mickey, we're glad you went out there, you know. I'm not saying I'm glad that I was drinking and had to go there, but in a way it really helped Mickey Mantle."


Giuliani's Executive Style: Fast Retorts Reminiscent of Koch
Three months into his term, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has adopted a style reminiscent of the Koch mayoralty, responding swiftly and sharply to criticism or dissent, even when it comes from officials whose support is crucial to the Mayor's plans to scale back government.
In the last few weeks, the Mayor accused the City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, of acting "irresponsibly" when the lawmaker questioned whether a recent jail closing and transfer of prisoners had contributed to a melee at Rikers Island.
Mr.
Giuliani belittled as "idiotic" a proposal by the Public Advocate, Mark Green, to save $11 million by hiring private contractors for custodial work and auto repairs in the Police Department.


Man Is Held In Swindles Of Elderly
He preyed on the old and the poor in two Brooklyn neighborhoods, telling them he was a water marshal and would cut them off unless they paid their overdue bills.
But there are no water marshals, and in many cases, there weren't even any overdue bills.
By the time his victims realized what had happened to them, he was gone.
The police estimate he made $900 a week.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6-6.5
6-6.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.56
3.53
3.34
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.50
3.47
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.85
3.79
3.04
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.61
6.63
6.03
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.97
7.01
6.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.81
7.85
7.84
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.10
6.07
6.05
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Pacers End Scoring Slump
Pacers 126, Clippers 93
Rik Smits scored 27 points and Reggie Miller added 22, hitting 5 of 6 shots from 3-point range, to lead Indiana out of an offensive slump with a 126-93 victory last night over the Los Angeles Clippers in Indianapolis.


Saturn, G.M.'s Big Hope, Is Taking Its First Lumps
The Saturn Corporation, the upstart auto maker created to revive its parent, the General Motors Corporation, is having a tough time growing up.
After a dazzling start, Saturn is grappling with too many unsold cars, a three-year-old design and some new, attractive competitors entering the small-car market.
At the same time, it must solve a related and even more difficult puzzle: how to fit in with the often fractious, often cash-short G.M. family of automobile divisions ranging from Cadillac to GMC Truck.


A Promising Debut for a Dress House
New designers slip in and out of fashion's charmed inner circle with alarming frequency.
Some make an impact with their first collection but soon fade away because they lack talent or business acumen.
For some, the problem is undercapitalization; for others, inexperience.
Among the promising new dress houses to spring up for the fall season (formal fashion showings begin next week) is Sully Bonnelly.
Mr.
Bonnelly, 35, prepared carefully for the day his name would be on a label.
He has designed a collection of styles he hopes will be wearable, contemporary and sensibly priced.
He has served his apprenticeship on Seventh Avenue and attracted a knowledgeable business partner.
They are starting with little fanfare -- no big fashion show, just invitations to stores to view the collection in their showroom.


Devils Tie, Rangers Rest, Worried Islanders Practice
Approaching the end of a long road trip, the Rangers, who have seen the Devils catch them for the Eastern Conference and National Hockey League lead in total points, got a break yesterday.
Coach Mike Keenan gave the team the day off in Philadelphia after it was forced to take part in a Saturday night practice in Winnipeg before a Sunday afternoon loss to the Jets.
The 3-1 loss allowed the Devils, who beat Quebec that night, to match the Rangers' 99 points.


Disarming the Subcontinent
U.S. intelligence predicts that if a nuclear war is going to happen, it will be a war between India and Pakistan.
Both countries have all the nuclear material and parts they need to assemble a considerable stock of warheads.
And each is developing missiles capable of striking the other's cities.
Washington wants India and Pakistan to stop their arms race -- and then reverse it.
But how?
The Clinton Administration argues that the U.S. should resume aid to Pakistan and deliver the F-16 fighters Pakistan paid for but never received -- if it first agrees to a verifiable ban on the production of nuclear material and halts its missile programs.
Opponents in Congress say that such inducements have not worked.
The Administration is right to try again.
But it needs to persuade India to go along; India insists it will not accept any deal that does not impose restraints on China as well as Pakistan.


Margaret Millar Is Dead at 79; Wrote Psychological Mysteries
Margaret Millar, whose psychological mystery novels included "How Like an Angel," "A Stranger in My Grave" and "Beast in View," died on Saturday at her home in Santa Barbara, Calif.
She was 79.
The cause was a heart attack, said Eleanor Van Cott, a trustee of her estate.


A School Board's Chokehold
A New York State Supreme Court justice has ruled that Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines exceeded his authority when he tried to force a Bronx school board to retain its reformist superintendent.
The ruling highlights the need for legislative changes in Albany so that the chancellor can protect students from the machinations of local boards.
District 9 in the Bronx has been riddled with shortcomings.
At least nine board members have been arrested over the past five years, and its students have repeatedly scored lower than any other district on citywide tests.


U.S. Surgical Reports Heavy Losses for Quarter
The United States Surgical Corporation yesterday confirmed earlier reports of heavy losses.
It also provided details of a $200 million private sale of newly issued preferred stock that was completed last week.
In announcements after the New York Stock Exchange closed, the company, which makes surgical staplers and miniature surgical instruments, said it lost $138.4 million, or $2.46 a share, for the three months ending Dec. 31, including $129.6 million in previously announced pretax restructuring charges.
This compared with earnings of $37.9 million, or 64 cents a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.
Sales plunged 24 percent, to $244.4 million, in the quarter.


Corrections
A review of "Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy" in the Times Book Review on March 20 misattributed the illustrations.
They are by Matthew Zim et, not by the author, Kip S. Thorne.


SOCCER
FIFA and the Presidency
The president of the world governing body of soccer, Dr.
Joao Havelange of Brazil, will meet with the heads of the five confederations next Tuesday to discuss Havelange's re-election as president of FIFA.


Predicting Twisters So Often Turns on Luck
Meteorologists concede that when it comes to predicting the random violence of severe storms and tornadoes, the most important forecasting tool is luck itself.
And in northern Alabama and Georgia, where several storm systems generated between 20 and 30 tornadoes on Sunday, "there was a lot of bad luck," said Joe Wheeler, a meteorologist in the Birmingham office of the National Weather Service.


A Child's Interactive Video Network
One of the Silicon Valley's respected computer designers, Carol Peters, and a well-known Hollywood producer, Jeff Apple, have formed a company to produce an interactive television network for children.
The company, to be called DaVinci Time and Space, will have offices in the Silicon Valley and in Los Angeles.
It will develop a computerized television service blending variations of a Disneyland-style electronic theme park and a television show like "Sesame Street" for young viewers.


No Headline
"Isn't there something we can all do so that this doesn't happen again?" -- SHUKI MATSUURA, whose son was killed by a car thief near Los Angeles.  [ B7:1. ]


CHRONICLE
HELEN O'HAGAN, who dispenses much of the news that comes from Saks Fifth Avenue, made a bit of news herself yesterday.
She announced that she would step down on April 16 as vice president and director of corporate public relations after 38 years with the company, 19 of them in her present job.
Ms.
O'Hagan, who is 63, is taking voluntary early retirement but will continue to work for Saks as a consultant.
"This is the nearest thing to theater," she said of her work, which includes organizing promotional and social events.


Tillman May Join Traffic On the Road to Foxboro
It is beginning to look more and more as if running back Lewis Tillman -- a vital part of the Giants' offense last season and a big reason the team made it to the second round of the playoffs -- may not be back next season.
According to several people in the league familiar with the negotiations, Tillman, an unrestricted free agent who made $438,000 last season, received a multiyear offer worth about $2.5 million from the Patriots yesterday.
The Patriots also have apparently offered Jets running back Blair Thomas a one-year deal worth between $350,000 and $500,000.


Dow Jones Utilities
Advocates of the Dow Jones utilities average as a harbinger of rate movements say that a fall in the average, an index of the stock prices of 15 electric-power companies, indicates that interest rates will rise.
It has dropped in three of the five trading sessions since the Federal Reserve raised rates on March 22.
Detractors, however, say the index has little or no value as a predictor.


Study Says Taxpayers Subsidize the Cost of Driving Private Cars
Of every dollar spent in New York State on road and bridge maintenance, traffic patrols and related expenses, only 65 cents is paid by motorists, with the rest drawn from general tax revenues, according to a new analysis.
The report, released yesterday by the Tri-State Transportation Campaign, a coalition of environmental, planning and transportation groups, said that the difference, $2.4 billion, represents an unfair subsidy to drivers by general taxpayers, since 30 percent of New York State households do not own cars.


Trade Plan Is Offered By Japan
In a bid to break the trade stalemate with the United States, Japan announced today a package of market-opening measures that is wide in scope but lacks some specific commitments sought by Washington.
In an early analysis, some American officials here said they felt that the measures did not go much beyond what Japan was offering on Feb. 11, when trade talks collapsed during a meeting in Washington between President Clinton and Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa.
As such, the new steps might not immediately lead to a resumption of talks.
U.S.
Disappointment Seen
"I would be a little surprised if we see enough to say 'Let's go back to where we were on Feb. 11,' " one American official here said Monday night, a few hours before the package was officially delivered to the United States Embassy.
Even Japanese officials, he said, were saying that the Clinton Administration would not be fully satisfied.


Sexes Equal on South Sea Isle
ANTHROPOLOGISTS have long been attracted to South Pacific islands for more than the warm breezes and sparkling lagoons.
They go to such places seeking in the simpler societies the rudiments of human community, sometimes glimpsing a rough-hewn harmony beyond the experience of more complex societies.
So it was for Dr.
Maria Lepowsky, who in 1978 became the first and only anthropologist to live with the people of Sudest Island -- or to use the local name, Vanatinai, meaning motherland.
This is a sparsely populated island in the Louisiade Archipelago of Papua New Guinea, which extends southeast of New Guinea and separates the Solomon and the Coral seas.
The people there are an anthropologist's dream because they have had only minimal contact with Western colonialism and missionaries.


For Wall St., a New Tax Break
A new financing technique is enabling corporate executives and others with large stock holdings effectively to sell shares in their corporations without paying capital gains taxes and without giving up their corporate voting power.
It could also enable them to cash in their holdings when insider trading rules would bar them from outright sales.
The technique, known as "equity swaps" on Wall Street, has cost the Government millions in tax revenues, and the total is likely to rise sharply.
"We expect geometric growth," said Josh Weinreich, a managing director of the Bankers Trust Company, a leader in the field.


Man, Shot in 1992 Car Theft, Is Charged in Crime Spree
Howard Caesar, the teen-ager who was seriously wounded two years ago, ostensibly by the police, as he emerged from a stolen car, was arraigned today in connection with a carjacking, two shootings, multiple robberies and the ramming of a police cruiser, all in the course of two hours on Saturday.
Four others were also charged.
Mr.
Caesar alone was charged with resisting arrest after a stolen car the five suspects were in was trapped by the police.


United Picks 9 Directors For Post-Buyout Board
United Airlines named 9 of the 12 directors yesterday who will serve on the board of its parent, the UAL Corporation, if shareholders approve a buyout proposal this summer from the pilots' and machinists' unions.
The proposed board is seen by industry analysts as a selling point in the unions' effort to persuade shareholders to trade a 47 percent stake in the company to employees in exchange for roughly $5 billion worth of wage and work-rule concessions over six years.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Purchased the contract of Lonnie Smith, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League and assigned him to the 40-man roster.
Optioned Mike Cook, pitcher, to Rochester.


For Insects, the Buzz Is Chemical
HUMAN beings are audio-visual chauvinists.
Much of what people learn in life is conveyed through the eyes and ears.
As a result, people have long been blind to the currency of communication that rules the rest of the natural world: chemicals.
Whether seeking a mate, detecting a predator, deceiving a rival or tending to duties in the nest, most species rely on chemical signals to tell them where to go and how to behave.
Now a growing band of scientists working in a young field called chemical ecology is focusing on the extraordinary diversity of chemical languages found in the animal and plant kingdoms.
They are studying chemicals that alarm, chemicals that seduce, chemicals that repel, chemicals that persuade.
They are learning that for any single species, the vocabulary of chemicals can be extremely rich, capable of telling an individual not just where a potential partner may be found, for example, but whether that partner is a virgin or a vamp, an industrious provider with food to share, or a loser whose cupboards are bare.


Chicago Agency Chosen by Saturn
The Saturn division of the General Motors Corporation said yesterday that it had selected Cooperative Marketing in Chicago as the first agency to handle its retailer-based direct marketing programs.
Billings were not disclosed.


L.I. Woman Disappears During a Trip to a Shopping Center
With her wedding set for June, Michelina Abbatiello's friends had planned a surprise shower for her on Sunday.
Instead, they spent the day worrying about what may have happened to her.
Miss Abbatiello, 23, of Westbury, has not been seen since Friday night, when she went to the Roosevelt Field Shopping Center here to buy cosmetics.


The Italian Right: 3 Men to Watch; Silvio Berlusconi; Forza Italia
Last fall the media magnate Silvio Berlusconi set up 1,200 political clubs across Italy to improve the chances of centrist parties against the powerful former Communists.
Linked by computer, the groups were modeled after fan clubs of the soccer team he owns in Milan.
But in January, judging the center's chances of winning March elections to be weak, he decided to harness the clubs for his own political movement and founded Forza Italia.


Officer Arrested in Inquiry of 73d Precinct
In the latest move against a suspected ring of corrupt New York City police officers, Federal agents yesterday arrested an officer they said was part of the ring on charges that he falsely told a grand jury he knew nothing about the group's purported crimes.
The arrest of the officer, Christopher Banke, 25, a member of Brooklyn's 73d Precinct -- where the officers reportedly stole cash, drugs and guns from drug dealers -- is the fourth in the case.
About a dozen officers in the Brownsville precinct are suspected of having been part of the rogue band.


In America; Jury Room Injustice
The state of Georgia plans to go ahead with tomorrow's execution of William Henry Hance even though there is now clear evidence of gross misconduct by the jury that sentenced him to death.
A second juror has come forward with a sworn affidavit acknowledging the shenanigans that went on during the sentencing deliberations.
The juror, a white woman, also says that the process was tainted by racial prejudice.


No Headline
"They are literally as close to us as any member of your family can be. So we have to deal with it like we had lost a son or a brother or a father." MARCEL CLAES, a firefighter from Engine Company 24.  [ A14:4. ]


Taylor Starts Over
GRAHAM TAYLOR, who resigned in November as coach of England's national team, was hired yesterday as coach of Wolverhampton and given a three-year contract.
Taylor, 49, was coach of Watford and Aston Villa, guiding both to promotion before taking over England after the 1990 World Cup.
He resigned when England failed to qualify for this summer's World Cup.


Clinton's Ex-Partner Is House Candidate
James B. McDougal, the Clintons' partner in the Whitewater real estate venture now under investigation, became a Democratic candidate for Congress today.
Mr.
McDougal, 53, continued to maintain that Bill and Hillary Clinton did nothing illegal when they invested with him and his wife in the Whitewater resort development in the Ozark Mountains in 1978.
Federal authorities are investigating Whitewater and its connection with Madison Guaranty Savings, which Mr.
McDougal owned until it failed, costing taxpayers about $60 million.


Action Was Preliminary On a Disputed Patent
The controversy over a sweepingly broad software patent may not be resolved, Federal patent officials and lawyers for the patent holder said today.
The Patent and Trademark Office distanced itself today from reports that it would definitely withdraw a multimedia software patent awarded to Compton's New Media.


Matthew Harlib, 68, Television Director
Matthew E. Harlib, a producer and director of films and television, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 68 and lived in Manhattan and Sherman, Conn.
Mr.
Harlib was born in New York City.
In the early 1950's he joined CBS as the first director of Arthur Godfrey's live radio show.
He then switched to television, directing such classics as "Studio One," "The Goldbergs," "Westinghouse Summer Theater," "The Ford Theater" and "Strike It Rich."


Sleeping With Parents May Benefit Infants
ALTHOUGH most parents are strongly advised to get their babies to sleep in their own cribs as soon as possible, a new study suggests that it may be healthier for the infants to sleep with their parents.
The continuing study, directed by Dr.
James J. McKenna and Dr.
Sarah Mosko of the University of California at Irvine, monitors the sleep patterns of mothers with their 3-month-old babies in a sleep laboratory over three consecutive nights.


Daly Out With Flu and Nets Are Out of Steam at Atlanta
Because the Atlanta Hawks and Nets came into their game tonight in second and seventh place, respectively, in the Eastern Conference playoff standing, the match up was hyped as a playoff preview.
Maybe it was.
If so, the Nets know they can hang with the high-flying Hawks.
They did so here tonight, despite the fact that Brendan Suhr was coaching instead of a flu-bitten Chuck Daly.
The Hawks escaped with the 101-98 victory before a crowd of 13,942 in the Omni, but it came down to the final buzzer.


U.S. Spurns Japan's Concessions on Trade
The nation's top trade official dismissed Japan's latest proposed trade concessions today as inadequate and half-finished, and said the United States would not reopen trade talks until the Japanese went further.
The strong criticism by Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, showed that the Clinton Administration had no intention of easing its pressure on Japan despite the weakening of its Government and the growing possibility of fresh elections there later in the spring.


Japan Makes It Tough to Do Business There
To the Editor:
"Let's Learn How to Negotiate With Japan" (letter, March 15) by Ann Barcher, on the cultural insensitivity of the Clinton Administration in its trade negotiations with Japan, is typical of misconceptions in trade disputes between Japan and the rest of the industrialized world.
It is also naive in the lessons Ms.
Barcher relays from her uncle's experiences with the Japanese as a representative for the Boeing Corporation.


Giuliani Promises Firefighters New Gear
A day after a firefighter was killed when a wall of flame trapped him in a SoHo apartment building, and hours before a second firefighter died from burns suffered in the same blaze, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said he would outfit the department in the kind of protective gear fire experts maintain could have prevented the deaths.
Firefighters have long argued that they need "bunker gear," clothing to shield them against extreme flames and heat they rarely face -- the 1,500-degree temperatures encountered in Monday night's fire.
Firefighters last night were still determining the cause of the blaze.


Brodeur Sets a Record For Victories by Goalie
From Martin Brodeur in goal to the last player on the fourth line, the Devils played one of their best games of the season tonight.
They had to in order to achieve a 5-2 victory over the Montreal Canadiens, last season's Stanley Cup champions, and to keep pace with the Rangers, who are intent on becoming this season's Stanley Cup champions.
Brodeur, the rookie sensation, set a franchise record for victories by a goaltender with 25, which he accomplished with 29 saves, several in key situations when the game was on the line.


Ron Silver Leaves Cast Of New Play by Miller
Ron Silver has withdrawn from the cast of "Broken Glass," Arthur Miller's Broadway-bound play now completing its world-premiere run at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, the producers of the play announced yesterday.
No reason was given.
In a prepared statement, one of the producers, Robert Whitehead, said, "No actor could have been more cooperative and professional in his efforts to serve the play." Mr.
Silver, who is the president of Actors' Equity Association, the labor union, did not return a telephone call to his office yesterday.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with the continuation of an article about violence in Johannesburg referred incorrectly in some editions to the police officers shown taking cover from gunfire.
They were uniformed officers, not plainclothes.


CHRONICLE
LYNN REDGRAVE has been elected president of the Players, the 106-year-old club for actors and patrons of the arts, on Gramercy Park.
Chosen for the post by the 22-member board of directors, she will be the Players' first female president.
The first woman to be a member, Helen Hayes, was not admitted until 1988.
"I love the place and I am delighted," Ms.
Redgrave said yesterday from Houston, where she was planning a stop for her show "Shakespeare for My Father."


2d Hospital in Research Inquiry
St.
Mary's Hospital, a community hospital in Montreal associated with McGill University, said today that a "discrepancy" had been found in one patient file it submitted as part of a major North American breast cancer study.
Representatives of the National Cancer Institute in Washington and a Canadian-American research group known as the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project are auditing the files of all 200 patients in the study.


Networks To Rotate Emmy Show
Executives in charge of the Emmy Awards, which had become the battleground in a bitter dispute among the television networks, will break a long-term contract with ABC and return to a system of rotating the broadcast among the four networks, the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences announced yesterday.
The academy revised the deal under pressure from CBS, NBC and Fox.
Last year, those three networks pulled out of any official participation in the ceremony after ABC signed a four-year contract to broadcast the September awards show.


Ruling Allows DNA Testing As Evidence
The state's highest court ruled today that DNA testing, which can distill complex genetic codes from a spatter of blood or strands of hair, is reliable for identifying criminal suspects and can be admitted in court as evidence.
State law-enforcement officials praised the ruling, saying the Court of Appeals had definitively given its approval to a process in wide use here and around the nation that had nonetheless been clouded by debate about the risks of misidentification.
They predicted that the techniques, called DNA fingerprinting or DNA typing, will now be used more in criminal trials and may prod development of a statewide genetic database similar to automated fingerprint databases.


Sports of The Times; Cowboys' Cozy Couple Splits
YOU probably know a couple just like them.
As soon as their divorce was final, as soon as the financial settlement had been agreed upon, they couldn't say enough nice things about each other.
And yesterday the latest cozy couple to fit that description sat side by side in front of a blue-and-silver Cowboys banner.
"I feel better," Jimmy Johnson was saying, "about Jerry Jones as a friend understanding me than I ever have in our entire relationship."


John A. Burgess; Graphic Arts Executive, 63
John A. Burgess, president of the Graphic Arts Technical Foundation, a research and educational institute in Pittsburgh, died on Friday at Presbyterian University Hospital in Pittsburgh.
He was 63 and lived in Mount Lebanon, a suburb of Pittsburgh.
The cause was complications after surgery, his family said.


Caterpillar
Cyclical stocks, ones that are thought to benefit from a resurgent economy, have been favorites among institutional investors all year.
One of the most favored is Caterpillar Inc., the maker of tractors and other construction equipment.
Caterpillar has risen strongly in 1994, gaining 24 percent, despite four consecutive price drops recently.


Metropolitan Diary
THE place: The Citibank branch at Lexington Avenue and East 42d Street.
The lunch-time lines were unusually long.
Directly in front of me, an attractive young woman was talking intimately in Hungarian with a young man standing beside her.
He seemed annoyed as he asked, "Why can't we go to your apartment?"
"He's home; he didn't go to work," she said.
"You know how he babies himself. The slightest sniffle and he takes the day off."


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Review/Television; Manipulating the Genes: A New Medical Frontier
The developing world of genetic medicine is glimpsed on "48 Hours" tonight through lives that have already been changed by it.
"Marked for Life" begins with the successful effort to produce a healthy child for a couple who had lost a baby to the always fatal Tay-Sachs disease.
The story is moving, the process fascinating: embryos produced by in vitro fertilization were screened for the gene that causes the disease.
The embryos that contained the mutant gene were allowed to die; one of the normal embryos was implanted into the mother's womb, and she gave birth to a healthy baby.
In another case, a so-far-healthy member of a family with a history of Huntington's chorea, which cripples and kills its victims in middle age, volunteers to have doctors search his body for the culprit gene.
The brief wait for the results is excrutiating.
Some people in families at risk say they prefer not to know whether they carry the gene because nothing can be done to stop the disease's progress.


Gaza Killings Leave Peace Caught in a Crossfire
To Salah Abu Eida, who saw the shooting, it was an execution.
Six Palestinians, he said, never had a chance when they were gunned down by Israeli soldiers without warning outside his gas station here on Monday night.


Review/Film; Baseball's Wild Bunch Takes the Field Again
In the chaotically funny "Major League," Charlie Sheen played a onetime car thief with a killer fastball.
Nicknamed Wild Thing, he was not even the strangest member of the ragtag Cleveland Indians team that made it to the playoffs at the end of the hit 1989 movie.
The oddest player was Pedro Cerrano (Dennis Haysbert), who built a voodoo shrine in his locker.
In "Major League II," Wild Thing has lost his fastball, and he's not the only one.
There has rarely been such a steep and strange decline between a movie and its sequel as the one between the fast, silly original and the dismal, boring "Major League II."


Review/Film: Jimmy Hollywood; In a Tinseltown Nightmare, Angling for the Dream
"Jimmy Hollywood" brings Barry Levinson bounding back from the otherworldly catastrophe of "Toys" to the bittersweet tale of a would-be actor who can't find any usual way of breaking into movies.
Since "Jimmy Hollywood" actually looks and feels as if it were made on Planet Earth, it qualifies as an improvement right from the start.
The title character is Jimmy Alto (Joe Pesci), who at one point has a daydream in which he becomes so famous that friends speak admiringly of him in television interviews.
"He's a genius in a town that doesn't embrace geniuses," Jimmy imagines one friend telling the cameras.
Although "Jimmy Hollywood" is a semisatire, it seems to intend that statement somewhat more seriously than is helpful.
Misunderstood genius is best not mentioned here, not even in a whisper.


John Paul II to Visit The City for Address At United Nations
Pope John Paul II will visit New York City in October, in his fourth major trip to the United States as Pope, and will address the United Nations General Assembly for the first time since 1979, the Vatican representative to the U.N. said yesterday.
John Cardinal O'Connor said the Pope might also visit St.
Joseph's seminary in Yonkers.
The U.N. ambassador, Archbishop Renato Martino, said the only certain element of the Pope's agenda was the visit to the U.N.


Bed Bath &amp; Beyond Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Market Place; Insurance investors still feel the rumbles from Los Angeles.
AFTERSHOCKS from the Los Angeles earthquake in mid-January have spread to Wall Street, where increases in the estimates of earthquake losses are raising questions about the long-term earnings prospects of large property insurance companies.
The immediate effects of the earthquake are already evident.
Shares of the 20th Century Insurance Company have fallen $5.375 each, or 21.4 percent, to $19.75 since it said on March 18 that earthquake losses would be $161.7 million, or about 25 percent of its capital, after taxes and collections from reinsurance contracts.
That is about triple its earlier estimate of $54.4 million.


People
*
Ron Pantello, chairman and chief executive at Lally, McFarland &amp; Pantello, New York, and Ed Tedeschi, a partner at Lally's sibling agency, Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer/Euro RSCG, New York, were named to jointly oversee a new venture specializing in consumer health care communications, called Messner/LM&amp; P. The unit will seek projects from existing clients of the two agencies, which are both owned by Euro RSCG, as well as solicit new accounts. *
Samuel D. Ostrow, president of the public affairs division of the Rowland Co.
U.S., New York, was named to the new position of international director at Rowland Worldwide, New York, responsible for its global liability management activities.


Edwards (A.G.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


2 Titles but Now No Coach for Cowboys
It wasn't about winning, and it wasn't about money.
Instead, the high-profile owner-coach relationship that helped build the Dallas Cowboys into a two-time Super Bowl champion ended today in a Texas-sized clash of personalities and egos.
Jerry Jones and Jimmy Johnson, friends since their days as football teammates and roommates at the University of Arkansas in the 1960's but feuding rivals in recent weeks, parted ways when Johnson announced he was stepping down as the Cowboys' head coach.


Executive Changes
CALIFORNIA AMPLIFIER INC., Camarillo, Calif., appointed Ira Coron chairman and chief executive.
DISNEY DEVELOPMENT CO., Lake Buena Vista, Fla., a unit of the Walt Disney Co., that handles the design and development of resorts and other real estate businesses, named Todd Mansfield executive vice president.


Salvadoran Election Wasn't Fraudulent
To the Editor:
As a veteran of three United States official election observer missions to El Salvador, and as a member of President Clinton's observer delegation in the March 20 election, I take strong exception to your March 23 editorial, which alleges "significant instances of fraud."


Hillary Clinton Turned $1,000 Into $99,540, White House Says
The White House said today that in 1978 Hillary Rodham Clinton invested $1,000 in commodities futures and that the investment grew in 10 months of trading in the notoriously volatile market into a gain of nearly $100,000.
Seeking to dispel suggestions that the trades were risk-free and improperly arranged by an Arkansas lawyer who represents one of the state's most powerful companies, the White House issued a statement this afternoon that said the First Lady had put up her own money and that she bore all of the financial risks in a marketplace where three out of four investors lose money.


Environmental Lobby Beats Tactical Retreat
Disappointed by an Administration and Congress that they had hoped would be better allies, lobbyists for major environmental organizations have reluctantly agreed to narrow their sights and choose their battles more carefully.
The groups had high expectations last year for tougher laws in many areas, including toxic wastes, mining, water, pesticides, wilderness preservation and endangered species.


Aristide Cool To U.S. Shift In Haiti Policy
Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, has reacted coolly to changes in the Clinton Administration's Haiti policy, in which Washington has vowed to step up pressure on Haiti's military to cede power.
Father Aristide's main objection, his advisers say, is that the new policy requires only the army commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, to resign, and not the military high command and Port-au-Prince's powerful police chief, Lieut.
Col.
Michel Francois.


Nassau County Panel Votes to Create a New Government
Over the objections of some Democrats, a Nassau County commission today adopted a plan to create a new government for the county, with a 19-member legislature as its centerpiece.
The proposal, drafted by the Commission on Government Revision and adopted today by the commission 15-2, will now go to Judge Arthur D. Spatt of Federal District Court for approval.
Last year Judge Spatt ruled the current government unconstitutional, saying that the six-member Board of Supervisors violates the one-person, one-vote principle.


Bronx Couple Charged With Murder in the Death of Their Daughter, 4
To friends and neighbors, Orlando and Sherain Bryant appeared to be attentive, well-meaning parents who frequently walked their five children to school and to church every Sunday.
But the police say the Bryants were regularly beating and abusing their children, finally killing 4-year-old Shayne Bryant on Monday.
The police said Shayne, whose death authorities have attributed to "child abuse syndrome," had been burned with cigarettes and beaten.
Police officers, responding to a call about an "asthmatic girl," discovered her body, dressed in shorts and a T-shirt, sprawled face up on a dining room table in the family's apartment in the Twin Parks West Consolidated public housing project at 760 East 183d Street in East Tremont.


COMPANY NEWS
BAKER PERFORMANCE CHEMICALS INC., Houston, a unit of Baker Hughes Inc., announced that it would divest itself of its Mineral Handling Group, which markets dust suppressants and freeze conditioning agents to the coal mining and mineral transportation industry.
MERCANTILE BANKSHARES CORP., Baltimore, has agreed to acquire Fredericksburg National Bancorp, Fredericksburg, Va., in a stock swap valued at $42.5 million.


Thanks for Your Support


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
East Meets West
Boston University and Harvard come to the semifinals of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament tomorrow at St.
Paul having played splendid hockey over the last six weeks.


Butterfinger Grabs Top Reggie Award
A promotion marketing campaign for Nestle's Butterfinger candy bar took top honors last night at the Promotion Marketing Association of America's annual Reggie Awards ceremony in Chicago.
The Butterfinger campaign that captured the Super Reggie featured the cast of cartoon characters from the Fox Television series "The Simpsons" in a whodunit contest to find the culprit who snatched Bart's Butterfinger.
The campaign, created by Alcone Sims O'Brien of Irvine, Calif., was selected from among nine other Reggie winners.


Marathon Sets TV Coverage
The 25th annual New York City Marathon, scheduled for Nov. 6, will be televised locally by WPIX-TV Channel 11, it was announced yesterday at a news conference in midtown Manhattan.
ABC, which had broadcast the race for the last 13 years, decided to drop it last November reportedly because of high expenses and logistical problems.
The New York Road Runners Club, organizer of the race; Trans World International, the broadcasting division of the International Management Group, and Tribune Broadcasting's WPIX all agreed on a deal whereby TWI and WPIX will produce the full-length broadcast and the station will handle broadcast advertising sales.


Fox Is Interested in Johnson
If Jimmy Johnson wants Fox Sports, Fox Sports wants him. Badly.
"We think he's absolutely fabulous," said David Hill, president of Fox Sports.
"How can you be anything but interested in someone with the skills, charisma and tactical abilities of a Jimmy Johnson?"


Lausanne Journal; The Swiss Debunk William Tell and All That
The Alps will not crumble; the watches will continue to tell time.
There will be numbered bank accounts, and cows will still graze on mountain slopes and donate milk for cheese and chocolate.
But an exhibition in the Historical Museum of this city on Lake Geneva casts scorn on many other fundamentals, shared by most Swiss, that give this prosperous nation a sense of righteous self-assurance.


Giving Curried Chicken A Spicy Individuality
CUMIN, coriander, ginger, turmeric and garlic are just a few of the many spices that go into a curry.
Surprisingly, curry powder is not native to India: the British created it from the spices they found when they ruled that subcontinent.
Curries should vary, and it hardly takes a minute longer to put in your own assortment of spices to make each curry different from the last.


Albert Goldman, Biographer, Is Dead at 66
Albert Goldman, the author of no-holds-barred biographies of Lenny Bruce, Elvis Presley and John Lennon, died on Monday while traveling from Miami to London, where he was to take part in a television program on biography.
He was 66 and lived in New York City.
The cause was heart failure, said Deborah Karl, his literary agent and executor.


Mourning a Son Lost


Evolution Of Tea: Now It's Hip
TEA is becoming the coffee of the 90's.
A new-found appreciation of fine tea has led to a rush of smart tea bars and tea shops from coast to coast.
Tea lovers are no longer content with indifferent mass-market black tea from Argentina packed in skimpy tea bags.
They are graduating to higher-quality tea bags, choice loose teas and even costly, carefully plucked leaves from single estates.
And tea companies are responding by offering an ever-wider variety of teas.


Helen Wolff, a Publisher, Is Dead at 88
Helen Wolff, an American editor and publisher whose taste and talents led to the acquisition and publication of major works of literature, died yesterday at her home in Hanover, N.H.
She was 88.
The cause was apparently a heart attack, said her son, Christian.


Safety Gear for Firefighters
Mayor Giuliani said he would outfit firefighters in new gear that experts said might have saved the lives of two firefighters.
Page B2.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


2 STATES TO JOIN IN SYSTEM TO STOP FRAUD IN WELFARE
Responding to reports of welfare recipients illegally collecting benefits in more than one state, New York and New Jersey have agreed to develop a system to compare their welfare rolls in an effort to weed out millions of dollars in fraud.
Until now, localities in the two states have rarely compared welfare rolls because workers usually had to do so by poring over paper lists, a costly and painstaking process.


Islanders Pull Out a Tie After Barely Taking Aim
With less than three minutes left in regulation, the Islanders had just 13 shots on goal, equaling a club-record low for a game.
They couldn't control the puck in their own zone, and they didn't look as if they would catch with Washington, which had a 2-1 lead.
Just when it seemed the Islanders could kiss their slim playoff hopes goodbye, Marty McInnis took his team's 14th shot and got lucky.


Asphalt Company Says It Never Worked Near Pipeline Blast Site


Dream Team II Is Set
SHAQUILLE O'NEAL of the Orlando Magic and REGGIE MILLER of the Indiana Pacers will be the final two players on Dream Team II, which will represent the United States in the world basketball championships this summer in Toronto.
Miller was a surprising choice, picked over LATRELL SPREWELL of Golden State since the team will be coached by DON NELSON, Sprewell's coach with the Warriors.


The Italian Right: 3 Men to Watch; Umberto Bossi; Northern League
A blunt 52-year-old politician from the economically vibrant Lombardy region, Umberto Bossi is the leader of a movement that caught the wind of taxpayer revolt when the first signs of recession appeared in the 1980's.
Resentment was most acute among prosperous northern Italians, who felt that their pockets were being picked by the Government in Rome for pork-barrel projects in the depressed south.
In 1982, Mr.
Bossi founded a newspaper in Varese, his hometown north of Milan, called Lombardia Autonomista, which became the mouthpiece of his movement.
Known initially as the Lombard League, it promised northern Italians autonomy from the south.
Changing its name in 1991 to the Northern League, it marched from victory to victory in local elections.
Mr.
Bossi entered Parliament in Rome in 1992.


Rates SurgeOn Worries Of Inflation
Interest rates pushed higher yesterday, mainly because of investor concerns over inflation and fears that the Federal Reserve might move to tighten credit policy further.
As a result, the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond was at its highest level in 13 months.
Charles Roden, managing director of fixed-income securities for Josephthal, Lyon &amp; Ross, believes the market is trying to figure out where rates are going, and with the end of the quarter nearing, many long-term bond portfolio managers are cutting their average days left to maturity.
"I suspect end-of-quarter cash may be king for a while as managers shorten up positions," Mr.
Roden said.


The Italian Right: 3 Men to Watch; Gianfranco Fini; National Alliance
In recent months Gianfranco Fini has been trying to shake off the past, distancing his neo-Fascist party from the blackshirts who led Italy to disaster in World War II.
First, the party he took over in 1991, the Italian Social Movement, founded by Mussolini loyalists after the war, was renamed the National Alliance.
Then there were the gestures: The Holocaust, he stated, was "an error that led to a horror." This year he made a pilgrimage to the Ardeatine Caves outside Rome, where a monument honors more than 300 Italians, nearly one-fourth of them Jews, who were killed in 1944 by the Germans.


Prudential Deadline May Change
Lawyers for plaintiffs in the largest class-action suit stemming from Prudential Securities' limited partnership scandal will support extending the amount of time that investors have for withdrawing from the settlement of that case, regulators said yesterday.
The decision could prove quite significant for many of the 130,000 investors who purchased $1.4 billion worth of Prudential-Bache Energy Income partnerships.
Many of the investments were sold as safe, when in fact they were risky and subsequently lost much of their value.


DIALOGUE: Dr. Giuliani's Hospital Cure; A Bad Deal For the City
As Mayor Rudolph Giuliani takes on the deficits in New York City's budget, he has put pieces of the Health and Hospitals Corporation at the top of his list to sell, give away or turn over to private management.
Privatization and competition between government and the private sector may be desirable tools for reforming some agencies and services, but surrendering control of public hospitals would be little more than a fiscal shell game.
Dismantling the system rather than overhauling it is feel-good politics: it gives the appearance of dramatic action but (as even the Mayor has now acknowledged) will not reduce the deficit.
What it will do is jeopardize critical health services for millions of New Yorkers -- especially the poor and uninsured, for whom city hospitals are often the only source of health care.


New Education Legislation Defines Federal Role in Nation's Classrooms
When President Clinton signs a sweeping school measure this week, the nation will for the first time have a Federal blueprint to educate its children.
The legislation, called the Goals 2000: Educate America Act, recommends academic standards for students in the 4th, 8th and 11th grades.
It encourages states to design new ways to measure student achievement and exhorts states to lower the dropout rate, improve preschool programs and reduce crime in schools.
The legislation also addresses job training and promotes literacy for adults.


Man In the News: Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon; A Tragedy's Stand-In
Two years ago, when he was Secretary of Education, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon tried to set Mexican history straight by ordering new public-school textbooks that for the first time mentioned student demonstrations in 1968 and seemed to blame the Mexican Army for shooting protesters.
Mr.
Zedillo's approach proved to be too direct for many Mexicans.
He ran afoul of the politically powerful army and other conservative groups, and the history texts were rewritten the next year.


Miscellany
*
Linda Gottlieb, executive producer of ABC-TV's daytime soap opera, "One Life to Live," has resigned to form Linda Gottlieb Enterprises, an integrated programming, marketing and licensing company in New York.
Her first client will be ABC Daytime. *
Chief Auto Parts Inc., Dallas, said it would introduce a music and commercial broadcasting service next month in its 490 stores, to be operated by Muzak In-Store Marketing Group, Raleigh, N.C.


Commercial Fisheries Evade Conservation
To the Editor:
Senator George J. Mitchell, in announcing he would not seek re-election, expressed pride in having been able to persuade Commerce Secretary Ron Brown to scrap a proposed limit on the number of days fishing boats could be at sea.
In short, to gut a conservation program that is too little and too late, having been tortuously and tardily developed by commercial fishermen under a court order.


Rightist Victors in Italian Vote Continue Battle for Real Power
Less than a day after surging to an election victory, the right-wing alliance led by the media magnate Silvio Berlusconi became enmeshed in a power struggle today that threatened its ability to form a strong government.
Some commentators also warned that the strong showing of the neo-Fascist party, one of the partners in Mr.
Berlusconi's coalition, could signal a resurgence of extremism and anti-democratic fervor 51 years after the ouster of Mussolini.
A Troubling Echo
When the leader of the neo-Fascist National Alliance party, Gianfranco Fini, hailed some 2,000 supporters early today in Piazza del Popolo in Rome, hundreds of youths in the crowd gave straight-arm fascist salutes and chanted "Duce! Duce!" -- the rallying cry for Mussolini.


METRO DIGEST
FIREFIGHTERS MOURN A FALLEN COMRADE
Engine Company 24 and Ladder Company 5 were out of service yesterday.
Though their members spent the day in their Greenwich Village firehouse, they had been relieved of duty out of respect for James F. Young, one of their ranks who had died in an incinerating blast.
Instead of responding to alarms, they pressed their faces into the long horizontal line of windows in the garage door and stared out at a cold rain.
Above them, three semicircles of purple and black bunting flapped in the wind.
A1.
Mayor Giuliani said he would spend $10 million to outfit the department in protective gear.
B2.
STATES JOIN TO FIGHT WELFARE FRAUD
New York State and New Jersey have agreed to compare their welfare rolls in an effort to weed out millions of dollars in fraud by people illegally collecting benefits in two states.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  LEADERS PROPOSE SELLING SEWER PLANTS
The leadership of the City Council proposed selling three of New York City's sewage treatment plants to private companies as a way to help close the city's $2.3 billion budget gap and avert some of the deepest service cuts proposed by Mayor Giuliani.
B3.
OFFICER ARRESTED IN CORRUPTION INQUIRY
In the latest move against a suspected ring of corrupt New York City police officers, Federal agents arrested an officer they said was part of the ring on charges that he falsely told a grand jury he knew nothing about the group's purported crimes.
B3.
A LOFT, AND A DREAM, GROWS IN BROOKLYN
Breakfast is over in the second-floor loft at 151A North Third Street in Williamsburg and it is time for Olga Hiiva and her husband, Andy Teirstein, to go to work.
Ms.
Hiiva, who is 33 years old, kisses Mr.
Teirstein and heads toward the southern part of the loft to work on her large oil paintings.
Mr.
Teirstein withdraws to an alcove in the northern corner, picks up a pencil and begins composing music.
About New York.
B3.
REGION  SOFTER TONE, SAME MESSAGE
By the time Louis Farrakhan released his oratorical grip on an audience at Kean College in Union, N.J., early today and the students filed outside a campus theater well past midnight, a fine raw rain that greeted them did not lessen the new enthusiasm many professed for the Nation of Islam leader.
B4.
CASINO COMMISSION CHAIRMAN TO QUIT
Steven P. Perskie, who played a major role in bringing casinos to Atlantic City 16 years ago, announced that he would step down in May as chairman of the New Jersey Casino Control Commission to join a company that specializes in riverboat gambling.
B4.
COMPANY DENIES DIGGING AT BLAST SITE
The lawyer for an asphalt plant situated next to a natural gas pipeline that ruptured and exploded in Edison, N.J., last Wednesday said that the company, Quality Materials, has no idea how the 36-inch main was damaged or when.
B5.
NASSAU ADOPTS PLAN FOR LEGISLATURE
Over the objections of some Democrats, a Nassau County commission adopted a plan to create a new government for the county, with a 19-member legislature as its centerpiece.
B5.
Chronicle B10


Washington at Work; A Tax Lawyer Now Atop the I.R.S.
A year ago, just after President Clinton announced her nomination as Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Margaret Milner Richardson was toasted at lunch by friends, all female tax lawyers.
Someone mentioned her legendary success as a fund-raiser for political causes and charities.
"Well, I think I'm now going into the biggest fund-raising job there is," responded the Vassar graduate, originally from Waco, Tex., who took a leave of absence from her Washington law firm to work in Mr.
Clinton's campaign.
"And this time," she added, thinking of the agency's 115,000 employees and vast legal powers, "I won't even have to use my Rolodex."


2 Fire Companies Silently Mourn Two Who Fell in the Line of Duty
Engine Company 24 and Ladder Company 5 were out of service yesterday.
Though their members spent the day in their Greenwich Village firehouse, they had been relieved of duty out of respect for James F. Young, one of their ranks who had died in an incinerating blast the night before.
Two other comrades had been critically injured, and last night more bad news came: a second man, Firefighter Christopher J. Siedenburg, had died of his burns.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 25
Mar. 18
Mar. 26
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
6.9
6.7
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.2
3.0
Gasoline stocks
217.6
222.7
231.1
Distillate stocks
101.8
102.3
98.7
Crude imports, daily
5.8
7.3
7.0
Product imports, daily
1.9
2.1
2.3
Crude stocks
335.8
341.2
338.9
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
86.2
87.1
86.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6-6.5
6-6.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.44
3.53
2.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.48
3.50
2.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.82
3.85
2.99
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.71
6.61
6.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.06
6.97
6.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.88
7.81
7.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.15
6.10
6.04
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Accounts
*
NFL Enterprises, New York, to Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss, New York, as the first agency to handle its satellite subscription television service.
Billings were not disclosed.


Giant Food Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


DRINKING CHAMPAGNE WITH: Brigitte Bardot; And God Created An Animal Lover
THE photographs decorating her office show Brigitte Bardot much as she looked when she first seduced the world: long blond hair, seductive eyes, pouting mouth.
The slim upright woman in black who appeared through the door had reading glasses hanging from her neck and the lined face of someone who had spent a summer too many in the sun.
Yet, she, too, looked familiar.


Settler Tells of Call by Hebron Killer's Wife
A Jewish settler said today that minutes before the Hebron massacre, the wife of the killer had contacted him looking for her husband and saying he had not gone to the Cave of the Patriarchs shrine to pray.
The settler, Shlomo Edelstein, testified before an Israeli commission of inquiry into the Feb. 25 massacre that he had not interpreted Mrs.
Goldstein's words as a warning and had not reported them to his commander.


BDM Int'l reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Acklands Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Review/Theater: The Night of the Iguana; Lost Souls Communing On a Turbulent Night
Competent revivals tell us what we already know about a play.
Exceptional revivals force a play to go beyond itself and yield up some of its secrets.
The production of "The Night of the Iguana" currently at the Goodman Theater here belongs to the latter category.
From this point on, Tennessee Williams's 1961 drama about the lost denizens of a ramshackle resort on the west coast of Mexico will never seem quite the same.
Up to now, the mood has usually been set by the moist, enervating heat that hugs the Costa Verde Hotel, a tumble of tin-roofed shacks, like a dank shroud.
Spent to begin with, Williams's characters found it hard to breathe, and the thunderstorm gathering on the horizon promised no relief.
Their only option was to succumb to the sultry landscape sapping their will, or so it seemed.


Pitt Will Turn It Up
RALPH WILLARD didn't promise Final Fours, blue-chip recruits or Big East Conference championships.
He did promise to bring change to the University of Pittsburgh's basketball program -- and soon.
"There won't be many dull moments," Willard said.
"Basketball at Pitt is going to be fun."


Review/Film Festival; Growing Up Ever at War
"Little Dreams," an earnest but inept Egyptian film rounding out the geographical range of this year's New Directors/New Films series, observes the 1967 war between Egypt and Israel through the eyes of a young Egyptian boy.
Ghareeb (Tamer Ashraf), who is only 13 at the time of the film's climactic events, has already seen his short life greatly influenced by war.
His father died in the Suez war of 1956.
The boy's destiny is shaped by memories of a man he barely knew.
During "Little Dreams," which will be shown tonight at 9 and tomorrow at 6 P.M., Ghareeb is taken under the wing of Mahmoud (Salah al-Saadany), a comrade of his father's.
"Your father was a hero and you will complete his task," Mahmoud tells the boy, who lives in Suez with his mother.
Mahmoud gladly steps into the role of father figure and leads Ghareeb toward a political awakening, during which the boy learns to share his mentor's admiration for Gamal Abdel Nasser, Egypt's President.
Mahmoud's devotion to his country's leader runs so deep that he is moved to tears by Nasser's wartime resignation.
"Why, Gamal?" Mahmoud asks, hugging Nasser's framed portrait.


Novel Idea in Welfare Plan: Helping Children by Helping Their Fathers
The plan to overhaul welfare that was presented to President Clinton last week grapples for the first time with the needs of a group usually pushed to the periphery of the welfare system: unwed low-income fathers.
Staking a claim to welfare reform and family values, the Administration wants to train these men for jobs while giving them a sense of responsibility as fathers.
The goal is to involve them in their children's lives and increase what the fathers can earn in order to help them lift their children out of poverty.


Britain Yields on Europe Union Dispute, Drawing Fire at Home
Britain gave ground today in a bitter dispute with the rest of Europe, paving the way for the European Union to grow from 12 countries to 16 by admitting three Scandinavian countries and Austria next January.
Although it said it had won a "compromise" from the other countries in settling the row over voting procedures, the Conservative Government was attacked by the opposition in the House of Commons and by its own back-bench party members for picking a needless fight with its European partners and then being forced into a humiliating "climbdown."


A Cultural Capital Tries to Live Up to Its Label
Every year since Melina Mercouri, as the Greek Minister of Culture, thought up the idea more than a decade ago, a city has been outfitted with the trappings of Cultural Capital of Europe.
But as earnest aficionados trekked about Europe from one such capital to the next, they began to wonder how much of this program was truly cultural and how much half-baked touristic promotion.
The answer, of course, is a little of both, although touristic promotion, too, can be more or less sophisticated.
Each city seems first to fall victim to political infighting, a squabble for money and control.
Then someone comes up with a more or less plausible, more or less gaseous theme.
The cultural budget is nudged up a bit, often not enough to make much difference; there is some refurbishment of the city itself, and with drums and trumpets the program is proudly inaugurated.


Italian Kennedy Roots
To the Editor:
Jim McManus (letter, March 17) states that the "Fitzgerald in John F. Kennedy is a famous Norman name."


President Resigns at Limited Stores
Howard Gross, who struggled to no avail for three years to revive the beleaguered Limited stores, has resigned as president to join Today's Man, an off-price men's retailer, as president and chief operating officer.
Michael Weiss, the vice chairman of the Limited Inc. who has won Wall Street's praise for his management of other Limited divisions, was named acting president of Limited stores, the company said yesterday.
He had worked with the division's merchants since June to fix merchandising problems at the Limited stores.


Man Dies in Custody
A man who struggled with a police officer and two others lost consciousness and died about 6:30 P.M. yesterday, the police said.
The man, who was not immediately identified, had been seen "dragging" his 2-year-old son down a street in Flatbush, Brooklyn, the police said.
Two men intervened and called the authorities, and they and a police officer took the child away from the man.
He struggled to take the child back, then collapsed and was taken to Kings County Hospital, where he died, the police said.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.  Coach Johnson Is Unbeaten
Magic Johnson is 2-0 as coach of the Lakers, but it was close and not particularly pretty as Los Angeles beat the Minnesota Timberwolves, 91-89, last night at Inglewood, Calif.


CHRONICLE
It has been a long journey out of hiding for ROSEMARY LEARY, the fourth of Timothy Leary's five wives, who has been a fugitive from the law and living under a false identity for 23 years.
Last week, a judge of the Superior Court in Orange County, Calif., agreed to dismiss the six-month sentence imposed on Ms.
Leary in 1970, after her prosecution, with her husband, for possession of marijuana.
"Tim was in prison in Berkeley, and I was released on appeal," Ms.
Leary, 58, said yesterday from her home, whose exact location in Northern California she would not reveal.
"He escaped, and in September 1970 we went to Algeria to join Eldridge Cleaver. In 1972, he was brought back to the United States from Afghanistan in chains and served four years -- and I was a fugitive."


Clinton Wages a Quiet War Against Poverty
The Clinton Administration has embarked on the most energetic antipoverty effort in a generation, but it has deliberately done much of it so quietly that few people have noticed.
In an era of painfully tight budgets, the Administration has added tens of billions of dollars to existing programs, a major example being the $21 billion expansion of tax credits for low-wage workers.


CUNY Really Needs Restoration of Its Severely Slashed Funds
To the Editor:
You call for filling immediately the empty seats on the City University's board of trustees in "Neglect of the CUNY Board" (editorial, March 15).
However, you have the facts wrong when you describe Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposed budget generous to CUNY.


A Fool for Food? Try Some of These
POOR April Fools' Day.
Other holidays are linked with time-honored foods: turkey at Thanksgiving, roast ham at Christmas, caviar on New Year's Eve.
But April Fools' Day, the perfect time for culinary pranksterism, is oddly bereft of a single signature dish.
Over the years, I've collected a stack of weird but wonderful recipes that would astonish any dinner guests on the first night of April.
It all began when I was poring over some old cookbooks and I discovered a recipe, of mysterious origin, for a cake baked in a shoe box.
A woman's size 9B produced a luscious dessert for 24.


Hillenbrand Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Williams-Sonoma Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


ESPN and Prodigy Offering Sports Information Service
The ESPN sports television network and the Prodigy information network, the country's biggest players in cable television programming and on-line computer services, respectively, are teaming to create an interactive sports information service accessible through personal computers.
The new service, called ESPNET, is to be announced today at a news conference at Madison Square Garden and will be available tomorrowthrough the Prodigy network.


For the Map-Challenged, Technology to the Rescue
Knitting together cellular phone technology and the Pentagon's navigation satellites, Nynex is testing a variety of high-technology services that would allow motorists to find out precisely where they are and how to get to their destination, even if they are completely lost and do not want to roll down a window to ask directions.
Starting on Friday, 30 Avis customers at LaGuardia Airport will be offered cars equipped with cellular telephones and satellite receiving equipment that can tell drivers where the cars are to within a few feet.


How Many Schools? Define 'School.'; In New York, the Answer Involves Philosophy and Politics
New York City Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines caused a stir when he recently discovered that the Board of Education's central bureaucracy has about 7,000 employees, 3,000 more than anyone had thought.
But there's a more fundamental problem: No one knows how many schools there are in New York City.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Greg Litton, infielder, to a minor-league contract.
Waived Carlos Quintana, first baseman.
Sent Cory Bailey, pitcher, to Pawtucket of the International League.
Promoted Bob Schaefer, major league special assignment scout, to director of field operations, and Ed Kenney, director of minor league operations, to director of player development and administration.
Reassigned Eddie Kasko, vice president of baseball development, to vice president-baseball.


Ira Murchison Is Dead; Sprinting Star Was 61
Ira Murchison, a sprinter who set world records on two continents and won a gold medal in the 1956 Olympic Games, died on Monday at Ingalls Hospital in Harvey, Ill., outside his native Chicago.
He was 61.
The cause of death was bone cancer, his wife, Verinda, said.


Review/Pop; Turning a Solo Concert Into a One-Woman Show
There's a moment in a baseball game when, if the pitcher has the right stuff, a no-hitter begins to look possible.
That sense of impending perfection was prevalent during Rickie Lee Jones's show on Monday night at Town Hall.
She was tossing the vocal equivalent of meticulously placed, audacious pitches.
With the stage lights draping her in a dull gold against a stark black background, Ms.
Jones was performing in the barest of circumstances: alone.
Every move she made, accompanying herself on guitar and piano, fell into place without a blemish.
It all worked, in part because her voice, moving from a girl's talk to a blues-drenched moan, was unerringly on pitch, with a phrasing that made everything seem natural.
It also worked because her ability to make her songs, and their bohemian narratives, avoid the traps of street romanticism that mar her recordings.


Cellstar Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Another Steep Drop For Stocks
For the stock market, the last four days of falling prices have been a sickening trip back in time.
Yesterday's slide capped an eight-week decline that has wiped out most, if not all, of the gains this year.
And many on Wall Street say the decline could go far beyond the relatively benign 10 percent "market correction" that has been widely predicted since the Federal Reserve raised interest rates in February.
Many investors have been looking forward to such a correction, in effect a 10 percent-off sale, which would take the Dow to 3,580, a level not seen since early October 1993.


Theater in Review
Written and Sealed  Puerto Rican Traveling Theater 304 West 47th Street Clinton Through April 17 By Isaac Chocron, translated by Susan J. Jones, revised and edited by Carmen L. Marin; directed by Pablo Cabrera; sets and costumes by Randy Barcelo; lighting by Spencer Brown; production stage manager, Roger Franklin; producer, Miriam Colon Valle.
Presented by Puerto Rican Traveling Theater.
WITH: Ramon Albino, Rafael DeMussa, Isabel Keating, Irma-Estel LaGuerre and Jaime Sanchez.


CUC Int'l reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Florida Is Back, Doing It Right
The black letters posted above the front doors of the Florida Bookstore practically shouted down University Avenue with news the people had been clamoring for since that instant on Sunday afternoon when the street was flooded with Gators, automobiles, bicycles and joy.
FINAL FOUR SHIRTS COMING TODAY.


Asphalt Company Denies Digging at Explosion Site
The lawyer for an asphalt plant situated next to a natural gas pipeline that ruptured and exploded here last Wednesday said today that the plant's current operators had not done any digging on the property in the 10 years they owned it.
The lawyer, Vincent Gentile, said the asphalt company, Quality Materials, has no idea how or when the 36-inch pipeline was damaged.
The fact that it ruptured beneath Quality's eight-acre plot here was coincidental, Mr.
Gentile said.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about plans by Chemical Bankto close 50 branches and eliminate 650 jobs included in some editions an incorrect description of 200 of those positions, provided by Chemical.
All 650 jobs will be officer positions; no teller positions will be eliminated.
Rather, tellers will be reassigned to other branches.


A New Voice in Macy Case
A group of shareholders in R. H. Macy &amp; Company is seeking a seat at the table where creditors are negotiating a plan of reorganization with the company.
The group, made up of former Macy's employees who hold common shares of the privately held company's stock, has asked Judge Burton R. Lifland, the Federal bankruptcy judge overseeing the case, to direct the United States trustee to create a committee to represent them.


Drug Makers Plan Genetics Research Deal
In a vote of confidence for the emerging drug-discovery science of genomics, Hoffmann-La Roche Inc. plans to enter a research collaboration agreement with Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. valued at more than $70 million.
The deal, which the companies expect to sign within the next day or two, will involve the second-largest investment ever in a privately held biotechnology company.
The collaboration will cover the use of Millennium's genomics technology for the development of drugs to treat obesity and adult-onset diabetes.
Big Genetics Project
Genomics technology is derived from the Human Genome Project, a huge federally supported research effort aimed at identifying all the genetic information in the human body.
Genomics companies like Millennium hope to create drugs by isolating the genes associated with leading diseases.


Sometimes, Winners Are Quitters
When Jimmy Johnson parted from the Dallas Cowboys yesterday, he was hardly the first coach or manager to leave while on top.
Vince Lombardi and Bill Walsh did it in the National Football League.
So did Joe Gibbs and Bill Parcells in the N.F.L., Ralph Houk and Johnny Keane in baseball, Pat Riley in the National Basketball Association and Scotty Bowman in the National Hockey League.


'Mommies' Replace Madge for Palmolive
Three years after sending Madge the manicurist to advertising character heaven, the Colgate-Palmolive Company has doubled the number of spokeswomen to replace her in pitching its Palmolive dishwashing products line.


Maas Sees a Silver Lining in His Release
Kevin Maas shook hands, collected some bats, stared at the pinstriped uniform hanging in his locker one final time, smiled at his wife and smiled at the world.
His eight-year association with the Yankees came to its expected demise today when he was released.
Maas was excited.
Reality will probably hit later.
Once trumpeted as the next great power hitter who would exploit the right-field porch at Yankee Stadium, once featured on the team's media guide cover and always considered a favorite of the club owner, George Steinbrenner, Maas's four-year career in New York ended with a phone call from General Manager Gene Michael this afternoon.
It came 15 minutes before the 2 P.M. deadline for teams to release a player and be responsible for only one-fourth of his salary.


Packers Sign Mersereau
SCOTT MERSEREAU, a starter at defensive tackle for the last six seasons for the Jets, has agreed to a one-year contract with the Green Bay Packers.
Mersereau, who was cut by the Jets two weeks ago, agreed to a deal reported to be worth $375,000, along with a $100,000 signing bonus.
He would have made $675,000 with the Jets, but they cut him to make room under the salary cap for Steelers' defensive tackle DONALD EVANS, whom they signed to a three-year, $3.45 million deal.


Food Notes
Award Ballots Ready?
Earlier this month the International Association of Culinary Professionals announced nominees for its annual Julia Child cookbook awards.
The winners, to be announced at a convention in San Francisco on April 23, will be selected by a jury of cooking professionals.
But there will also be an award -- the Cook's Choice Award -- given to a cookbook that wins the most votes from the public.
An official ballot is required and must reach the organization's headquarters in Louisville, Ky., no later than April 10 at noon Eastern daylight time.
Ballots sent by fax are not eligible.
Anyone who fills out a ballot will be eligible to win a trip to San Francisco the weekend of the convention.
Ballots can be obtained by sending a stamped, self-addressed envelope to Cook's Choice Award, I.A.C.P., 304 West Liberty Street, Suite 201, Louisville, Ky. 40202, or by calling (502) 587-7953.
Express From Century Cafe
Century Cafe, 132 West 43d Street, has started a lunchtime delivery service.
Excellent soups, salads, pasta, sandwiches and desserts are on the Century Cafe Express menu, and the service is prompt.
The selections include a moist salmon club sandwich for $6.95, Caesar salad for $3.75 and a well-seasoned salad of penne, grilled shrimp, arugula and roasted peppers for $3.50.
Delivery between 11 A.M. and 3 P.M. is free for orders of $5 or more, with delivery between 35th and 49th streets and Madison and Ninth avenues.
Although orders can be placed at lunchtime, anyone wishing to receive them at a specific time should place orders by 3 P.M. the day before by calling (212) 398-1988.
Taste of Japan in Jersey
An interesting excursion to New Jersey for a taste of Japan will be sponsored April 18 by the Roundtable for Women in Food Service, a networking group.
There will be a guided tour of the giant Japanese supermarket at Yaohan Plaza, 595 River Road, Edgewater, N.J., beginning at 4 P.M.
From 6:15 to 8 P.M., participants will have a chance to shop and have dinner.
The cost is $10 for members of the round table and $18 for nonmembers, not including transportation, shopping or dinner.
Transportation is $2.55 each way by public bus from the Port Authority or the George Washington Bridge.
Those who drive can park at no charge.
Reservations, which are required, can be made by sending a check payable to R.W.F. to the group's office, 80 Eighth Avenue, Suite 303, Box 677, New York 10011; (212) 807-5677.
If space is available, tickets will be sold at the door for $15; $23 for nonmembers.
Subliminal Shopping
Consumer Reports has just published the "Supermarket Buying Guide" by Kent B. Banning and Mary Weber ($14.95).
This 291-page paperback explains how the layout of a typical supermarket can affect what a consumer spends, and gives money-saving shopping strategies.
The most useful section is a guide to selecting, storing and preparing foods.
An appendix gives Consumer Reports ratings for products in about a dozen categories.
Unfortunately, the book says nothing about organic produce or other foods produced without pesticides, herbicides or preservatives.
Food as Medicine
On April 10 at 2 and 4 P.M. an hourlong program called "Food as Medicine" will be presented at the American Museum of Natural History.
Li Lian Xing, a Chinese herbalist, will discuss Chinese theories and demonstrate his methods of diagnosing health problems.
Samples of herbal teas, a seafood broth and other drinks and will be served.
The program is sponsored by Legal Seafoods, a Boston chain of restaurants, and the Imperial Herbal Restaurant in Singapore.
The program will be held in the museum's Auxiliary Dining Room.
Tickets are $5, and can be reserved by calling (212) 769-5310, or can be purchased at the door.
Cooking Schools Expand
Professional cooking schools are expanding.
At the French Culinary Institute, 462 Broadway (at Grand Street), short programs for amateurs are being eliminated and sessions to train professional cooks in classic French techniques are being added.
The changes are being made by Michael J. Sheets, a former marketing executive, who became president of the institute in January.
And the California Culinary Academy in San Francsico has just opened more classrooms and kitchens at 700 Polk Street, near its headquarters at 625 Polk Street.
The school's baking and pastry programs will be taught in the new space.
More Creme
Creme de la Creme, one of New Jersey's better catering shops, has moved from Teaneck to larger quarters in Dumont, at 405 East Madison Avenue.
The shop, which is owned by Richard and Mary Beth Brace, both graduates of the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, N.Y., features a full range of prepared foods and desserts, including some made with lower fat and sodium.
The shop is open every day except Monday.
Caffeine Lit
Inevitable, you say.
Java Journal, a downtown monthly, made its debut last month with 32 pages of poetry, short stories, snippets of information about coffee, mini-reviews of 45 coffeehouses in Greenwich Village, the East Village and points south, and a calendar of events, like poetry readings in coffeehouses.
It is distributed free in coffee stores and cafes.
A Collective for Condiments
In what may be the wave of the future, three independent producers of fine condiments in California have joined forces to produce and promote their products.
The line, called Napa Valley Kitchens, includes Consorzio Oils, Napa Valley Mustard and Napa Valley Flavored Oils.
Sardine Suggestions
Recipe pamphlets provided by food companies are rarely worth noting.
One exception is the Norway Sardine Cookbook, a bright, lively and imaginative 28-page book of recipes and cooking tips.
It is available for a postage and handling fee of $3 from Department CPR, P.O.
Box 426230, San Francisco 94142.
Healthful Chips
Terra Chips, the company that introduced assortments of colorful and tasty root-vegetable chips like beet, lotus root, sweet potato, taro and carrot a few years ago, has started selling bags of individual kinds of these chips.
Last fall it came out with bags of peppery spiced sweet-potato chips.
Now it has added seasoned taro-root chips and unspiced sweet-potato chips.
The taro chips are flavored with Asian seasonings like lemon grass, ginger and coriander, giving an aromatic note to their delicate flavor.
The sweet-potato chips are crunchy and rich.
Both varieties come in 1.5-ounce bags for around $1 and 6-ounce bags for about $3.
Munchers who find the chips irresistible should note that the serving size listed for the nutritional information is actually 1 ounce, or 140 calories, not the entire 1.5 ounce bag (210 calories).
A $1,000 Cookbook
If you happen to own a copy of the "Hotel St. Francis Cookbook," published in San Francisco in 1919, you may be surprised to learn it is worth $100.
A first edition (1931) of "The Joy of Cooking" is worth $1,000, but the "Harvest Sale Cookbook," published by the Ladies Aid of Malden Hospital in Massachusetts, is only worth $15.
"Cookbooks Worth Collecting" by Mary Barile (Wallace-Homestead Books, $17.95) is a guide to collectible cookbooks with a bit of history.


MEXICAN LEADER PICKS SUCCESSOR TO SLAIN NOMINEE
One week after the assassination of its presidential candidate, Mexico's long-governing party today announced that its new standard-bearer would be Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, a former Cabinet minister who had been managing the slain nominee's campaign.
The choice of the new candidate was made by the departing Mexican President, Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
In selecting Mr.
Zedillo to replace Luis Donaldo Colosio, who was shot to death in Tijuana last week, Mr.
Salinas turned to one of the American-trained economists most closely associated with his own effort to modernize Mexico's institutions and strengthen its ties to the United States.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
The stock market suffered its worst slide so far this year, with the Dow Jones industrial average falling 63.33 points.
Many analysts say the market's overall drop, now in its eighth week, could go beyond the expected "correction."  [ Page D1. ]


H. S. Strygler, 75, Importer and Donor
Harry S. Strygler, a pearl importer and philanthropist, died on Sunday at the Hilton Hotel in Rye, N.Y., where his family was celebrating Passover.
He was 75.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his wife, Rosa.


Book Notes


Knicks March Through Month of March Unbeaten
Winning has become a habit that the Knicks refuse to break.
Extending their winning streak to 14 games and reaching the 50-victory mark for the third consecutive season, the Knicks (50-19) overcame a 13-0 deficit and a determined opponent to beat the Charlotte Hornets, 106-95, last night at Madison Square Garden.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  NEW NOMINEE IN MEXICO  Mexico's governing party selected a 42-year-old former Cabinet minister and economist as its new presidential nominee, a week after the assassination of the heavily favored candidate of the party.
A1  For the new candidate, a delicate balancing act.
A6


INSIDE
From Gaza Strip Shootings, New Divisions and Strains
While killings by Israeli soldiers in a Gaza Strip refugee camp were seen as executions by Palestinians, the Israeli Army defended the shootings.
The episode created new tensions for negotiators on both sides.
Page A3.
A Correction, or Worse?
Yesterday's slide in stocks was the worst of the year so far, with the Dow falling 63.33 points.
Many analysts say the market's overall drop, now in its eighth week, could go far beyond an expected correction.
Page D1.
U.S.
Edges Back on China
The United States, in a box over its warnings that China must improve its human rights policies or face trade penalties, is considering less comprehensive sanctions.
Page A10.
Reform for Cancer Studies
Taking further action against a major cancer research center at the University of Pittsburgh, Federal officials have halted enrollment in its study of whether tamoxifen prevents breast cancer.
Page B8.
It Still Isn't Easy Being Green
Disappointed by an Administration and Congress they hoped would be their allies, lobbyists for environmental groups have reluctantly agreed to narrow their agenda.
Page B7.


Farrakhan Softens Tone But Sticks To Message
By the time Louis Farrakhan released his oratorical grip on a Kean College audience early today and the students filed outside a campus theater well past midnight, a fine raw rain that greeted them did not lessen the new enthusiasm many professed for the Nation of Islam leader.
It was a performance that swelled with defiance at perceived enemies in the news media, at Hollywood image-makers he insinuated were dominated by Jews, and at a mass culture he accused of robbing black Americans of the chance to succeed.
Perhaps less predictably, for nearly three and a half hours he kept up a drumbeat of criticism, gentle at first and then volcanic, aimed at young blacks who he said were more concerned with sex, rap music and drugs than with working to elevate themselves and the condition of all black society.


Wine Talk
IF there were a perfect wine grape -- there isn't, of course -- it would be the chardonnay.
Jancis Robinson, the British wine writer, summed it up when she said: "Chardonnay is one of the happiest combinations: the grower loves to grow it; the wine maker loves to fashion it; and we all love to drink it."


Change, Italian Style
Political upheavals tend to be messy, and Italy's ballot box purge of its postwar political class is no exception.
The leaders of the victorious right-wing coalition are already headed off in contradictory directions, leading disappointed losers of the left and center to predict a rupture before a new government can be formed next month.
Whatever their hopes, this fact remains: A new, often demagogic populist right has won a decisive triumph that cannot be conjured away.
The center has been utterly discredited by scandal.
The post-Communist left, despite the end of the cold war, has been unable to broaden its appeal.
The rout of the main postwar parties is close to complete.


Kresse Staying Put
JOHN KRESSE, who led the College of Charleston to a 24-3 mark and its first appearance in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament this season, agreed to a 10-year contract worth more than $900,000.


Aide Says U.S. May Scrap an Across-the-Board Penalty for China
A senior State Department official said today that the Administration might consider a selective withdrawal of current trade privileges from China's state-owned enterprises instead of an across-the-board penalty if Beijing failed to make sufficient progress on human rights.
Responding to a question after a speech to the United States Chamber of Commerce, Winston Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs, said such selective sanctions "should be looked at" because they would help preserve private enterprise in China and protect United States investments there.


Alvin H. Meadow; Lawyer and Publisher, 61
Alvin H. Meadow, a New York trial lawyer for 34 years and a magazine publisher, died on Sunday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 61 and lived in Rye, N.Y.
His family said the cause was lymphoma.


Jury Finds Mercer Is Not Guilty In Ferguson Bout Bribery Case
Winning the most important unanimous decision of his heavyweight career, Ray Mercer was found not guilty of sports bribery yesterday.
"I'm not surprised, but I'm relieved and I'm grateful," Mercer said after a jury of six men and six women issued the verdict after five hours of deliberations in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


In School
There are at least two versions of how Vinnie Galindez, age 13, from Bayside, Queens, wound up at the School of American Ballet.
Vinnie said: "See, my mother saw the 'Nutcracker' and she saw some boys in it and I was 10 and she said, 'Vinnie, I'm putting you in ballet.' I said, 'No way.' And she made me and now I'm 13 and I'm still doing it."


Council Leaders Propose Selling 3 Sewage Plants
The leadership of the City Council yesterday proposed selling three of New York City's sewage treatment plants to private companies as a way to help close the city's $2.3 billion budget gap and avert some of the deepest service cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
The proposal came as the Mayor's office negotiated with municipal unions all day yesterday to try to reach an agreement on severance packages Mr.
Giuliani hopes to offer to cut 7,600 jobs by the end of April.
By last night, negotiators on both sides reported progress.
The talks ended for the day with subcommittees continuing to work out details.
The full teams resume at 9 A.M. today.


Review/Film; The Great, Big Worries of Such a Tiny Girl
If there is an underlying message in Don Bluth's animated musical, "Hans Christian Andersen's 'Thumbelina,' " it is that nice little girls with big dreams should stay as far away from show business as possible.
The parade of characters who try to manipulate and possess Thumbelina (Jodi Benson), a tiny 16-year-old girl who springs magically from the center of a flower, are a rogue's gallery of unwholesome show-business types.
When not ogling and pawing the thumb-size girl, they promise her a grubby, compromised notoriety on the lower rungs of the show-business ladder.
In Mr.
Bluth's freewheeling cinematic adaptation of the popular 19th-century story, Thumbelina is plunged into a nightclub netherworld the night after she meets and falls in love with the fairy prince of her dreams.
The scenes of their courtship, in which her dream lover, Cornelius (Gary Imhoff), flies them around on a bumblebee and the dancing couple glide and dip like an Olympic figure-skating team, are among the movie's most captivating.


Ciba-Geigy Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Breakup of Cowboys' Team Leaves a League in Wonder
Pro football's coaches, players, broadcasters and agents expressed shock and surprise at the resignation of Coach Jimmy Johnson yesterday.
They saw potential problems for the Dallas Cowboys next season.
"After what had transpired over the last week," said Coach Dan Reeves of the Giants, "I didn't think Jimmy Johnson and Jerry Jones could coach or work together. I thought something was going to happen. Too many things had been said by both parties. So that part didn't surprise me. What surprised me is that Jimmy is going to be able to coach when he wants.


Blenheim Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


McCaffrey a Player With a Mission
Billy McCaffrey has a world of things to smile about.
He has back-to-back seasons of averaging 20 points a game -- 20.9 this season -- making him the first Vanderbilt basketball player to do that since 1966.
McCaffrey has a chance to become the first player since the seven players on the 1981 Indiana team to win championships in both the N.I.T. and the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament when Vanderbilt plays Villanova in the National Invitation Tournament championship game at Madison Square Garden tonight.
He was a member of the Duke University team that won the N.C.A.A. championship in 1991, before transferring to Vanderbilt.


The Pop Life
Marvin Gaye Reissues
Marvin Gaye was shot dead by his father 10 years ago this Friday.
To mark the anniversary and honor Gaye's 26-year career, which critics have said left an indelible mark on popular music, Motown Records is kicking off a yearlong celebration featuring the reissue on compact disk of many of his works.
Gaye, an internationally popular singer, songwriter and musician who died on April 1, 1984, a day before his 45th birthday, is remembered by many as a handsome, sultry soul balladeer.
But he was also recognized as a recording-session drummer, a gifted instrumentalist, the first artist associated with the Motown label to begin producing his own albums and a performer concerned with spiritual matters.
Rock singers like Mick Jagger and Rod Stewart were influenced by his singing and several of his songs, including "Sexual Healing" in 1983, were perhaps the most overtly sensual popular music recordings of their time.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Sophisticated Software Set For Exotic Financial Trades
It could be a marriage made in techno-geek heaven.
Big banks and other trading institutions are venturing ever deeper into derivatives -- exotic financial instruments like "equity-spread call options" or "guaranteed performance bond options" that can be as complex to monitor as a space shuttle flight.


Viacom Agrees to Sell Lifetime TV Stake
Seeking to shed assets to help pare the $7 billion it borrowed to buy Paramount Communications Inc., Viacom Inc. agreed yesterday to sell its one-third interest in Lifetime Television to its partners, the Hearst Corporation and Capital Cities/ABC Inc., for approximately $317.6 million in cash.
Even as Viacom was announcing the sale, rumors of an even bigger deal were swirling on Wall Street.


South African Vote Official Optimistic Despite Killings
Downtown Johannesburg was in a state of nervous aftershock today from a rampage Monday through its hallowed commercial precincts.
The Zulu homeland was writhing from the worst factional violence in many years.
Callers to radio talk shows were talking, again, of fleeing the country.
The Zulu King was spurning a proposed peace summit meeting this week, and his cousin, the Zulu nationalist leader, was declaring, again, that civil war is imminent.


Miramax Turns Over Film On Outspoken Comedian
A little more than a year ago, Miramax Films, the prime independent distributor of art-house classics, was bought by the Walt Disney Company.
Executives of both companies insisted that Miramax would retain complete control of its often provocative movies and remain independent from Disney, which produces family and low-budget movies.
Today, the cultures of Disney and Miramax unwittingly clashed over a new movie, "You So Crazy," in which the comedian Martin Lawrence performs on a concert stage using raw language.
The outcome was that another company, Samuel Goldwyn Pictures, took over the movie's release from Miramax.
The movie will be released around the nation on April 27.


International Family Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Books of The Times; Disturbing Childhoods And Their Aftereffects
The Favourite
By Meredith Daneman
163 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.
Now You See Her
By Whitney Otto
303 pages. Villard. $20.


Wrecker's Ball Puts Gaps in Historic Philadelphia
Philadelphia's past is its best hope for future economic development, Mayor Edward G. Rendell said this month in announcing a new promotion to lure tourists here.
That same day, a contractor with a city permit knocked down two early 19th-century commercial buildings in the Old City section of Philadelphia.
A similar brick factory building nearby has been pulled down since then, another is expected to be demolished this week, and the dust in historic Philadelphia has not settled yet.


Catholic and Evangelical: Seeking a Middle Ground
In a statement with both strong religious and political overtones, a group of prominent Roman Catholic and evangelical Protestant scholars and leaders pledged yesterday to reduce frequent conflicts between their different Christian traditions.
They also promised to cooperate on questions of common concern like abortion, parental choice in schools and strengthening the traditional family.
The 39 scholars and church leaders who endorsed the statement emphasized that it was not an official document speaking for their denominations or committing them to any specific actions.
Many points in the statement were developed between Catholics and evangelicals during the 1970's and 1980's in dialogues that were sponsored by the Vatican, the Baptist World Alliance, agencies of the Southern Baptist Convention and other groups.


Broadway Ticket Prices
To the Editor:
"The Broadway Ticket Game: Bargain-Hunters Can Play" (arts pages, March 18) quotes producers as saying, in effect, that theatergoers expect Broadway prices to be exorbitant, and when this isn't so, they suspect damaged goods.
Not only is this view ludicrous and false, but it also illustrates the contempt producers harbor for the public.


'Sesame Street' Starts by Celebrating Children
To the Editor:
Your March 21 front-page report on the announcement of Viacom/Nickelodeon's plans for preschool programming focuses heavily on the PBS preschool schedule.


Confidence Index Is Highest Since '90
Reflecting a view that jobs are becoming easier to find and the economy is stronger, an important index of public confidence rose in March, reaching its highest level in nearly four years, the Conference Board reported yesterday.
The index jumped to 86.7, from 79.9 in February.
But the Conference Board, a research organization supported by Corporate America, emphasized not the sudden jump but a steady upward trend since August, when the national economy shifted out of the doldrums and began to expand rapidly.


U.S. Halts Recruitment of Cancer Patients For Studies, Pointing to Flaws in Oversight
Federal officials at the National Cancer Institute yesterday took sweeping action intended to correct serious deficiencies of oversight in several large studies being carried out at the University of Pittsburgh to determine new standards of care for cancer patients.
The action included a temporary halt in recruiting women into an experimental study of the drug tamoxifen to determine whether it can prevent breast cancer among women at higher risk of the disease.


The Mayor and the Fish Market -- Again
The Fulton Fish Market has been a fixture on the lower Manhattan landscape since 1833.
But decades of abdication by New York City's government have turned this bustling wholesale fish and seafood distribution center into a haven for organized crime, where extortion and physical intimidation are a routine part of doing business.
Eight years ago Rudolph Giuliani, then a U.S.
Attorney, began a worthy assault against the Mafia, leading to the appointment of a special Federal administrator, Frank Wohl.
Mr.
Wohl was given the temporary job of investigating corruption at the market and imposing fines and other sanctions.


King Asserts Racial Taunt Is on Videotape
Rodney G. King, who has flip-flopped on whether the policemen who beat him in 1991 taunted him with racial epithets, offered a new assertion today: Not only did at least one of them shout a slur at him, but it can be heard on the much-scrutinized videotape of the beating.
A defense lawyer for the City of Los Angeles, however, disputed Mr.
King's assertion, as did one of the lawyers who prosecuted the four police officers on assault charges two years ago.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Cigarette Giants Switch From Fantasy to Empathy
Reality is riding into Marlboro country.
The harsh truths American smokers are confronting in the 1990's are unexpectedly entering the longtime fantasy world of cigarette advertising.
Their intrusion is significantly altering a landscape dominated for decades by steely-eyed cowboys, cartoon animals and other make-believe marketing mainstays.


Top Argentine Regulator Is Ousted
In his three years as chief regulator of Argentina's stock market, Martin Redrado had been known as the Golden Boy, a baby-faced regulator who had a need for the spotlight, a zeal to stop often rampant market manipulation, a willingness to take on executives of major industrial groups and strong connections with the country's top politicians.
But today, those connections did not help the 32-year-old regulator, as his chief ally, President Carlos Saul Menem, signed a decree dismissing Mr.
Redrado for failing to "keep secret information obtained through the exercise of his functions."


Perskie Resigns Casino Post
Steven P. Perskie, who played a major role in bringing casinos to Atlantic City 16 years ago, announced today that he would step down in May as chairman of the New Jersey Casino Control Commission to join a company that specializes in riverboat gambling.
Mr.
Perskie said he had told former Gov.
Jim Florio last year of his plans to leave the commission and said he only stayed to allow Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman time to find a replacement to permit a smooth transition.
"If Florio had won re-election I would have left already," Mr.
Perskie said.


Late Score By Kovalev Makes the Difference
At the end of a draining month, a fatiguing five-game road trip and a furious third period in which the shots came in flurries and the goals came in bunches, the weary Rangers, their legs rubbery and exhausted, were stripped down to the resourcefulness of experience and determination tonight.
The score was 3-3, the Philadelphia Flyers were making one final desperate surge toward a fading playoff spot and the expended Rangers were frantically searching for a way to keep pace with the Devils atop the National Hockey League.


Addressing Nannygate
The failure of nominees for high government jobs to pay Social Security taxes for domestic workers, a failure known colloquially as Nannygate, has caused President Clinton trouble he never bargained for.
The tax problem felled Zoe Baird on her way to becoming Attorney General.
It added to the woes of others, including Bobby Ray Inman, Mr.
Clinton's nominee for Secretary of Defense, and led to the demotion of William Kennedy 3d, the White House Associate Counsel.
It has also embarrassed people safely in their jobs, including Commerce Secretary Ron Brown.


Why So Many Die Needlessly: Broken Cardiac Rescue Chain
THROUGHOUT the United States, and especially in big cities and rural areas, tens of thousands of people with hearts that should be good enough to keep them alive die each year for lack of adequate first aid.
In New York City, for example, a new study has shown that only one person in 100 outside of hospitals survives after the heart suddenly stops pumping.
In contrast, in Seattle the survival rate after such cardiac arrests is 1 in 5.
The difference can be traced to the effectiveness of what the American Heart Association calls the "chain of survival." Dr.
Joseph P. Ornato of the Medical College of Virginia, who heads the association's committee on emergency cardiac care, said "each link in the chain must be strong" for many lives to be saved.


Court Confronting Results of Limiting Death Row Appeals
In a death penalty argument marked by tense exchanges and an unusual display of anger from the bench, the Supreme Court came face to face today with the implications of its recent rulings sharply limiting the access of state death-row inmates to Federal court.
The question was whether Federal judges have the power to grant stays of execution to inmates who have exhausted their state appeals but have not found lawyers to help them file an initial petition for Federal court review.
A majority of the Justices were visibly disturbed when the lawyer for the State of Texas argued that Federal judges did not have such power.
Shortages and Difficulties
The Court was hearing the appeal of a convicted murderer, Frank B. McFarland, who came within hours of execution by Texas in November after two lower Federal courts refused his request for a stay.
The courts held that they had no jurisdiction over any aspect of the case until the inmate filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus, the document that initiates Federal court review of a state conviction.


William Golub, 79, Lawyer Specializing In Transport Issues
William W. Golub, a Manhattan lawyer who played a leading role in the renovation of public transportation in the New York metropolitan area in the 1950's, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 and lived in Manhattan.
During a long legal career, Mr.
Golub was an authority on regulatory and legislative issues and later on corporate financing.
He was a vital figure in the reorganization of the Long Island Rail Road and the Hudson &amp; Manhattan Railroad connecting Manhattan with New Jersey.
He also served as a special consultant to a commuter rail and bus line plan that was submitted to Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller in 1959.


China Shields North Koreans On Atom Issue
China again shielded North Korea today from the consequences of its decision to block a United Nations investigation into whether it is secretly developing nuclear weapons.
In the Security Council, China, which has a veto, objected to a proposed United States resolution urging North Korea to readmit the nuclear inspectors but also threatening "to consider further Security Council action" if it has not done so within a month -- a thinly veiled warning of a trade embargo.


Lower-Fat Versions Of Nabisco Brands
The Nabisco Biscuit Company said yesterday that it would introduce reduced-fat versions of six more best-selling brands, including Oreo and Ritz, in an effort to build on the success of several lines of no- and low-fat cookie and crackers.
Nabisco will sell the reduced-fat products, in distinctive green-banded packages, alongside the regular-recipe versions of the brands.
The Oreo cookies, for instance, will have 25 percent less fat; the Ritz crackers, 35 percent less fat, and the Triscuit crackers, 40 percent less fat.
The new products will be added to offerings that include Snackwell's fat-free cookies and crackers and fat-free versions of Newtons cookies.


Stolen Marilyn Monroe Items Recovered, Mostly


Corrections
A picture caption on the Evening Hours page of Styles of The Times on Sunday, about an opening at the American Crafts Museum, misidentified a woman shown.
She was Janet Kardon, the museum director, not Kate Carmel.
Corrections in this space yesterday and on Sunday, dealing with other misidentifications in the caption, repeated the error involving Ms.
Kardon.
The original confusion resulted from a picture substitution in the production process.


Personal Health; Saving a life with CPR can be as easy as A B C.
CARDIOPULMONARY resuscitation, or CPR, is a potentially lifesaving first-aid technique that combines mouth-to-mouth breathing with compressions to the chest to maintain circulation in a person whose heart has stopped.
I took a comprehensive CPR course more than 15 years ago.
I figured that if I ever needed to use it, chances are it would be for a family member, friend or colleague.
And I simply could not imagine myself standing by helplessly while someone I loved, or even a stranger, died before my eyes when I might have been able to do something to help.


Off the Menu
The Start of Something?
Long-term relationships are no easier to count on in the restaurant business than anywhere else.
Yesterday, Stefano Battistini was trying to start a new one.
The chef, who had been at the Four Seasons restaurant until a few months ago, began working as chef-consultant at Colors.
Colors, at 237 Park Avenue (46th Street), had been without a chef for about a month, ever since Eric Blauberg left to open his own place in TriBeCa.
For the time being, Mr.
Battistini says he is testing the waters.
"It's too early to tell what is going to happen with this restaurant," he said.
Comeback for Bobby Van's
Bobby Van's in Bridgehampton, L.I., was the Elaine's of the Hamptons, a wood-paneled tavern better known as a hangout for writers -- whose pictures hung behind the big bar -- than for gastronomes.
Truman Capote and James Jones were regulars in the days when the restaurant was on the opposite side of Main Street, and the bar remained fairly lively even after they were gone.


When Vacation Means Going to Work


Met Roster Is Now 27; Olson Leads List of Cuts
After inheriting a disaster last summer, Dallas Green wanted nothing more than the opportunity to pick his own ball club.
Today, Green got his chance.
Green and the Mets' executives sat down for more than an hour Monday night to discuss roster decisions and this morning Green trimmed his team to 27 players, two over the final limit, when he either demoted or released seven players.


Chicago Shop Opens A New York Office
Aaron D. Cushman &amp; Associates, a Chicago-based public relations agency, has opened an office in New York by absorbing Wishner Communications, a public relations shop.
The terms were not disclosed.
Howard E. Wishner, 41, president at Wishner since 1981, has joined Cushman as executive vice president and general manager.
Meredith Pillon, 47, who was previously senior vice president and head of the travel and tourism division at the Rowland Company of New York, becomes an executive vice president and head of Cushman's tourism department.


Corrections
A caption in Science Times on March 22 with a photomicrograph of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, described it incompletely.
The virus was shown emerging from a much larger infected human immune cell.


Loft Grows To House 2 Dreams
BREAKFAST is over in the second-floor loft space at 151A North Third Street in Williamsburg and it is time for Olga Hiiva and her husband, Andy Teirstein, to go to work.
Ms.
Hiiva, who is 33 years old, kisses Mr.
Teirstein and heads toward the southern part of the loft to work on her large oil paintings.
Mr.
Teirstein withdraws to an alcove in the northern corner, picks up a pencil and begins composing music.
Ms.
Hiiva, who spent the first 15 years of her life in what was then Leningrad, is finishing a series of three paintings, each about 10 feet square, that strongly evoke contemporary strains on nature.
The upper half of one shows a stand of birches of a northern forest, while below there is a herd of elk in close-up.
On a band between the two a nude male figure, somewhat emaciated and bent in embryonic posture is repeated in a chain.


William H. Natcher Dies at 84; Held Voting Record in Congress
Representative William Huston Natcher, a Kentucky Democrat whose political longevity and spotless reputation won him the most powerful committee post in the House, died of heart failure late Tuesday.
He was 84.
Outside of Congress, Mr.
Natcher was best known for his streak of 18,401 uninterrupted roll-call votes in the House, a feat that ended on March 3, when failing health forced him to miss a vote (on a minor procedural matter) for the first time since he took office in 1954.


The New Hire: Glorious Record, Outrageous Past
When Jerry Jones, the owner of the Dallas Cowboys, introduced Barry Switzer yesterday as the Cowboys' new head coach, he recalled that Switzer was his freshman football coach at the University of Arkansas and was also in charge of his freshman dorm.
"He kept several of us straight," said Jones, whose comment at the news conference in Irving, Tex., drew a chorus of double-edged chuckles.


The Honor Of Your Presence
OF all her customers at the Purgatory Pie Press, Esther K. Smith finds that brides-to-be are the most on edge.
"They sort of go temporarily insane, in a positive way," said Ms.
Smith, who runs the shop in lower Manhattan with her husband, Dikko Faust.
At Purgatory Pie, hundreds of typefaces are hand-set by Mr.
Faust.
The letters leave a strong, deep impression, and materials range from bark paper to recycled paper.
"We've seen leather, aluminum, copper, even gold engraving on chipboard," Ms.
Smith said.


Commodities Broker Has History of Legal Trouble
The broker who the White House says was used by Hillary Rodham Clinton to trade commodities futures has a record of regulatory and legal difficulties and was forced into bankruptcy after he was sued by customers and traders who said he had lost millions of their dollars.
The Arkansas office run by the broker, Robert L. (Red) Bone, collapsed in October 1979 as the market in cattle futures fell sharply.
Mrs.
Clinton stopped trading in her account in July 1979, and closed it shortly before the collapse.
Over 10 months of trading, Mrs.
Clinton had made nearly $100,000 on an investment of $1,000.


U.S. Renews Pledge to Aid Bosnia's Recovery After Peace Pact
The United States has pledged $10 million toward Sarajevo's reconstruction, but will not send troops here until after a settlement is reached to end the Bosnian war, the American representative to the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright, said here today.
In a show of support to the Muslim-led Bosnian Government, Ms.
Albright and Gen.
John Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, came here today to dedicate the future United States Embassy.


Skull in Ethiopia Is Linked to Earliest Man
The first reasonably complete skull of the earliest recognized human ancestors after the split-off from the great apes has been found near the bank of a dry riverbed in Ethiopia's arid badlands.
The skull, with its apelike heavy brow, jutting jaw and small brain case, is apparently that of a large male who lived three million years ago.


Cheek vs. Chic: Aspirin Design
SUFFERING esthetic aches and pains from too much high-flown design?
The Aspirin Design Conference is here to help.
Where there once were formal boundaries dividing graphic and industrial designers, architects and fine artists, there is now a distinct blur as people plunge or tiptoe into each other's territories.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Finicky Ficus
Q.
Recently I bought two seven-foot-tall ficus trees.
They began dropping leaves almost immediately, and one is now nearly dead.
Why? -- Herbert Martin Lynn, New York.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  MAYOR AND LABOR AGREE ON SEVERANCE Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the municipal labor unions announced that they had reached agreement on a package of severance offers that the Mayor hopes will cut 7,600 jobs from New York City's payroll without widespread layoffs.
A1.
FRIENDS IDENTIFY 6 DEAD COMPANIONS For nearly 10 months, the bodies of six Chinese men who drowned as they tried to swim ashore from the ill-fated Golden Venture have lain unidentified.
But what has been a mystery to the authorities has been known all along to other passengers of the Golden Venture.
Many said they were simply never asked.
A1.


Review/Theater; Another Chorus in the Ballad of John and Yoko
Although John Lennon's name is never mentioned in Yoko Ono's musical, "New York Rock," the show is really the latest chapter in Ms.
Ono's continuing eulogy of her relationship with the slain rock star.
In this version of the myth of the perfect couple separated by tragedy, an emotionally wounded but still idealistic pair named Jill and Bill (Lynnette Perry and Pat McRoberts) are the stand-ins for the Lennons.
Their giddiest love song, "Yes, I'm Your Angel," is in fact the same whimsical echo of "Makin' Whoopee" (decorated with tra-la-las) that Ms.
Ono first cooed to Lennon on the couple's 1980 album, "Double Fantasy." Moments after the song is finished, Bill is shot to death while taking an evening stroll with his true love.


Sports of The Times; Cowboys' 'Three-peat' Triangle
THIRTY years ago Jerry Jones wrecked Barry Switzer's car.
Yesterday, the Dallas Cowboys' owner finally made it up to him.
Only 24 hours after Jimmy Johnson cleaned out his office, Barry Switzer moved in as the Cowboys' new coach.
More proof that Jerry Jones sure knows how to hurt a guy in a Cowboy triangle that goes back to when the three were at the University of Arkansas three decades ago -- Jones and Johnson as guards and road-trip roommates, Switzer as a young assistant coach.


Koor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Justices, at Hearing on New York Case, Raise Pointed Questions Over Church-State Linkage
The Supreme Court's fault lines on questions of church and state were on full display today as the Justices heard arguments on the constitutionality of a New York public school district that was created to serve the secular needs of a deeply religious community.
Routinely during arguments, the Justices toss hypothetical questions at the lawyers before them as a way of exploring the dimensions of a case.
But while the Justices offered several imaginary scenarios today, none were as complex or exotic as the history and existence of the Kiryas Joel Village School District in Orange County, N.Y., whose fate will be determined by the Court's ruling.
The New York Legislature set up the district, which consists of one building, in 1989 to enable a village inhabited entirely by Hasidic Jews of the Satmar sect to give its handicapped children a publicly financed education in a cloistered setting that reflects the village as a whole.


Review/Cabaret; Song and Singer Join In an Emotional Fusion
That perfect moment when a singer and song find a transcendent emotional fusion is a goal devoutly pursued but hardly ever realized in cabaret performance.
Nancy LaMott, a singer who has grown steadily in depth and musicality over the last decade, achieved it on Tuesday evening in the Chestnut Room of Tavern on the Green with her medley of two Stephen Sondheim ballads from "Merrily We Roll Along."
Ms.
LaMott and her musical director and pianist, Christopher Marlowe, have joined the songs "Good Thing Going" and "Not a Day Goes By" into a seamless chronicle of a relationship that goes bad because one partner loses the will to continue.
Singing the medley, Ms.
LaMott lives the emotional changes of the story as she describes them, building from a quiet hopefulness into agonized frustration and ending in grief.


Fears and Fanfare for the New Store in Town; A Giant Retailer Opens Its Doors, and Main Street Will Never Be the Same
When Mike Nero was 13, one of his favorite things to do was to drive his father's 1953 Ford station wagon around an uncleared field off Fairview Avenue in this rural Hudson Valley town.
That was 30 years ago.
This morning at 7, Mr.
Nero was behind the wheel again in the same spot.
This time he was driving a golf cart and ferrying customers across a sprawling parking lot to the front door of the town's new Wal-Mart, which celebrated its grand opening today with a heavy dose of hype and fanfare.


New Talks Set By Israelis And P.L.O.
The P.L.O. agreed early today to resume negotiations with Israel on Palestinian self-rule in the occupied Gaza Strip and Jericho, ending an impasse that began last month after the massacre of Muslim worshipers in Hebron.
The two sides removed the main obstacle by agreeing on security for Hebron after two days of negotiations here, senior Palestinian and Israeli officials said.


A Mother's Thanks
To the Editor:
I wanted to thank each of the many men and women who gave me a seat on the subway on my way to and from work when I was pregnant during the heat wave last summer, and when I commuted carrying my infant daughter to the day-care center at my workplace during the snowstorms last winter.
There has not been one day when someone has not given me a seat.
I especially wanted to thank the man who gave me not only his seat, but his newspaper too, and pointed out the most interesting articles.
Like many women, I had no choice but to work during this time, and all of you made the commute possible.
ROSE AUSLANDER  Brooklyn, March 21, 1994


The Intricate Steps to Cutting the United Way Pie
Raising money for United Way takes ingenuity. So does spending it.
To encourage giving by employees of the Chemical Banking Corporation, Walter V. Shipley, Chemical's chairman and chief executive, took 12 senior officials on a tour of a family shelter in Manhattan run by the American Red Cross with financial help from United Way.


Albany Plan Would Create A New Prison
Seeking to reduce prison overcrowding, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders agreed today on a $44.6 million plan to convert a state psychiatric hospital into a 750-bed prison, the first time the correctional system will have been expanded since 1991.
The agreement today, which resolves the key issue of criminal-justice spending in this year's budget debate, also calls for creating about 450 treatment beds for addicted defendants and parolees facing prison sentences.
It would convert a 750-bed medium security prison into a treatment center for alcoholic and drug-addicted prisoners, many low-level drug dealers.


Bye-Bye to Balboni
STEVE BALBONI, a member of the 1985 World Series champion Kansas City Royals, was among six players cut yesterday by the team.
Balboni, at 37 years old trying to make it back to the major leagues after spending almost all of the last three seasons in the minors, said he was retiring from baseball. (AP)


B.C. Hires Milbury
Tired of contract negotiations and his other duties as a National Hockey League assistant general manager, MIKE MILBURY left the Boston Bruins yesterday to become hockey coach at Boston College.
Milbury, 41, went from star defenseman to coach of a Stanley Cup finalist to assistant general manager during a 20-year career with the Bruins. (AP)


From Northrop, a One-Day-Only Grumman Offer
Borrowing a page from hard-sell television merchandising, Kent Kresa, chief executive of the Northrop Corporation, offered a $70 million premium for the Grumman Corporation today, but only if it agreed to a merger offer within 24 hours.
After a deadline of 3 P.M.
Eastern time Thursday, Northrop, a weapons company based here, would pay a lesser price for Grumman, which agreed earlier this month in secret negotiations to merge with the Martin Marietta Corporation.


Essay; LOST at Sea
LOST is a loser, but the U.S. is getting ready to sign on.
The Law of the Sea Treaty -- its apt acronym LOST -- has been ratified by 60 nations and will come into force on Nov. 16 of this year.
The big question -- one that will affect global business on and under the sea for generations -- is whether the U.S. will subscribe to what third-world leaders and international bureaucrats hail as "the constitution of the oceans."


Nameless Dead In Sea Tragedy Now Identified
For nearly 10 months, the bodies of six Chinese men who drowned as they tried to swim ashore from the ill-fated Golden Venture have lain unidentified -- first in refrigerated vaults at the New York City Medical Examiner's office and now in a collective grave in New Jersey.
But what has been a mystery to government authorities for the last 10 months has been known all along to other passengers of the Golden Venture, which was smuggling a cargo of illegal immigrants from China.
Many said they had simply never been asked to identify their compatriots.


STOCKS PLUMMET IN HEAVY TRADING
In a day that tested the faith of the remaining optimists on Wall Street, the stock market fell in heavy trading yesterday for the fifth consecutive session, with some traders predicting worse days ahead.
The Dow Jones industrial average twice dropped more than 50 points in a few minutes, and high-speed computerized trading sold tens of millions of shares in as little time.


Let New York Put Welfare Recipients to Work for a Fair Wage
To the Editor:
The debate generated by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposal to put able-bodied New York City home relief recipients to work has elicited extreme and unproductive positions.
The Mayor and Deputy Mayor John Dyson clearly wish to exploit the surplus workers on home relief to help in deficit reduction.
They would do this in ways that weaken unions and provide a source of extremely cheap and pliable labor for the city.


No Headline
"I missed football. I don't know how this happened. I thought my time had passed." -- BARRY SWITZER, new coach of the Dallas Cowboys.  [ B11:2. ]


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Alltel Corp., Little Rock, Ark., is selling $250 million of 7.25 percent notes due in 2004 at 99.508 to yield 7.32 percent through Stephens Inc.
The noncallable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Greyhound Financial Corp., Phoenix, a unit of GFC Financial Corp., is selling $100 million of 7.25 percent notes due in 2001 at 99.244 to yield 7.39 percent through Citicorp.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-2 by Moody's, BBB by S.&amp; P. and A- by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Russians Agree to Review $5 Export Tax on Oil
Secretary of Commerce Ronald H. Brown said today that he had won a commitment from the Russian Government to review a controversial $5-a-barrel export tax on oil that is threatening major American oil investments in this country.
At a news conference held at the end of the first leg of his weeklong trade mission to Russia, Mr.
Brown said he had told Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin that such protectionist taxes and tariffs created a "chilling effect" on investments in Russia, at a time many countries are competing to attract foreign capital.
Travels With Business
Mr.
Brown, who came here with 28 leading American business executives, said his visit had been successful in prying several major business deals free from the Russian bueaucracy, but evidently he and the oil executives who accompanied him were unable to get any promises of relief on the export tax.


Books of The Times; Keeping the Child, But Not the Father
Delusions of Grandma  By Carrie Fisher  260 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.
The story that Carrie Fisher tells in her third and latest novel, "Delusions of Grandma" (following "Postcards From the Edge" and "Surrender the Pink"), may not be the most original or suspenseful ever imagined.
Cora Sharpe, successful Hollywood screenwriter, has had difficulty sustaining romantic relations.
Cora falls in love again, with Ray Beaudrilleaux, an entertainment lawyer.
The romance fails, partly because Cora is a snob about lawyers, partly because she doesn't want to marry and partly because she won't give up what she calls her "short list of long-term friends." So Cora ends up mateless but also pregnant.


Defying Gravity in Manhattan


Brown &amp; Williamson Dropping Campbell
The Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation unexpectedly announced yesterday that it would end its relationship with Campbell Mithun Esty in New York after eight and a half years.
B.&amp; W. said it would move the creative and media services assignments on its cigarette brands, with more than $40 million in billings, to two of its other shops, Grey Advertising in New York and Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago.
Grey, which already handles international assignments for B.&amp; W.'s sibling company, British-American Tobacco, will now handle creative and media services for the company's largest brand, Kool, with billings estimated at $20 million to $22 million.
Grey will also provide creative services for the Kent, Barclay, Viceroy and Pall Mall brands in international markets, while also picking up the media placement duties for the Kool and Capri brands and G.P.C.
Approved generic brand in the United States.


Chamber Music Society To Present Premieres
The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center is to present the world premieres of works by Ned Rorem, Joan Tower and Wynton Marsalis, and the New York premieres of pieces by Andre Previn, John Harbison and Osvaldo Golijov as part of its 26th season.
In its main subscription series at Alice Tully Hall, the society is presenting 12 programs, each performed twice (on Tuesday and Sunday evenings) from Oct. 21 through May 9.
There are also several nonsubscription performances, including a celebration of the 25th anniversary of the society's first concert, and the opening of Alice Tully Hall, on Sept. 12.


Bracknell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Market Place; A Baby Bell's spinoff will give investors a mixed portfolio.
BREAKING up is hard to do, even if the split, as in this case, is an amicable one.
With only a few days left before the Pacific Telesis Corporation officially splits in two, spinning its cellular telephone and paging business into a separate and publicly traded company, analysts are trying to assess the market value of parent and progeny.


April 24 Runoff Set In Salvador Election
With the vote count slowed by charges of fraud, El Salvador's election authorities confirmed today that a runoff election will be needed to decide the presidential race and that one is scheduled for April 24.
Preliminary results from last week's election indicates that the right-wing Arena party, led by Armando Calderon Sol, won 49 percent of the votes.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
DAVID WESTERN, the Nairobi-based director of strategic planning for the Wildlife Conservation Society, was named director of the Kenya Wildlife Service yesterday.
He was appointed by PRESIDENT DANIEL ARAP MOI of Kenya.
Dr.
Western will succeed the embattled Dr.
RICHARD LEAKEY, who resigned last week to protest Government policies and what he termed a "campaign of vilification." Dr.
Leakey, whose parents were the anthropologists Louis and Mary Leakey, had been praised for reforming the service and protecting wildlife but criticized for failing to take the concerns of rural Kenyans into consideration.


F&amp;M Distributors Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Doc's Fine But He's Not Sure About Mets
Dwight Gooden is pleased with his pitching.
He is pleased with his health.
And he was pleased with his performance today in his final start of the spring.
He just doesn't appear to be all that pleased with the Mets.


Mets Trade Young and Plug a Hole
The Mets purged themselves of the most vivid symbol of their woeful 1993 campaign today when they traded pitcher Anthony Young to the Chicago Cubs for Jose Vizcaino, who instantly supplanted the rookie Fernando Vina as New York's everyday shortstop and leadoff hitter.
The Cubs also received Ottis Smith, a minor league pitcher, in the deal.
The Mets had held repeated conversations this spring with other clubs concerning a possible Young deal to no avail, most notably with the California Angels for first baseman J. T. Snow.
They seemed resigned to using Young as their No. 4 starter before the Cubs called this afternoon.


Bareheaded, Women Slain In Algiers
Suspected Muslim fundamentalists in Algeria killed two unveiled young women today, enforcing a vow made last month that women who do not cover their heads in public would join a list of targets that includes the army, the police, secularist intellectuals, artists, journalists and foreigners.
The women -- Raziqa Meloudjemi, 18, and Naima Kar Ali, 19, both students -- were killed at a bus station in Algiers by gunmen on a motorbike.


3 Utility Employees Hurt in Blast at a Power Substation
A transformer at a power station here exploded this morning in a deafening fireball, critically injuring three workers, knocking out electricity to nearly 30,000 customers in Hudson County for more than an hour and disrupting traffic and train service.
It was not immediately clear why the transformer, which carries 230,000 volts of electricity, malfunctioned and then blew up about 10 A.M., but officials said workers at the Penhorn substation, in a marshy area near the border of Jersey City and North Bergen, appeared to have been following proper procedures.


Gillen to Providence
PETE GILLEN switched coaching jobs yesterday, leaving Xavier of Ohio for Providence.
Gillen replaced RICK BARNES, who left Providence last week to take the job at Clemson.
Gillen, 46, coached at Xavier since the 1985-86 season. (AP)


Love Triangle Ends In Death for 2 Active In Church in Queens
In a love triangle that turned deadly, a Queens woman shot the church choir director she shared a house with and a member of the choir with whom he was also romantically involved, the police said yesterday.
The woman and her two victims prayed together at St.
Catherine of Siena Roman Catholic Church in St.
Albans during Holy Week services early Tuesday evening, shortly before the incident.


Chief of Staff To Salinas Resigns Post
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's powerful chief of staff resigned his post suddenly tonight.
The official, Jose Cordoba Montoya, was an architect of Mr.
Salinas's economic reform policies and a political mentor to the governing party's new presidential candidate.
The departure of Mr.
Cordoba, was seen by some Government officials as part of the price that Mr.
Salinas will be made to pay for forcing his choice of Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon as the new candidate of the Institutional Revolutionary Party over the objections of many party leaders.


Magadan Goes on D.L.
Florida Marlins third baseman DAVE MAGADAN was placed on the 15-day disabled list yesterday with a sprained right wrist, which means he will miss the first seven games of the season.
Magadan is eligible to return for Florida's second home game April 13.
The infielder hurt his wrist last week and aggravated the injury swinging a bat Monday. (AP)


Into Banking's Future, Electronically
The flat brick building is barely visible from the wide highway behind the White Castle hamburger shop, but it is the busiest of more than 350 bank branches operated by Huntington Bancshares, which is based here.
Last year, this branch booked as many home equity loans as 100 typical branches, and as many new credit cards as 220 branches.
Yet any customers who managed to find the entrance to this former discount store would not see tellers, but a locked door.
It does business entirely by telephone, and it can approve a loan in 10 minutes, even in the middle of the night.


So You Think PAC's Buy Politicians
To the Editor:
Your vilification of political action committees in "PAC Pollution" (editorial, March 21) misses the greater and more insidious (because more hidden) source of money: large individual contributions ($200 or more).
Our research demonstrates that those who make large contributions to Congressional candidates (and whose economic and legislative interests line up neatly with PAC inter- ests) provide more money to these candidates than PAC's do.
In 1992, large individual contributions made up 35 percent of the total given to Congressional candidates, compared with 29 percent from PAC's.
When you include Presidential candidates, large individual contributions ($375 million) dwarf PAC contributions ($180 million) more than two to one.
When you add large contributions from business-connected individuals to PAC contributions from the same businesses, the grand total dwarfs the next largest source of money -- labor -- by six to one. (If you compare PAC totals only, the ratio is three to one.)
PAC and large individual contributions together maximize the political clout of business.
Our research shows this is true for every category of business, particularly health care, insurance and finance.
Furthermore, the profiles of members of Congress who eschew PAC contributions, taking only contributions from individuals, show economically interested funding patterns virtually identical to those who accept PAC contributions.
Framing the campaign finance reform issue as a PAC issue encourages narrowly drawn "reforms," which are more likely to freeze into place the worst aspects of the system or even make it worse.
If we want real reform, which addresses the conflicts of interest and disenfranchising inequalities inherent in private financing of public elections, we need to understand the source of that financing.
And that source is not just PAC's.
ELLEN S. MILLER  Executive Director Center for Responsive Politics Washington, March 22, 1994


Police Receive Report on a Missing Woman
The Nassau County police said today that they had received information indicating that Michelina Abbatiello, a missing 23-year-old Long Island woman, may have taken a taxi to La Guardia Airport last Friday, the day she was last seen by her family and her fiance.
The police issued a statement saying that a taxi driver had come forward to say that he had picked up a woman who looked like Miss Abbatiello at the Roosevelt Field Shopping Center in Westbury about 5 P.M. on Friday.
He told investigators that he took the woman to the airport and dropped her off at the Air Canada Terminal.


Parking Rules
Alternate-side rules are suspended today through Sunday because of religious holidays.


Hoechst Celanese Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Deadly Blaze Tied to Trash Atop a Stove
Firefighters said yesterday that they believe trash atop a gas stove started the fire in a SoHo apartment building that killed two firefighters and critically burned a third.
While a final report on the cause of the blaze on Monday will not be released until the end of the week, fire marshals rummaging through a burned-out apartment on the first floor of the building at 62 Watts Street have concluded that the fire began in a room doubling as a kitchen and living room, and they found discarded containers, as well as plastic and paper bags, on top of the stove, said Chief Marshal John Stickevers.


Review/Dance; Showing Off A Rare Gift: Scampering
The years have burnished and honed Nina Watt's gifts as a performer.
Miss Watt, a senior member of the Limon Dance Company, is now a stunning example of how a fine dancer can grow into an artist.
And the fruits of that process were much in evidence in a program presented by the company at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night, when Miss Watt performed "Hollow Lady," a solo created for her by Alwin Nikolais.
Remarkably selfless for so self-aware a performer, Miss Watt is the rare dancer who can get away with scampering onstage.
She did that, lightly and deftly, in a show-stopping solo in Limon's "There Is a Time," which closed the program.
In a way, Nikolais's solo is the opposite side of that coin.
The Nikolais work bears down on Miss Watt like a scientist studying some minute form of life through a microscope.


Store Manager Slain in Brooklyn
Marvin Wildstein fell to his knees and pleaded for his life, but he was shot to death anyway, witnesses said, in what appeared to be a robbery yesterday morning at the plumbing supply store he managed in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Wildstein, 63, a former Marine who served in the Korean War, managed the Boerum Hill branch of the Eigen Supply Company, which is based in Manhattan.
The company's executive vice president, Steven Edelson, said the Brooklyn branch catered largely to contractors with store accounts and usually had very little cash on hand.


Rahat Journal; After Hebron, a Fierce Test of Bedouin Loyalty
In this Bedouin town on the northern lip of the Negev, not an Israeli flag was to be seen today.
Palestinian flags were hoisted at an annual Arab protest event called Land Day, and so were green Islamic banners.
But when a man tried to wave an Israeli flag, someone yanked it down and a scuffle broke out.


Dance Notes
Group Downsizes Itself
The Fund for Dance, founded in 1973 as the National Corporate Fund for Dance, will close its doors today.
One of the earliest and most visible organizations raising money for dance, the fund sought corporate donations for general operating expenses rather than the more popular and exotic sponsorship of new works.
It ran the first consolidated drive for a performing art in the United States, raising $6.5 million in the last two decades from more than 250 corporations to help 40 member dance com panies and choreographers.


Williams Is Willing; Yanks Are Cautious
Bernie Williams thinks that he will be healthy enough to play center field when the Yankees open their season on Monday against the Texas Rangers, but his opinion is probably irrelevant.
The officials who make that decision will wait at least another day and possibly longer before announcing anything definitive.
After performing agility drills, shagging fly balls, stretching and throwing today, Williams reported no pain in the strained left groin that has hampered him and continued describing his right shoulder as feeling terrific.
Williams will travel with the Yankees to West Palm Beach, Fla., to oppose the Expos in their Florida spring finale Thursday and said he expected to play a few innings.


Slowly, the New York Region Begins Regaining Its Jobs
For the first time since New York City and its suburbs sank into recession in 1989, they showed a slight gain in employment last year, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday.
The pace of growth is expected to accelerate this year, the agency said, but gains will be smaller than elsewhere in the nation.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  U.S.
DROPS EXPORT CONTROLS  The Clinton Administration scrapped virtually all export controls on shipments of telecommunications equipment and computers to China, Russia and most other former Communist countries.
A1


PARENT &amp; CHILD
WHEN Dr.
Richard M. Lerner was 15, he told his parents that he couldn't live with them anymore.
He moved in with his grandmother, who lived in another neighborhood in Brooklyn.
The adults stayed in close touch.
Three weeks later, tired of the long commute to his high school and in need of fresh clothes, he returned home.
"It was the break I needed at the time," said Dr.
Lerner, now an expert on adolescent development and the director of the Institute for Children, Youth and Families at Michigan State University in East Lansing.


Store Manager Slain in Brooklyn
Marvin Wildstein fell to his knees and pleaded for his life, but he was shot to death anyway, witnesses said, in what appeared to be a robbery yesterday morning at the plumbing supply store he managed in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Wildstein, 63, a former Marine who served in the Korean War, managed the Boerum Hill branch of the Eigen Supply Company, which is based in Manhattan.
The company's executive vice president, Steven Edelson, said the Brooklyn branch catered largely to contractors with store accounts and usually had very little cash on hand.


Review/Dance; Sampling the Wares Of 7 Choreographers
The seven new dances offered on Tuesday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater were usually inventive; nothing in them looked either awkward or inappropriate.
But there were few revelations in this presentation, part of Dance Theater Workshop's Fresh Tracks series of choreographic showcase programs.
The best pieces dealt with strange, even inexplicable, emotional states, which nevertheless were made to seem of the utmost importance.
To the recorded accompaniment of the Funeral Music from Wagner's "Gotterdammerung," RoseAnne Spradlin beckoned heroically, had fits of trembling and broke into determined gallops in her "Primiryat'." A spokeswoman for the theater said the title derived from a Russian word referring to a reconciliation of opposing forces.
Whatever specific forces may have been attacking the woman Ms.
Spradlin portrayed, the wild movements that depicted her struggle with them commanded attention because of their obvious urgency.


Those Streaking Knicks Are Most Thankful for Ample Depth
If not for their depth and resiliency, the Knicks' extraordinary winning streak would be over.
The loss of John Starks could have been devastating.
And the absence of Charles Smith would have hurt lesser teams.


Rights Groups Fault China's List of Those Held as Dissidents
Human rights groups today challenged the accuracy of data on political prisoners provided recently to Secretary of State Warren Christopher by China.
Rights workers said the document was inaccurate and less detailed than a list given to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d in 1991.
A detailed accounting of political prisoners is one of the central requirements of an executive order issued last year by President Clinton linking renewal of China's trade privileges to "overall, significant progress" on human rights.


Isles Turn Powerless In Race for Playoffs
The Islanders may well miss the playoffs this year, and if they do, they might have only themselves and a late-season scoring drought to blame for it.
The play of center Pierre Turgeon kept the Islanders' playoff pursuit alive for almost a month.
The team's leading scorer, with 33 goals and 51 assists for 84 points, Turgeon came back in February after missing 12 games because of a cheekbone injury.
He scored at least one goal or had at least one assist in 13 straight games, from Feb. 21 through March 17.





I.R.A. Plans 72-Hour Cease-Fire in Ulster
In its first conciliatory response to the British-Irish peace initiative of last December, the Irish Republican Army said tonight that it would observe a 72-hour cease-fire in Northern Ireland next week.
The I.R.A., in a statement issued by a republican newspaper in Belfast, said its cease-fire, to begin at midnight Tuesday, was a "unilateral initiative" with "no conditions attached."


Campaign by Police in Los Angeles Changes After Slaying of Japanese
One rests atop Vergee's Palace de Bella Donna, beyond a sister billboard for "Naked Gun 33 1/3," near Crenshaw and 48th -- a few blocks west of the vortex of the 1992 riots.
It shows a man, masked and menacing, aiming his gun at an unsuspecting woman as she approaches her car.
"Warning: This Can Be You Without the Police Dept.," the billboard, placed by the Los Angeles Police Protective League, declares.


Homing In on Agenda While Clinton's Away
As President Clinton vacations in California this week, the aides he left behind are taking advantage of the lull created by his absence and the Congressional recess to try to rescue a domestic agenda knocked askew by Whitewater.
The public relations assault, led by David R. Gergen, the counselor to the President, and Thomas F. McLarty 3d, the White House chief of staff, questions the relevance of the Clintons' real estate and commodities investments in the 1970's and promotes the legislative accomplishments that officials say have been obscured.


CHRONICLE
In New York, DAVE and REBA WHITE WILLIAMS are going to the rescue of a beloved landmark: the carousel in Central Park, which is in serious need of an overhaul.
Mr.
Williams, the chairman of Alliance Capital Management, a $115 billion investment concern, and his wife, the special projects director for the company and a doctoral candidate in art history at the City University Graduate Center, read an article in The New York Observer about the deterioration of the 86-year-old carousel two weeks ago and decided to donate the $132,000 needed to repair it and its failing ball-bearings.


Dylex Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN EXPRESS CO., New York, said it would repurchase up to four million shares of its common stock in the open market.
MONTGOMERY WARD &amp; CO., , Chicago, the privately held retailer, completed the purchase of houseware retailer Lechmere Corp., for $100 million.


Critic's Notebook; Old Jazz Is Out, New Jazz Is Older
The presentation of a new work by the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis tomorrow at Alice Tully Hall will undoubtedly reignite the critical furor that has hounded the Lincoln Center jazz program for the last few years.
Mr.
Marsalis is the program's artistic director, and critics, commentators and some older musicians of an experimental bent (though not audiences, which flock to the concerts) have been complaining with great regularity about the preponderance of Mr.
Marsalis's own band members in the program's shows, and the yearly presentation of a new commission to himself.
Neither he nor the administrators of Jazz at Lincoln Center have seen fit to do anything diplomatic about the complaints.
Instead of backing down, they just keep on going.
So Mr.
Marsalis will present "Blood on the Fields," a two-and-a-half-hour meditation on slavery played by a big band that includes his entire septet (it will be repeated on Saturday).
And the furor, undoubtedly, will continue.


Arden Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Mrs. Clinton's Windfall: the Brokers' View
Commodity traders and brokers here, shown reports of Hillary Rodham Clinton's dazzling trading profits from October 1978 to the next July, said it might well be impossible to determine whether they were based on luck or skill.
To know for sure, they said, investigators would have to see records detailing when and how each order was received and executed.
But the Commodity Futures Trading Commission requires that such records be maintained for only five years, and it is widely assumed that Refco Inc., the company through which Mrs.
Clinton traded, has long since disposed of hers.


Critic's Notebook; Music That Looks for the Best in an Ugly World
Bringing Easter up to date is a problem for Christians.
Indeed, when liturgies and music are especially beautiful, they can subvert as well as inspire.
We float on the ancient language of the Book of Common Prayer, roll with its cadences, divorce our sensibilities from hard meanings therein.
It is no surprise that modern churchmen have devised plainer, uglier words for their services and substituted guitars for organs.
Lovely music at one point may have brought God closer.
Now it seems almost in the way.
Take for example the distant beauty of Orlandus Lassus, which comes to us in a new recording of the "St. Matthew Passion" (Harmonia Mundi).
For the disembodied purity of its sentiments and the amazing grace of its polyphonic writing, we wonder at this music.
Yet precisely four centuries have passed since Lassus's death, and in that time so deeply have our listening habits changed, and indeed our thoughts about what music is and does, that something is lost to us, perhaps irrevocably.


Carillon Importers Selects Margeotes
Carillon Importers Ltd. said yesterday that it had selected Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss in New York to handle the account of several brands for which it recently acquired distribution rights, including Stolichnaya vodka.
The brands, with billings estimated at $10 million, had been handled by Calet, Hirsch &amp; Ferrell, now Ferrell Calvillo, in New York, for more than a decade.
The selection of Margeotes was the most recent development in a stunning shift in liquor loyalties.
Carillon, which had built the Swedish vodka brand Absolut into a best seller, lost its distribution rights to Absolut to the Seagram Company.
Then, on the rebound, Carillon was assigned the American distribution rights to Stolichnaya from Monsieur Henri Wines.


Avis Chief Sees Big Challenge at UAL
Joseph V. Vittoria, the chairman and chief executive of Avis Inc., had never accepted an offer to serve on another company's board.
"I've got plenty to do at my own company," he said.
But when he was asked to join the board of the parent of United Airlines if and when the employees succeed in their effort to gain majority control of the carrier this summer, he said yes.
"If it works, it has the opportunity to change significantly the way we structure things in the United Sates," he said yesterday during a brief interview in Manhattan.


Albany Deal on Prison
Seeking to reduce prison crowding, Governor Cuomo and legislative leaders in Albany agreed on a $44 million plan to convert a state psychiatric hospital to a 750-bed prison, the first expansion for the correctional system since 1991.
The agreement, which resolves the key issue of criminal-justice spending this year, would also create 500 beds for defendants and parolees who are addicts.
Article, page B1


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6-6.5
6-6.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.45
3.83
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.46
3.48
2.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.77
3.82
2.99
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.76
6.71
6.02
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.09
7.06
6.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.95
7.88
7.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.26
6.15
6.04
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


INSIDE
Arab-Israeli Talks to Resume
The P.L.O. agreed to resume negotiations with Israel on Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza, Palestinian officials said.
Page A5.
Women Attacked in Algeria
Suspected Muslim militants in Algeria killed two unveiled young women, enforcing a vow to attack women who do not cover their heads.
Page A3.
Full-Time Working Poor
Census data shows an increase in people who work full-time but cannot lift a family out of poverty.
Page A18.
Rise in Jobs for New York
For the first time since the recession began, the New York region showed a slight rise in jobs last year.
Page B6.


Culprit in South Africa
Accounts differ drastically as to who or what was responsible for Monday's gun battle in downtown Johannesburg that claimed at least 31 lives.
But there can be little doubt that the larger responsibility for this tragedy lies with Mangosuthu Buthelezi, the Zulu chief and the only South African leader of consequence who refuses to participate in the national vote set for late April.
In refusing, Mr.
Buthelezi has made common cause with white racists who oppose what South Africa's men and women of good will have sought for generations: the scrapping of apartheid, non-racial elections and social and economic justice though common citizenship in a democratic state.


Journal; You'll Always Walk Alone
To any American who was around in the 1950's, Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d were as corny as Kansas in August -- and as much a part of the decade's oppressively sunny landscape as Ike, backyard barbecues and Ozzie and Harriet.
This begins to explain why a jaded, middle-aged crowd was so startled to find itself weeping at the opening night of "Carousel" last week.
The audience came to Lincoln Center for a sentimental nostalgia trip back to that idyllic America of cockeyed optimism.
Instead they found themselves abandoned in a dark alley.


Giuliani and City Union Chiefs Agree on a Plan to Reduce Jobs
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the municipal labor unions announced last night that they had reached an agreement on a package of severance offers that the Mayor hopes will cut 7,600 jobs from New York City's payroll without having to resort to layoffs.
The agreement was Mr.
Giuliani's first success in his effort to reduce the size of the city's work force of 216,000 as he seeks to close a $2.3 billion gap in the next fiscal year's budget.


Fighting Flares Again in Liberia


CHRONICLE
Add another entry to the list of museum galleries, wings, sculpture gardens and roof gardens that bear the names of B. GERALD and IRIS CANTOR.
Mr. and Mrs.
Cantor, who are bicoastal benefactors -- they live in New York, Beverly Hills and Bel Air, Calif., and have made large donations to museums on both coasts -- have announced that they will give $10 million to Stanford University.


Sports of the Times; Iron Mike Stumbles as a Scholar
THE news that Mike Tyson, inmate No. 922335 in the Indiana Youth Center in Plainfield, Ind., flunked his high school equivalency test indicates that the former heavyweight champion may still be having difficulties with English and math, as well as his attitude.
The reason he's in prison to begin with, according to an Indianapolis jury two years ago and a three-judge appellate court a few months ago, is that he didn't understand the word "No." So he remains in jail on a six-year conviction of rape, with the chance to be sprung next spring.


Economic Scene; A challenge to the complacent on the U.S. unemployment rate.
AS you have heard before and will no doubt hear again, it's America's turn to gloat.
The economy is perking along nicely, while unemployment is at its lowest point in three years and still heading south.
Japan and Europe, by contrast, remain mired in recession.
Lest the celebration get out of hand, however, remember this: no economist able to pass a sobriety test is predicting that unemployment will fall much below 6 percent.
That leaves the economy several million jobs shy of the 3 to 4 percent jobless rate that was considered normal during the 1950's and 1960's.
The mainstream economics profession, it seems, is not only becoming reconciled to a 1980's-style world of poorly paying jobs for the unskilled, but has grown complacent to European-style rates of unemployment.


Arkansas Coach Sees Beyond Final Four
The Arkansas Razorbacks will leave for Charlotte, N.C., Thursday morning and plunge into the hoopla of the Final Four weekend.
The newspapers here are filled with Hawg mania.
Razorback T-shirts are being sold everywhere.
Speculation is growing over the starting lineup and, more important, whether Nolan Richardson, the 52-year-old Arkansas head coach, will finally win his first national championship.


State Banks Win on Sale Of Annuities
The Court of Appeals, New York State's highest court, yesterday gave state-chartered banks the right to sell annuities, a form of investment usually sold by insurance companies.
About half the banks in New York, including Chemical and Key Bank of New York, have state charters.
The ruling does not apply to nationally chartered banks like Citibank and Chase Manhattan.


Sharp Increase Along the Borders of Poverty
The Census Bureau provided new evidence today of one of the most troubling trends in the American economy: a sharp increase in the percentage of people who work full-time but cannot by themselves lift a family out of poverty.
The percentage of all Americans working full time but earning less than the poverty level for a family of four, about $13,000 a year, has risen by 50 percent in the past 13 years, the study said.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Blues Stop Panthers  Curtis Joseph stopped 27 shots as the St.
Louis Blues beat the Florida Panthers, 3-1, last night in Miami.
Joseph's play in goal and third-period goals by Brendan Shanahan and Peter Stastny were the difference as the Blues slowed the expansion Panthers' drive to the playoffs.
Florida, currently eighth in the Eastern Conference, remained 4 points ahead of Philadelphia and 5 in front of the Islanders in the battle for the final playoff spot. (AP) Whalers 3, Blackhawks 2: Andrew Cassels scored with 1 minute 15 seconds left in overtime as host Hartford broke a four-game losing streak with a victory over Chicago. (AP)


Georgia Rejects Clemency for a Killer Who Says He Is Retarded
The Georgia Board of Pardons and Paroles today rejected a last-minute clemency petition from William Henry Hance, a former marine who is appealing his death sentence on the ground that he is mentally retarded and that one of the jurors in his trial now says she never voted for a death sentence.
A second juror recently swore in an affidavit that the sentencing deliberations were marked by misinformation, misconduct and racial bias.


All It Takes Is a Computer and Photos
"HEY, you never know," as the advertisements say, what fantasy scenes the New York State Lottery is cooking up to lure the public into buying chances for its multimillion-dollar Lotto jackpot.
Its latest advertising campaign, which began in January on buses, telephone kiosks and billboards throughout the state, is meant to show what can happen to an ordinary New Yorker with "a dollar and a dream." Stately mansions, luxurious gardens and ornate interiors -- this could be your life right here in New York, the advertisements imply.
But could it really?


Tillman Is Wooed By the Bears, Too
Giants running back LEWIS TILLMAN, an unrestricted free agent, received a two-year $1.9 million offer from the Chicago Bears late last night.
Tillman also has a multiyear $2.5 million offer from the New England Patriots but has not yet decided which team he will play for next season.


Warner's Daly-Semel Team Is Now Official
Robert A. Daly, the chairman and chief executive at Warner Brothers, said with a laugh today: "What makes Warner Brothers work isn't just Bob Daly. No way. It's Terry Semel, too."
Today, Mr.
Daly, who is 57, formalized his business relationship with his second-in-command, Terry S. Semel, 51, by announcing that the two men would share responsibilities and serve as chairmen and co-chief executives at Warner Brothers.
They will report jointly to Gerald M. Levin, chairman of Time Warner Inc.


Latvians Resent Russian Troops Who Stay On
To the Editor:
"Russia and Latvians Agree on Troop Pullout Deadline" (news article, March 17) illuminates how vestiges of Soviet imperialism influence ethnic relations in the region.
Latvia accepts ethnic pluralism for its historical minorities and is struggling to find an equitable solution to the status of hundreds of thousands of economic settlers brought in under Soviet rule.


Italy's Neo-Fascists: Have They Shed Their Past?
Half a century after the Fascists' defeat in World War II, the political descendants of Benito Mussolini are set to govern again as part of the right-wing alliance that sprinted to victory this week in Italy's national elections.
The challenge that faces them now is to convince skeptical Italians and other Europeans that they have shed the anti-Semitism and xenophobia of their forebears, allies during the war with the Nazis, to become what they insist is a modern party of the European right.


Health Plans Promise Choice But Decisions May Be Hard
As the White House and Congress debate the best way to reshape the nation's health system, an overriding concern remains: What effect will the final plan have on the quality of care Americans receive?
Many Americans -- at least those with money or health insurance -- now get the best medical care in the world, and under the proposals now before Congress many more would get access to basic and preventive care.
But at the same time, hospitals and health maintenance organizations are coming under pressure to reduce costs, and even some Clinton Administration officials worry that quality could decline without safeguards.


Democracy Postponed
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico had to wage a tough struggle to impose his choice of Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon as his party's new presidential candidate.
For Americans as for Mexicans, Mr.
Salinas's victory is a mixed blessing.
On the positive side, Mr.
Zedillo, an economist, is committed to the economic reform policies of the past six years.
The "dinosaurs" of the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, opposed his candidacy and wanted to return to the patronage and protectionism of the past.


Villanova Turns It Around to Claim Title
Villanova buried itself under an avalanche of bad 3-point shots in the first half of the National Invitation Tournament championship game last night.
Then, in the second half, the Wildcats used them to dig their way out.
After hitting only 2 of 12 3-point attempts in the first half, Villanova (20-12) hit 8 of 12 in the second half to rally and beat Vanderbilt, 80-73, to take the N.I.T. championship before 14,434 at Madison Square Garden.
With the title, Villanova became 1 of 15 teams to win both an N.I.T. and a National Collegiate Athletic Association championship.


Caution by Mutual Fund Investors
With interest rates rising and stock prices dropping, mutual fund investors are showing more caution than they have in years, fund managers said yesterday.
But stock funds still appear to be taking in more cash from new investments than they are losing to redemptions.
"The real story is bond funds," a spokesman for the Vanguard Group, John Worth, said.
He said Vanguard bond funds saw significant redemptions, with the largest in funds that invest in junk bonds and in mortgage-backed securities.


U.S. Pressure Ends Canada Supply Pact
Under pressure from the Clinton Administration, Bell Canada of Montreal and Northern Telecom Ltd. of Toronto are ending a 55-year preferred-supplier relationship that has given Northern Telecom a first crack at millions of dollars of Canadian telecommunications equipment business every year.
The decision, which resolves a nettlesome bilateral trade dispute, is likely to open export opportunities for the United States in Canada's $2 billion-a-year telecommunications market, and, according to Northern Telecom's competitors, lower prices here for equipment and services.


Capriati an Alternate
The four-woman team, plus a blockbuster alternate, that will represent the United States in Federation Cup competition July 18-24 in Frankfurt was announced yesterday in Hilton Head, S.C., by MARTY RIESSEN, who also captains the women's Olympic squad.
JENNIFER CAPRIATI, absent from the WTA Tour since August, celebrated her 18th birthday Tuesday by confirming that she will be a Federation Cup alternate this summer.
The 15th-ranked Capriati, who played on the 1990 championship team, is expected to return to competition this summer after taking time off to complete high school and rekindle her affection for her sport.


Classical Music in Review
Carmina Quartet  Walter Reade Theater
The Zurich-based Carmina Quartet -- Matthias Enderle and Susanne Frank (violinists), Wendy Champney (violist) and Stephan Goerner (cellist) -- has forged a strong European reputation in the last several years and won international attention for recordings on the Denon label.
In a program of Haydn, Mendelssohn and Ravel on Monday night, the quartet certainly showed considerable technical prowess: its sound was at once alluringly smooth and interpretively vigorous.


Trenton Committee Snags On School Spending Plans
A committee that was supposed to remove politics from the thorny issue of public school financing in New Jersey, deciding once and for all how the state should achieve educational and financial equity in its schools, today demonstrated just how difficult that proposition may be.
The Educational Funding Review Commission, which was appointed by the Legislature more than a year ago, became bogged down at what was supposed to be its final meeting, deadlocking on all but the most basic issues and rejecting all three financing proposals under review.


Council Nominates 4 Areas For Economic Development
The City Council yesterday proposed establishing four new economic development zones in New York City, which would provide the distressed areas with state help to stimulate business and employment.
The official decision on which areas will be designated as development zones will be up to the state's Department of Economic Development, which is to make the selections by June.


Latvians Resent Russian Troops Who Stay On; Death by Privatization
To the Editor:
Specialists are bewildered by the more than 30 percent rise in the Russian death rate and the 25 percent fall in the birth rate since the collapse of the Soviet Union two years ago.


Bridge
Those who argue about heredity and environment would find food for thought in some bridge families.
Norman Kay has long been one of America's best players, and earlier this month came within an imp of winning the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship in Cincinnati and adding to his large collection of titles.
He is a retired stockbroker, and his daughter, Robin, is an options trader at the American Exchange in Manhattan.
She is the president of the Greater New York Bridge Association, and at 29 the youngest in 40 years.
She has her father's skill in card play, as the diagramed deal demonstrates.
It helped her score a convincing victory last month in a Regional Stratified Pairs event in Cromwell, Conn.
Her partner was Aaron Silverstein, also an Amex options trader, and they had back-to-back 70 percent games.


Move Over, Wright Brothers


Schnitzer Steel Ind.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


It's a Tumultuous Time Within a Pro Football Business Subsidiary
National Football League Properties, whose licensed goods generated $2.5 billion in retail sales last year and whose three decades of success have taught other sports leagues how to market themselves, is in turmoil from a management upheaval and an internal audit of its business practices.
In addition, according to a league official who insisted on anonymity, a Federal investigation is under way of a person claiming to have had dealings with "at least one" former N.F.L.
Properties employee.
No other details of the investigation were available.


A Neighborhood Mourns Its Heroes


Morrison Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 5


Anheuser-Busch Backs Network
Anheuser-Busch, the owner of the St.
Louis Cardinals, became a sponsor of The Baseball Network yesterday, giving the fledgling joint venture among Major League Baseball, NBC and ABC a much-needed jolt of financial support.
The two-year sponsorship, with an option to renew, is worth about $20 million.
The St.
Louis-based brewer will get multiple commercial units in TBN's All-Star Game and 12 regular-season, wild-card playoff, League Championship Series and World Series games.


France Tries New Tack on Jobs for Young
Hoping to forestall new student protests called for Thursday, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur today revoked a Government decree allowing young people to be paid less than the minimum wage and proposed instead that employers be rewarded for hiring those under 25.
Thrown onto the defensive by three weeks of demonstrations, Mr.
Balladur suspended the decree for one week on Monday to allow time for a new policy to be drawn up.
But students have continued protests in many cities to press their demand for the decree's formal withdrawal.


Is It the Message or the Messengers?
Patrick Ewing is trading his brand-name basketball shoes for guns.
The shoes retail for about $90.
It is a deal you will not find on the Home Shopping Network.
"They're big in Europe," he said. "And Japan, real big in Japan."


Leslie Fay Weighs Closing of Plants
The Leslie Fay Companies said yesterday that it was considering closing its manufacturing operations in Wilkes-Barre and the Wyoming Valley region of Pennsylvania, a move that would result in layoffs of roughly 1,200 workers.
Although the proposal was made in the first bargaining session with the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, the announcement was noteworthy because it portended further economic hardship for that region, where the bulk of the company's United States production operations are based.
Proposal to Retrain Workers
The company, which is based in New York, also proposed that the union use the money it received from Leslie Fay for "liquidated damages" to retrain those workers who stand to lose their jobs.
The company said it had paid $1.5 million to the union in the last two years to compensate for jobs lost in the United States because of reassignments to foreign contractors.


At Utah Hospital, Innovative Way to Track Medical Quality
In the mid-1980's, the medical staff at LDS Hospital here took on a seemingly contradictory mission: to cut medical costs and also raise the quality of care.
For help, they turned to a sophisticated computer system they had just installed.
By tradition, improving quality had usually meant offering more services, employing expensive new drugs or buying costly diagnostic machines.
But the LDS doctors tried a different approach.
They simply began re-examining their existing treatments.


Calendar: From Design To Gardens and Glass
Design and Architecture  Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6321.
A three-part lecture series on business and design starts Monday at 6:30 P.M. with a talk on technology and domestic life.
The other topics are product design and marketing (April 11) and office architecture and design (April 18).
Fee, for the series, $70; members, $50; single lecture, $25; members, $18.


Zulu Leader Is More Isolated But Is Still Proudly Resistant
Here in the capital of the last homeland, the last holdout flipped intently through a file.
Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi, Chief Minister of the Zulu state of KwaZulu, had agreed to an interview, and the questions in the air today seemed momentous: threats of civil war, carnage in downtown Johannesburg, allegations of his lieutenants' complicity in police hit squads, his boycott of the election, and the very existence of his domain, which is scheduled to disappear with all the other apartheid homelands when a new constitution takes effect on April 27.


Arkansas Secrets
There will be plenty of time to explore whether laws were violated when the Clintons went into the land development business with James and Susan McDougal or when George Stephanopoulos and other White House aides meddled with Treasury Department investigations.
For the moment, it is enough to ponder the fluid morality implicit in the Clintons' tax returns and the records of Mrs.
Clinton's short but profitable career as a commodities trader.
The inescapable conclusion is that this couple, early and late, suffered from a thematic insensitivity to the normal rules of conflict of interest.
At every turn of their financial life, the then-Governor and First Lady of Arkansas were receiving financial favors from individuals who had something to gain from having friends in high places.


Texas Looks to Oklahoma: Cowboys Hire Switzer
Swiftly, decisively, and not so unexpectedly, the Dallas Cowboys' owner, Jerry Jones, filled his day-old head-coaching vacancy yesterday by naming Barry Switzer to replace Jimmy Johnson.
Switzer, the former University of Oklahoma coach, becomes only the third head coach in Cowboy history, following Tom Landry, who coached the first 29 Dallas seasons, and Johnson, who coached the last 5.
He takes over less than 24 hours after Johnson stepped down because of a personality clash with Jones that had damaged their working relationship beyond repair.


Small Nuclear Arsenal Is Defense Dept. Goal
To the Editor:
"Mr. Perry's Backward Nuclear Policy" (editorial, March 24) asserts that in a "recent" nuclear posture review I overturned a decision by former Secretary of Defense Les Aspin and established a new role for nuclear weapons: deterring and responding to chemical and biological threats.
The nuclear posture review, actually begun by Mr.
Aspin, is still in its early days.
I have not been briefed on interim progress, much less drawn policy conclusions from it or made recommendations to the President.


U.S. ENDING CURBS ON HIGH-TECH GEAR TO COLD WAR FOES
The Clinton Administration announced today that it was scrapping virtually all export controls imposed during the cold war on shipments of telecommunications equipment and computers to China, and to Russia and most other former Soviet bloc countries.
The move is expected to open a market worth roughly $150 billion over the next decade.
Administration officials said that stringent export controls would be kept on complex supercomputers and material that could be used in making nuclear bombs and other weapons of mass destruction.


Devils Lose Daneyko In the Heat of a Battle
How the Devils will adjust to the loss of Ken Daneyko in their battle with the Rangers for the top spot in the National Hockey League is the question now hanging over New Jersey.
Daneyko, a rugged and dependable 29-year-old defenseman, separated his left shoulder Tuesday night during a 5-2 victory over Montreal.
He said after treatment today that he was lucky nothing was fractured and that he would be ready for the playoffs.


Nintendo Licensing Deal Rocks Acclaim's Stock
Shares of Acclaim Entertainment Inc., a leading publisher of video games, tumbled today after Nintendo of America said it had reached an exclusive licensing agreement with WMS Industries, an arcade game company that has created some of Acclaim's most popular games.
But several analysts said that the stock market, driven by short-sellers, had badly misread the news and that Acclaim, based in Oyster Bay, L.I., was still well positioned in the $7 billion video game business.


OFFSTAGE WITH: Cynthia Phelps; Playing the Tune and Calling It, Too
CYNTHIA PHELPS does not exactly blend into the background: not at the New York Philharmonic, where, as principal violist, she sits up front, just to the maestro's right, in Kurt Masur's preferred seating, her alert bearing and model posture enhancing the effect of her striking looks.
And certainly not in a little restaurant on Broadway, opposite Lincoln Center, with a photographer hovering to catch her every changing expression.
But being the center of attention suits her well, however odd that may seem for someone who plays an often overlooked instrument, which generally finds itself in the middle of the orchestra and the middle of the harmony.


Classical Music in Review
Camellia Johnson  Soprano 92d Street Y
Camellia Johnson, Young Concert Artists' newest debutante at the 92d Street Y, came to her voice recital on Tuesday night less an untried talent than an already emerging international artist, one with considerable opera and concert experience behind her.
This program of Handel, Debussy, Strauss, Menotti, Liszt and Ricky Ian Gordon clearly explained why Ms.
Johnson has been where she has been.
It also made it clear that she is going a lot further.


CNN Charged Over Tapes Of Noriega
The Cable News Network was charged with contempt of court today on the recommendation of a special Federal prosecutor, who said the network had "knowingly and willfully" disobeyed a judge's order in 1990 not to broadcast tape recordings of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega while the former Panamanian dictator was in jail here.
The criminal complaint was announced nearly three and a half years after Judge William M. Hoeveler first learned that CNN had obtained tape recordings of General Noriega's telephone conversations.
The calls involved his lawyers and members of their staffs, former military subordinates, his family and his mistress and her family.
The network eventually surrendered the tapes, but only after broadcasting excerpts for two days and fighting all the way to the Supreme Court.


That Marbled Look
AT some time in your life, you've probably walked on Fritztile.
It may be under your feet this very moment.
It is showing up everywhere, from Los Angeles Metro stations to Pennsylvania Station in New York.
Used in thousands of public spots since 1961, it is increasingly being used in homes.
Its cachet is that it looks like marble but is actually marble chips embedded in polyester resin.
It's much cheaper, at $8 to $10 a square foot, than the marble it seeks to imitate, and it can be laid down like vinyl.


Assassination Mysteries
A special prosecutor arrived here today as evidence mounted of possible wider involvement in the assassination last week of the governing party's presidential candidate.
Two men have been charged, and at least two others remain under suspicion.
But the more details that emerged, the more murky became any possible motive in the killing of the candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, who had been expected to become Mexico's next President.


Woolworth Examining Its Books
In an announcement jarringly at odds with a corporate image straight out of a Norman Rockwell painting, the Woolworth Corporation said yesterday that its board had appointed a special committee of outside directors to investigate allegations of accounting irregularities.
The discount and specialty retailer also said it would restate its interim financial results for the fiscal year that ended on Jan. 29, and might have to restate interim financial results for the previous fiscal year as well.
It said it did not expect the adjustments to change full-year results for those years, but did not explain further.


Reality Bites: McEnroe Brings His Art to a Senior Circuit 'With Kick'
Once upon a time, John McEnroe said senior tennis circuits were a silly waste of time and energy by a bunch of pensioners who would be better off doing something useful, like joining a rock band, captaining a Davis Cup team or opening an eponymous art gallery.
He said he couldn't see himself patronizing the "hit and giggle" format because, for him, tennis had never been a laughing matter.
But since the first two options didn't work out and the third, collecting art, requires a steady influx of capital and hasn't quite sated his competitive appetite, McEnroe has reversed his low opinion of the senior service and agreed to anchor the brand-new Advanta Tour.


Steven R. Kohn; Professor, 51
Dr.
Steven R. Kohn, professor of dermatology at the Yale University School of Medicine, died on March 23 at his home in Guilford, Conn.
He was 51.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said a brother, Donald.


Spectrum Chairman Resigns After 9 Days
In the latest in a series of seizures at Spectrum Information Technologies Inc., Edward W. Maskaly resigned yesterday as chairman and chief executive after only nine days on the job.
On Monday, the Manhasset, L.I., company said that two of its three outside directors had resigned, and that five of its inside directors had been asked to step down from the board.
In a prepared statement, Mr.
Maskaly said that in his short tenure as chief executive, he had become "convinced that the media will not cease its attacks on Spectrum as long as anyone who has served on the board or been associated with Peter Caserta is running the company." Mr.
Caserta, the president of Spectrum, said on March 23 that he would take a leave of absence to clear his name after Federal agents arrested four employees of a company owned by his son-in-law, and charged an employee of Spectrum with wire and mail fraud.


Ira Murchison, 61, Former Track Star
Ira Murchison, a sprinter who set world records on two continents and won a gold medal in the 1956 Olympic Games, died on Monday at Ingalls Hospital in Harvey, Ill., outside his native Chicago.
He was 61.
The cause of death was bone cancer, said his wife, Verinda.


Florida Weighs Fees for Its Computer Data: Some See Profits; Others, Too High a Price
Prodded by local governments, which see potential for profit in the growing body of public records being stored electronically, Florida lawmakers are considering a proposal to charge fees based on volume for government records stored on computers.
The information is available free in paper form.
The proposal, which both backers and opponents say would be the first such statewide measure in the nation, is being fought by trade and public interest groups on the ground that it would inhibit the ability of citizens to monitor government activities.


Around the World in TriBeCa
TRIBECA may be the hippest triangle south of Canal Street, but it's sorely missing the kinds of arty shops that make SoHo, north of Canal, a jammed weekend spot.
Stepping into this void is Sara Penn/Knobkerry, an emporium that sells ethnic and brightly colored textiles, furniture, jewelry and clothing.
Sara Penn, who opened her loftlike TriBeCa store in December, has been selling objects from Africa, Asia and the Americas since the 1960's, when she started in the East Village.
"I moved to SoHo in the 70's, stayed until the 80's and am now here," she said.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Sent Jeff Richardson and Jose Munoz, infielders, and Chris Howard, pitcher, to Pawtucket of the International League.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Optioned Rod Correia, infielder, and Steve Hosey, outfielder, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Sent Jorge Favregas, catcher, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.


10 Are Killed In French Sub On Exercises
Ten sailors died today in an accident aboard a French nuclear-propelled submarine that was taking part in naval exercises in the Mediterranean off Toulon, the Defense Ministry announced.
A ministry spokesman said that the Emeraude, a 2,400-ton Rubis-class attack submarine, did not carry nuclear missiles and that its 48-megawatt nuclear reactor was not damaged in the accident, which occurred when a burst pipe released high pressure steam into a turbine compartment.


Mother in Child Death Case Lost Custody Twice
Sherain Bryant, who was charged Tuesday with murdering her 4-year-old daughter Shayne, twice lost custody of her children to New York City child protection authorities because she abused cocaine, individuals familiar with court and child welfare records said yesterday.
Three of her five children, including Shayne, were exposed to cocaine in the womb, they said.


Mark IV Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Placing Heaven on Earth for the World of 'Carousel'
Two years ago, Nicholas Hytner and Bob Crowley, an English director and an Irish set designer, flew to the United States and toured the Maine seacoast in a rented car.
They spent four or five days visiting the region's ocean-front villages, taking in the prim white churches, the trim lawns, the beaches and the sea and listening, not incidentally, to "Carousel" on the tape deck.
The Rodgers and Hammerstein musical, which takes place in the late 19th century, is set in this landscape, of course, and out of this trip came the rudiments of Mr.
Crowley's design for the production of "Carousel," which began life to great acclaim at the Royal National Theater in London in December 1992.


Depositors to Withdraw Money in Retaliation for Natwest Bank's Transfer of Jobs
Venting frustration over another exodus of jobs from Long Island, several local government officials and real-estate developers said yesterday that they would withdraw money from National Westminster Bank to protest a transfer of some back office operations to Pennsylvania.
"It's time we stop mincing words to businesses that seek to use Long Island residents as their cash cow," said Thomas Gulotta, the Nassau County Executive.
"In part, what we are doing is symbolic. But it's an important message that we hope will be interpreted in a positive fashion. We want to lend our support to those businesses who are willing to remain here on Long Island." First Such Boycott
The action, which one expert said may be the first time major depositors have threatened a bank boycott over a loss of jobs, is not expected to halt NatWest's move.


Rates Move Higher for a Second Day
Interest rates moved higher yesterday for the second straight session on investor fears of fast economic expansion and Federal Reserve monetary policy, as well as on end-of-quarter window-dressing by fund managers.
And while bond prices, which move in the opposite direction of interest rates, did not deteriorate as badly yesterday as they did on Tuesday, trading was choppy and caused the yield on the 30-year bond to reverse its field a number of times.


Vivra Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Nets Rise A Rung In the East
The Nets' 9-6 record for March hardly compares with the 14-0 mark of the rival Knicks.
Still, by achieving a 111-101 victory over the Miami Heat at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight, the Nets made it eight straight at home and moved half a game ahead of the Heat in the Eastern Conference playoff race.
"This time of year, when you play back to back, you're going to get some struggling games -- and this was a struggling game," said Chuck Daly, who was back in his head coach's chair after sitting out the first game of his pro career, with an intestinal flu in Tuesday night's loss in Atlanta.
"This was the type of win we have to grind out."


Yanks Say No to Gay Games
The Yankees have denied Gay Games IV organizers the use of Yankee Stadium for their closing ceremonies on June 25, citing concerns about thousands of athletes marching on the field.
John Lawn, the Yankees' vice president for operations, said permission was not granted because the Catholic High Schools Athletic Association baseball championship game is scheduled to be played the previous day, with June 25 as the rain date.


J. Hobart Warner; Dean, 85
J.
Hobart Warner, a dean and faculty member of the Wooster School in Danbury, Conn., for 44 years, died Monday at the Genesee Hospital in Rochester.
Mr.
Warner, who had moved to Rochester last year, was 85.
Mr. Warner had a heart attack while driving, said a daughter, Judith Edwards.


Wendell Niles; Radio and TV Announcer, 89
Wendell Niles, a West Coast radio and television announcer for 30 years who also appeared in films, died on Monday at his home in Toluca Lake, Calif.
He was 89.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Wendell Jr.


Big Picture Studies
To the Editor:
Re "Academic Disciplines Increasingly Entwine, Recasting Scholarship" (Education page, March 23):


Classical Music in Review
Kurt Ollmann  Baritone Weill Recital Hall
Kurt Ollmann's recital on Tuesday night made for a bewildering prospectus on paper: songs of Ives, Poulenc, Jacques Leguerney, Richard Rodgers, Aaron Copland and a clutch of contemporary American composers.
What brought these disparate 20th-century materials together was Mr.
Ollmann's clear, eloquent baritone, negotiating every stylistic turn with the utmost grace.
Few other singers could sing Ives's "Autumn," Poulenc's "Chansons Villageoises" and Rodgers's "Way Out West (on West End Avenue)" with equal conviction.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The White House scrapped virtually all export controls on shipments of telecommunications gear and computers to China, as well as to Russia and most other former Soviet bloc nations, to take advantage of a potentially enormous market.  [ Page A1. ]
Russia will review an export tax of $5 a barrel on oil that is threatening major American oil investments there, Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown said in Moscow.  [ D5. ]


U.S. to Press North Korea Over A-Sites
The United States has decided to press for a United Nations resolution demanding that North Korea open up its nuclear sites to international monitors despite objections from China, American officials said today.
But following deliberations at the United Nations this evening, American officials said that China was continuing to voice strong opposition to a Security Council resolution warning North Korea to comply or face possible economic sanctions.


Pepsi-Cola to Stamp Dates For Freshness on Soda Cans
For decades, marketers have managed to convince American consumers that they had problems they never knew were problems -- halitosis, body odor, coffee nerves, dishpan hands, even bad breath in dogs -- and then peddle them solutions.
Now the Pepsi-Cola Company seeks to add to that list a most unlikely problem, staleness in sodas.
Beginning tomorrow, Pepsi, the nation's No. 2 soft-drink maker, will sell Diet Pepsi with freshness dates emblazoned on can bottoms, indicating the contents are best if used in 12 to 14 weeks.
Freshness dates will soon follow on all other Pepsi brands, including the flagship Pepsi-Cola.


Patriots Sign Thomas
The Patriots have signed BLAIR THOMAS, an unrestricted free agent.
The Jets' former No. 1 draft pick signed a one-year $550,000 contract with no money up front.


