Washington Talk;Sex Case Shakes Navy, And No One Is a Winner
This is a story with no winners and a lot of losers.
The careers of a junior lieutenant and a decorated four-star admiral appear to have ended abruptly, and rifts within the seemingly monolithic military hierarchy have been exposed.


Memories in Germany and Japan
The Wages of Guilt Memories of War in Germany and Japan By Ian Buruma 330 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.
In theory, the overarching idea behind Ian Buruma's new book is a good one.
With the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II rapidly approaching, it seems an appropriate time to examine the ways in which Germany and Japan have coped with the legacy of that conflict.
The generation that bore firsthand witness to the war is slowly dying, and as it does so, the collective memory of  the war passed on to children becomes increasingly important.
How the past is remembered, after all, affects how people behave in the present, how they think  of themselves and their place in the world.


U.S. Title Is Taken Back From Harding
The United States Figure Skating Association finally got its chance to pronounce judgment on Tonya Harding today, and the verdict was unanimous and harsh.
A five-member disciplinary panel stripped her of the national championship she won on Jan. 8 in Detroit and banned her from the association for life.


Grisly Discovery in Rwanda Leads French to Widen Role
Four hundred sick and frail Tutsi, including scores of people suffering from  grenade, machete and gunshot wounds, were rescued today from marauding Hutu forces by French troops near this town in western Rwanda.
One survivor indicated that the group was the largest remnant of the 10,000 Tutsi who lived in the region before the Rwandan civil war erupted again in April.
Fewer than a thousand survive, he said.


25 People Arrested In a Fireworks Raid
A large cache of fireworks was seized and 25 people were arrested yesterday in Chinatown, in a raid in which the authorities for the first time confiscated  the cars of fireworks buyers.
The raid at 197 Hester Street, conducted by fire marshals and the police, netted 60 cases of fireworks, including "pineapples" with the explosive power of a half-stick of dynamite, and mortars for launching pyrotechnics, said Howard Safir, the New York City fire commissioner.


Kidnappers, Bad. Baby, Good. And Fearless.
Baby Bink, the rosy-cheeked 9-month-old infant who crawls and gurgles his way through "Baby's Day Out," is as indestructible a movie hero as Superman and a lot more adventurous.
During a day spent on the streets of Chicago on his hands  and knees, Bink fearlessly wends his way through traffic, staying so close to the ground that the cars and trucks whiz right over him.
A construction site becomes his playground.
Elevators are carnival rides, and loose boards on ledges 500 feet aloft become slides and seesaws.
But there are many critical maneuvers that "Baby's Day Out" doesn't show.
How is Bink able to crawl from the street into the back seat of a taxi?
Or onto a bus?
At such moments, the camera simply turns away and leaves these impossible transitions to the imagination.
And how is it that through all his grubby adventures, Bink remains indefatigably cheerful, alert and spotlessly clean?


E-Mail Borne by Cable TV Is Coming to Yonkers
Politicians and bureaucrats have forever sought new ways to reach the public.
Now, officials in this Westchester city will have another tool at their disposal: a kind of E-mail provided through the local cable television system.
Officials here will soon be able to send their constituents direct messages,  alerting them about school closings, street repairs, emergency meetings and the  like.
A cable subscriber will be alerted to messages by a red light on the television cable box.


Mark Jackson Acquired by Pacers
Two seasons after the Knicks traded him, Mark Jackson has been traded to one  of New York's chief rivals in the Eastern Conference.
The Indiana Pacers acquired Jackson and the draft rights to Greg Minor from the Los Angeles Clippers yesterday, in exchange for Malik Sealy, Pooh Richardson and the draft rights to Eric Piatkowski.
The deal looked great on paper for the Pacers, who acquired the veteran point guard that they were looking for in Jackson without giving up any of their key players.


Maradona, Argentine Soccer Star, Is Suspended


METRO DIGEST
FORCED CARE SEEN FOR MENTALLY ILL


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;Nintendo turns up the volume in a provocative appeal to its core market: teen-age males.
IF belching and bold tattoos dismay you, if disrespect for authority figures  puzzles you, if loud rock music played by bands like Sweaty Nipples bothers you  and if you don't know how to "hock a loogie" -- or even what it means -- you have made Nintendo of America Inc. very, very happy.
That, gentle reader, is because you are probably not part of the intended audience for a new Nintendo campaign centered on those provocative elements.
The television commercials and print advertisements, by Leo Burnett U.S.A., are intended to attract the core video game consumer, a devoted, even fanatical player who is usually a male teen-ager.


Bulgaria Wins a Man Short While Argentina Doesn't
Bulgaria wanted a victory, needed at least a tie, and played like it.
Argentina was still adjusting to the shock of having its captain suspended and its lineup reshuffled, and played like it.
The result was that a scrambling Bulgarian team, playing a man down for the last 26 minutes of the game, hustled its way into the final berth in the World Cup's second round with a 2-0 victory here tonight.


Before We Applaud France's Mission to Rwanda;From the Ground Up
To the Editor:
Re "Survival Test," your excellent series on the tragic developments in Africa (June 19-21): Africa's problems include legacies of colonialism, unsustainable agriculture, population growth, structural-adjustment programs that hurt the poor, focus on urban areas and low prices paid for commodities.
To further compound the problem there is Africa's "problematic climate" and "sensitive environment" (in the words of Paul Harrison's excellent "Greening of Africa," 1987).


$600 MILLION DEAL TO BUILD TRANS-ANDEAN PIPELINE
Tenneco Inc. and a consortium of Argentine energy companies said yesterday that they would start building a $600 million pipeline next year to transport natural gas to neighboring Chile.
Financing for the 750-mile pipeline would be provided by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, banks and equipment suppliers, Tenneco Gas's chief executive, Steve Chesebro, said.
Mr.
Chesebro said Tenneco had signed a protocol with Overseas Private Investment to provide $200 million in financing and $200 million in insurance for the pipeline project.
Five Argentine energy companies that extract natural gas from the Neuquina Basin in southern Argentina are Tenneco's partners in the project.
The  companies are Y.P.F.
S.A., Astra, Bridas, San Jorge and Pluspetrol.


Executive-Suite Shifts at Continental Grain
Marking the accession of a new generation of leadership, Michel Fribourg, the longtime chairman of the Continental Grain Company, has stepped aside to make room in the executive suite for his second-oldest son, Paul J. Fribourg.
The elder Mr.
Fribourg, who is 80, will become chairman emeritus of the giant agricultural company, which is based in New York.
He will be succeeded as chairman by Donald L. Staheli, who has been president and chief executive officer of Continental Grain since 1988.
The younger Mr.
Fribourg, in turn, will become president and chief operating officer reporting to Mr.
Staheli, who will  retain his position as chief executive.


E.P.A. to Require Cleaner-Burning Gas in Polluted Areas
The Environmental Protection Agency said today that beginning next year it will require that gasoline used in areas with severe air pollution contain more  oxygen to make it burn cleaner, and that at least some of the additive come from renewable sources.
By doing so, the Clinton Administration opened the way for ethanol to play a  significant part in providing a cleaner-burning gasoline for the smoggiest cities.
Ethanol, also known as grain alcohol, is produced from corn and is the only renewable oxygenate that can meet the volumes demanded by the clean gasoline program.


KEMPER SECURITIES FINED BY NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE
The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that it had fined Kemper Securities Inc. $50,000 for what the exchange said were reporting failures.
The  stock exchange said Kemper failed to report promptly to the exchange on at least 58 matters involving employees and regarding customer complaints, arbitrations and dispositions.
Of the matters, 24 were reported more than 6 months late, 13 were reported 3 to 6 months late and 21 were reported as much as 3 months late, the exchange said.
Kemper also failed to establish and maintain adequate reporting systems, the exchange said.
Kemper consented to the penalty and fine without admitting or denying wrongdoing.
Kemper Securities is an affiliate of the Kemper Corporation of Chicago, which recently agreed to merge with Conseco Inc.


Russia Denies It Hid Chemical Arms Data
Senior Russian officials have dismissed charges by the Clinton Administration that Russia is concealing information about the development and testing of chemical weapons.
Last Friday the State Department charged that Russia had broken an agreement  between the two countries to exchange information on their chemical stockpiles.


Judge Leaning to Single Jury in Menendez Retrial
A judge says he is leaning toward having one jury hear the retrial of Lyle and Erik Menendez rather than two juries, as were used in the first trial of the brothers accused of killing their parents.
The judge, Stanley M. Weisberg of Los Angeles Superior Court, said on Wednesday at a court hearing that he was concerned about several matters, including the need to sequester two panels and to keep one jury's decision secret from another jury still in deliberations.


Japan's First Socialist Premier Appoints a Familiar Cabinet
Japan's new Socialist Prime Minister appointed a Cabinet today in which the most important positions went to members of the conservative Liberal Democratic  Party, a signal that the new Government might not make radical departures from past policies.
The naming of the new Cabinet by the Prime Minister, Tomiichi Murayama, helped quell some of the sense of panic that accompanied his election on Wednesday night by an almost unthinkable partnership of Socialists and Liberal Democrats.


Setting Up for a Flashy Night


Don't Wait Until They Get Dangerous
To the Editor:
Re your June 17 news article on the New York State debate over committing the mentally ill involuntarily:


Victory Over the Doubters;Once, Whitman's Budget Plan Was Ridiculed. Now Other Governors Follow Her Lead.
Christine Todd Whitman, the Governor of New Jersey, has an admirer who will never vote for her -- unless she runs for President.
It's George E. Pataki, the Putnam County State Senator and Republican aspirant for governor in New York.
Mr.
Pataki is consulting with Mrs.
Whitman on campaign issues and has all but embraced her program as his own.


The City Council Ducks on Disclosure
When it comes to mundane chores like scrutinizing Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's budget, the New York City Council is notably lethargic.
But the Council showed lots of pep last week as members rushed to block sensible new rules for timely public disclosure of members' campaign finances.
The rules, adopted by the city's Campaign Finance Board in May, were designed to improve the management of the city's voluntary public campaign financing system.
To claim public matching funds for early donations, citywide and Council candidates would have been required to file regular campaign finance reports throughout the four-year election cycle, instead of withholding the data until a monster June 1 filing in the election year.


The Court Adjourns
ABORTION CLINICS -- The Supreme Court rules that a Florida court injunction meant to keep protesters from blocking clinics does not unduly burden speech.
Page A1.


Ferrer Urges HUD to Revise Aid Plan in Bronx's Favor
Making an end run around Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and a powerful Harlem Congressman, Borough President Fernando Ferrer of the Bronx appealed directly to the Clinton Administration yesterday to include more of the Bronx in an "empowerment zone" New York City has proposed as a target area for Federal aid.
Mr.
Ferrer's bid is a direct challenge to Charles B. Rangel of Harlem, the fourth-ranking Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee, who wrote the legislation creating the Federal empowerment-zone program and whose district is  expected to benefit most from the grant it hopes to win.


A Dali Show Stops Short Of the Circus
SALVADOR DALI is one of the most popular artists of the 20th century, so no doubt many people who hear that a Dali show has opened at the Metropolitan Museum will expect nothing less than a full-dress retrospective.
Fortunately, they will be disappointed.
There is no sign here of the Dali of  the last half-century (he died in 1989), when he so assiduously cultivated notoriety and fortune that his erstwhile Surrealist colleague Andre Breton famously rearranged the letters of his name to become Avida Dollars.
Nor is this a show about the Dali whose work, increasingly a recycling of his youthful ideas, became more and more a matter of merchandising.
And neither is it about the aging prankster who was said to have signed thousands of blank sheets of paper, later turned into factory-produced lithographs, that flooded the market and fueled the bitterness surrounding his already plummeting reputation.


Decentralization Advocate
Edward N. Costikyan, the man behind Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposal to dismantle the Board of Education, has been relentlessly advocating for decades that New York City services be decentralized.
Mr.
Costikyan, a prominent Manhattan lawyer and the former New York County Democratic leader, was the chairman of a state-appointed panel that in 1972 recommended a sweeping overhaul of city government.


Gooden Meets With Doctors
Dwight Gooden is scheduled to meet in New York today with the two psychiatrists who are involved in Major League Baseball's drug program.
At the meeting, Dr.
Robert Millman, who represents ownership, and Dr.
Joel Solomon, who represents the Players Association, are expected to recommend to the Mets' pitcher what they believe he should do to deal with the problem that resulted in two failed drug tests and a 60-day suspension.


Accord on Early March for Presidential Primary
The State Legislature has agreed to move New York's Presidential primary from early April to early March, top aides to the Governor and legislative leaders said today.
But in an unusual twist, the primary in 1996 would be held on the first Thursday in March rather than the first Tuesday, defeating some of the purpose of advancing the date.
That is because the first Tuesday in March 1996 is Purim, a Jewish holiday.


Art in Review
'American Realism and Impressionism' 'Drawings, Prints and Photographs' Metropolitan Museum of Art Fifth Avenue at 82d Street Through July 24


Murphy, Career Stalled, Changes His Agent
Eddie Murphy is at a crossroads in his career.
One of the biggest stars of the 1980's, Mr.
Murphy has been plagued in recent years by weak films, declining audiences and the perception among movie-studio executives -- and perhaps moviegoers -- that his comedy style is losing its edge.
Today, in a move that has significant implications in the extremely competitive world of Hollywood's talent agencies, Mr.
Murphy told Creative Artists Agency, the most powerful talent agency in town, that he was planning to join them in an effort to reignite his career.
In doing so, Mr.
Murphy, who is 33, will leave International Creative Management, another powerful agency, which has represented him for years.


Racial Dispute Is Set Off By Dyson With Comment
Deputy Mayor John S. Dyson became embroiled in a racial dispute yesterday after he used the word "watermelon" in discussing a disagreement between the Mayor and the City Comptroller over whether the city should hire a company owned by a black woman to market New York City's bonds.
The remark by Mr.
Dyson, quoted yesterday in The Bond Buyer, the daily financial newspaper, was denounced as offensive or racist by Democratic elected officials in and around City Hall.


Marshall Takes Over at Villanova
JOHN MARSHALL, a 1984 Olympian in the 800 meters, was chosen yesterday to succeed MARTY STERN as head track and field coach at Villanova, his alma mater.
Marshall, a 1985 graduate of Villanova, situated just outside Philadelphia, had  been the top assistant to Stern, who announced his retirement March 8.
Stern was women's coach for a decade, the last four years of which he also coached the men's team.
His teams produced 17 National Collegiate Athletic Association champions, 146 all-Americans and 22 victories at the Penn Relays. (AP)


City of Pittsburgh Digs Deep to Offer Pirates an $8 Million Loan. Will It Be Enough?
Is baseball dying in Pittsburgh?
The Pirates have a mediocre 38-38 record, but those numbers aren't the ones that count these days.
The team is wheezing financially, losing money by the day, and looking far removed from 1990-92 when they were champions of the National League East.


Inside Art
Banking on a Possible Velazquez


Mortgage Rates Rise
Home mortgage rates continued their climb this week, with the average rate on a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage rising to more than 8.5 percent, the Federal Home  Loan Mortgage Corporation said today.
It said rates rose to 8.57 percent, from 8.46 percent the previous week.
Fifteen-year fixed-rate loans rose to an average 8.07 percent this week from 8.00 percent and adjustable-rate mortgages rose to 5.48 percent from 5.41 percent.


GE CAPITAL BUYING HARCOURT'S INSURANCE UNITS
Harcourt General Inc. agreed yesterday to sell its life insurance business for $400 million in cash to the GE Capital Corporation, the General Electric Company's financial subsidiary.
The units to be sold include the Federal Home Life Insurance Company, the PHF Life Insurance Company and the Harvest Life Insurance Company.
The sale will produce a pretax profit for Harcourt of about $12 million, and the proceeds will be used for acquisitions in Harcourt's core businesses.
Harcourt owns Harcourt Brace &amp; Company, a book publisher, and it owns 66 percent of the Nieman Marcus Group, a retailing company.
The businesses to be sold produced $550 million of revenues last year, about 15 percent of Harcourt's total, and nearly 20 percent of Harcourt's $361.6 million  of operating profits.
The sale was announced after Harcourt's stock closed at $35.125, down 75 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Arafat Will Advance Trip, Visiting Gaza Strip Today
Yasir Arafat, the ever-elusive Palestinian leader, changed his mind once more today.
If his advisers are to be taken at their word, Mr.
Arafat pushed up his heralded return to the Gaza Strip by a day, to Friday, for what ordinarily would have been an implausible reason: he did not want to interfere with the Jewish Sabbath.
But then very little here is ordinary these days.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Stocks traded lower here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues  stood at 20,543.41, down 100.52 points, or 0.49 percent.
On Thursday, the index  gained 162.93 points.


A Legend's Expulsion Disappoints U.S. Team
Claudio Reyna, the American midfielder, has a poster of Diego Maradona on the wall of his bedroom at his parents' home in Springfield, N.J.
Reyna's father, Miguel, played professionally in Argentina.
The family has on videotape every game from the 1986 World Cup that the Maradona-led Argentina team won.
Claudio Reyna was not prepared for his hero's expulsion from the World Cup.


Vice Chairman Quits At DDB Needham
John Bernbach, vice chairman of DDB Needham Worldwide, said yesterday that he would leave the agency, effective immediately, and remain on the board of DDB Needham's parent, the Omnicom Group.
"There are some specific intriguing business and professional opportunities that have come to me, and I felt that now is the moment to pursue them," Mr.
Bernbach, 50, said in a statement.
Lou Tripodi, a spokesman for DDB Needham in New York, said Mr.
Bernbach was traveling and could not be reached for comment,  adding that there would be no successor.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 22 about the corporate board memberships of the City University Chancellor, W. Ann Reynolds, compared her expense account incorrectly with that of her predecessor.
The general account of $140,000 from which Dr.
Reynolds's 1993 expenses were paid was actually smaller than the comparable account under her predecessor, which totaled $255,000; her account was not 10 times as large.
The university recently provided documents to The Times demonstrating the error.


Allstate Cuts Its Business In California
The Allstate Insurance Company, the second-largest homeowners insurer in California, said yesterday that it would limit the sale of new policies in the state to its existing customers as part of an effort to reduce its risk of loss  from earthquakes.
Allstate, which lost about $950 million from the Northridge earthquake in January, is the largest of several companies in that state to cut back on new business.
Its new sales rules are effective immediately.
Earlier this month, Farmers Insurance, California's third-largest homeowner insurer, stopped accepting new customers in the state.
Other smaller companies have taken similar steps or stopped accepting applications for older homes.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday, about a letter sent by WLR Foods Inc. to shareholders regarding the takeover attempt by Tyson Foods Inc., misidentified the company that is challenging a Virginia law regulating corporate takeovers.
The challenge has been brought by Tyson, not WLR.


Home Video
With sales surging ("The Return of Jafar," "Mrs. Doubtfire") and bigger movies to come ("Jurassic Park," "Snow White"), home video has few immediate worries about the information superhighway.
In fact, figures released last week  at the Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago indicate that many households are buying third and fourth VCR's to add to the first and second.
To be sure, now flying overhead is a new high-powered communications satellite that can shoot a lot of movies directly onto television screens with no need for a video store.
Casting shadows across the cassette-distribution landscape, satellites have long been touted as alternatives to stores, as well as cable and telephone lines, for home delivery.
This system, part of a $1 billion joint venture by RCA, GM Hughes Electronics and Hubbard Broadcasting, is the first to become operational.


Copter Deaths: Pentagon Finds Human Failure
Controllers aboard an Awacs radar plane failed to warn the pilots of American F-15 jets that two helicopters they were preparing to attack over northern Iraq  in April were friendly, a classified Pentagon report says.
The disclosure that some Awacs controllers knew the Blackhawk helicopters were American at the time other controllers were clearing the jets to attack added a new twist to the mystery of how one of the American military's worst self-inflicted losses unfolded.
Twenty-six people were killed in the mistaken downing of the two helicopters.


Who Knows What Evil Lurks? Guess
The ability to "cloud men's minds," as the Shadow puts it -- to place them in hypnotic trances so that people and even buildings seem to disappear -- is a handy trick to know if you're fighting Mongol warriors in Manhattan.
So is a talent the Shadow is struggling to master, that of hurling a knife through the air telekinetically.
This particular knife has a golden handle shaped like the head of a batlike creature, whose fierce eyes snap open and whose extra-sharp fangs bite its victim.
Early in the film, that knife goes flying into Lamont Cranston, who is not yet a suave, crime-fighting playboy.
In those pre-Shadow days he is a long-haired crime lord called Ying Ko, the Butcher of Lhasa, the meanest American in Tibet.
"The Shadow" is, of course, based on the exceptionally popular radio character, who appeared in 1930 and didn't vanish from the airwaves until 1954.
"Who knows what evil lurks in the hearts of men? The Shadow knows," is one of the most famous phrases in American pop culture, familiar even to people who have no idea who the Shadow was or what he did.


Supreme Court Throws Ount Union's Fine for Contempt
The Supreme Court yesterday threw out a $52 million civil contempt fine against the United Mine Workers of America, ruling that the penalty was so serious that the mine workers should have had the opportunity to defend themselves in a jury trial.
The union characterized the unanimous decision, in a case growing out of a strike against two Virginia coal companies in 1989, as a "tremendous victory for the United Mine Workers of America, working Americans and their unions and the collective bargaining process."


Before We Applaud France's Mission to Rwanda
To the Editor:
President Francois Mitterrand of France has sent his troops to Rwanda for allegedly humanitarian objectives.
Let's withhold our applause: France's role in the region, flush with self-interest, has been insidious.


Deputy Mayor's Remark Draws Racial Fire


Truce Collapses In Yemen Fighting
Another truce in Yemen's two-month civil war collapsed today when Government  soldiers reportedly battled secessionist southern fighters around Aden while rebel warplanes struck an oil field in the north.
Even as the cease-fire broke down, Russia announced it had mediated a new truce, the eighth cease-fire since the war erupted May 4.


Ban on Sale of Assault Arms Is Upheld
A Superior Court judge today upheld Connecticut's law banning the sale of assault weapons.
The two other states with assault-weapon bans, New Jersey and California, have also had their laws upheld against challenges by gun owners and manufacturers.
But their state constitutions do not include the right to bear arms, while Connecticut's does.


The Perils of Info-Democracy
The country may be moving in the direction of a purer democracy than anything the ancient Greeks envisioned.
It promises to be a fiasco.


G.E. to Buy 7 Satellites
The General Electric Company signed a definitive agreement yesterday to buy the satellite communications network of the GTE Corporation.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


U.S. CASE SETTLED FOR MORE THAN $10 MILLION
A unit of Pfizer Inc. will pay the Federal Government more than $10.75 million to settle claims that it made false statements to get Federal approval for a heart valve with potentially fatal flaws, the Government said yesterday.
Shiley Inc., and its parent, Pfizer, a diversified pharmaceuticals and hospital  products maker based in New York, will initially pay $10.75 million.
They will also pay the costs that Federal agencies, including the Department of Health and Human Services, would otherwise pay in connection with the replacement of certain valves, the Justice Department said.
Shiley officials could not immediately be reached for comment.
A message left at Pfizer was not returned.


30 Drown as Haitian Police Fire on Refugees
A police launch fired on a 60-foot boat carrying Haitian refugees early Wednesday, causing a panic in which at least 30 refugees drowned, two foreign journalists said today.
The journalists, Edward J. Barnes of Time magazine and Simon Dring of the BBC, who arrived at the scene Wednesday afternoon, said witnesses had told them  that most of the victims were women and children.


Bail Denied In Slaying Of 2 Children
A father charged with slaying his two children while they were on a weekend visit to his home pleaded not guilty today in New Jersey Superior Court here.
Judge Sybil Moses ordered the father, Avi Kostner, 50, of Teaneck, held without bail.
She denied bail because, she said, John J. Fahy, the Bergen County prosecutor, is considering seeking the death penalty if Mr.
Kostner is convicted.


Before We Applaud France's Mission to Rwanda;Renewal in Nigeria
To the Editor:
Re "Survival Test: Can Africa Rebound?" (front page, June 19-21): Objective observers of events in Nigeria agree that the present administration has restored normalcy and put in place a process that will lay a sound foundation for enduring democratic renewal.
The election of delegates to the constitutional conference, concluded in all parts of the country in an atmosphere of peace, has received overwhelming endorsement from Nigerians.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AZTAR CORP., Phoenix, a casino hotels company, was selected by Evansville, Ind., to operate the only riverboat gaming facility planned for the Evansville market.


SmithKline Shingles Drug
SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. said today that it had won United States approval to sell Famvir, a new medication for the treatment of shingles, setting the stage for a battle with the market leader, Wellcome P.L.C.'s Zovirax.
The Food and Drug Administration clearance of Famvir came six months ahead of most expectations and is expected to increase the pressure on Zovirax, which has dominated herpes treatment for more than a decade.


Woman Convicted of Plot to Kill Rich Parents
A teen-ager was found guilty on Wednesday of plotting to kill her millionaire father and stepmother to obtain her inheritance, and jurors today began considering whether she deserved the death penalty.
Prosecutors say the 19-year-old defendant, Kristi Koslow, had her boyfriend and another youth carry out the knifing of her parents at their home in March 1992.
Her stepmother, Caren Koslow, a 40-year-old oil heiress, was killed; the father, Jack Koslow, survived the slashing of his throat.


Ready to Spend $1 Million To Stop Clinton on Health
Ross Perot has offered the Republican Party at least one million dollars to produce a nationally televised program to critique President Clinton's health care plan, Republican officials said today.
The officials said they were close to an agreement with Mr.
Perot, though they have not officially accepted his offer.
The program would be one hour or longer in prime time and its content would probably be determined by the Republicans but Mr.
Perot might appear in it.


Ship Terminal Owner Files for Bankruptcy
New Haven Terminal Inc., the owner of shipping terminals in Bridgeport and New Haven, has filed for bankruptcy protection from creditors.
The company filed on Wednesday for protection under Chapter 11 of the United  States Bankruptcy Code.


After Second Test, Maradona Is Out of World Cup
Diego Maradona, the Argentine superstar with a history of fabled play on the  soccer field and drug use off it, was abruptly removed from World Cup play today because he had tested positive for five variants of ephedrine, a stimulant banned by soccer's international governing body.
The decision was announced at a news conference here six hours before Argentina played Bulgaria at the Cotton Bowl, losing 2-0.
Maradona's appearance  tonight would have been a record 22d World Cup appearance for the 33-year-old Maradona, the team captain.
He almost single-handedly led his country to a World Cup championship in 1986 and sparked the team again four years later when Argentina reached the tournament's final game, losing to West Germany.


Bond Sales Upheld As Borrowing Tactic
New York State's practice of borrowing through public-authority bond sales, often called "back-door borrowing" was unanimously upheld today by the state's highest court.
In a 6-to-0 ruling, the Court of Appeals said complaints about the practice belonged in the political, not the judicial, arena.


Play or Coach? MacTavish's Choice
The Rangers are offering CRAIG MacTAVISH a hefty raise to stay with the Stanley Cup champions and pass up a chance to coach in the National Hockey League.
MacTavish, 35, has been offered the coaching job with the Edmonton Oilers, for whom he played before being traded to the Rangers in March.
GLEN SATHER would reportedly give up his coaching duties in Edmonton to concentrate on being general manager.


U.S., Having Won Changes, Is Set to Sign Law of the Sea
After two decades of on-again-off-again negotiations, the Administration announced today that it would sign the Law of the Sea treaty, which Republican Administrations have condemned as hostile to free enterprise.
In announcing the decision, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said the Administration had negotiated broad changes that make the treaty friendlier to business.


Soccer's Study In Contrasts
Diego Maradona scored his first goal in Argentina's opening game of the 1994  World Cup, and he kept running until his face nearly pressed into a television camera behind the net, his jaw clenched in celebratory defiance.
His look was predatory, like a shark poking his snout into a diver's cage.
Soccer's most riveting and difficult superstar was back.
Or so it seemed.
The critics who once said he was overweight, over the hill, would soon retreat into  fawning obeisance as Maradona attacked with renewed ferociousness.


The Two Powers Behind a CBS Merger


Dollar Touches a New Low Against the Yen in Tokyo
The dollar slid below 98 Japanese yen in trading in Tokyo early today despite efforts by Japan's central bank to prop it up.
The dollar touched a new record low of 97.73 yen , then rebounded to 98.52 yen in early afternoon trading.
Earlier in New York yesterday, it settled at 98.49 yen, down from 98.80 yen on Wednesday.


Miscellany
Greenstone Roberts Advertising, Melville, L.I., said its subsidiary, Greenstone Roberts Advertising/ Florida, had formed a strategic alliance with Key Promotion and Marketing Group, Miami.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: CBS and QVC Announce Their Marriage;Merger Accord Proves Popular On Wall Street
CBS may have lost some luster since its days as the "Tiffany network," and stock in Barry Diller's QVC Inc. may have skidded in the wake of its failed Paramount takeover bid, but all that was forgotten yesterday.
Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of CBS, and Mr.
Diller, QVC's chairman, confirmed that they had reached a tentative agreement to merge the two companies.


As if Fireworks Weren't Enough
Here is a sampling of events in the New York metropolitan region this Fourth  of July weekend:
NEW YORK CITY


Diner's Journal
Plus Ca Change


U.S. Judges Can Delay Executions to Allow Federal Reviews, Justices Rule
In a rare victory for death row inmates, the Supreme Court ruled today that Federal district judges can postpone executions of convicts who have exhausted their state appeals to give them a chance to get lawyers for a Federal review of their cases.
The 5-to-4 ruling in a Texas case is likely to postpone the executions of scores of death row inmates throughout the nation.
It could also be a turning point in the Court's analysis of the documents used by defendants to seek Federal review, habeas corpus petitions.


Corrections
The Advertising column in Business Day yesterday, about the new executive vice president and executive director at the New York office of TBWA Advertising Inc., misstated the given name of an executive vice president at that office.
He is Peter Lubalin, not Richard.


Death Penalty Debate: A Question of Fairness
Although advertised as a debate over the large proposition that "the death penalty is a good thing," tonight's "Firing Line" set-to concentrates instead on the narrower question of whether it is a fair thing as currently applied.
That is the accomplishment of Bryan A. Stevenson and Stephen B. Bright, members of the anti-death-penalty team, who spend much of their off-camera time fighting capital punishment in the Southern states that account for 90 percent of America's executions.
In Georgia, Mr.
Stevenson says, "If the defendant is black and the victim is white, you are 22 times more likely to get  the death penalty." Mr.
Bright speaks of legal lynchings.


BILL COMPELS CARE FOR MENTALLY ILL
Legislative leaders have agreed on measures expanding the government's authority to compel mentally ill people into treatment against their will, and allowing the police to temporarily hospitalize a person on drugs who may hurt himself or others.
The sponsors say the bills came after years of frustration for mental health  professionals and for ordinary citizens, who often feel helpless or threatened when they encounter mentally ill people in streets and subways.
The bills represent a cautious step toward making involuntary commitments easier, though they were drafted in consultation with patient advocates and civil libertarians.


Haiti Refugees Drown
Haitian police opened fire on a boatload of refugees, causing a panic in which at least 30 drowned, according to British and American reporters.
At the United Nations, the Security Council tentatively backed an expanded international presence in Haiti if and when military rulers leave.
Article, page A6.


Olympia &amp; York in Accord On 3 Manhattan Buildings
In its first big step toward regaining financial stability, the Olympia &amp; York Companies (U.S.A.) said yesterday that it had reached an agreement with the owners of three important Olympia &amp; York properties to revise the terms of $970  million of notes maturing in 1999, which are secured by those properties.
The agreement is the first of several expected agreements to revise $5 billion of Olympia &amp; York debt held by a group of banks and investors, including Leon Black, one of the country's most aggressive deal makers.


Store Clerk Tells Court Simpson Bought 15-Inch Knife Weeks Before the Killings
A preliminary hearing on the evidence in the case against O. J. Simpson opened today with a clerk from a Los Angeles cutlery store testifying that he sold Mr.
Simpson a 15-inch folding knife on May 3 after having it sharpened at Mr.
Simpson's request.
The testimony was a striking beginning for the nationally televised hearing,  which will determine whether the evidence is strong enough to try the former football great, who has been accused in the slashing deaths of his former wife and her friend on June 12.
The police are still searching for a weapon.


The Jersey Swamp Dragons?
The New Jersey Nets, exploring marketing changes in an effort to enliven their image, may change their nickname, and according to radio and newspaper reports are considering the name Swamp Dragons.
The Nets have confirmed that they did apply for a new nickname and that name, logo and team colors changes are always a potential marketing option.
The would  not, however, admit that Swamp Dragon is one of the possible names suggested by  the organization but said more than one is being considered.


Prices of Crude Oil Surge As Output Looks Tighter
Crude oil prices surged yesterday after the civil war in Yemen spilled over into its oilfields.
The threat of an oil workers' strike in Norway and labor unrest in Nigeria, both oil producers, also helped lift prices.
"All the news talked about today is bullish," said Mike Hiley, a trader with  Smith Barney.


Art in Review
Zhu Qizhan L. J. Wender 3 East 80th Street Manhattan Through July 15


'95 G.M. Prices to Be 2.5% Above Current Levels
The General Motors Corporation said today that it was raising the prices of its 1995 cars and light trucks by an average of 2.5 percent, or $494, above the  current prices of its 1994 models.


Blues Sign Veteran Goalie in Casey
The St.
Louis Blues got some help for one of the most overworked goalies in the N.H.L. yesterday, signing the veteran JON CASEY to back up CURTIS JOSEPH.


Israel Rightists Block Roads Over Arafat
Hundreds of rightist demonstrators snarled traffic and scuffled with the police at the entrance to Jerusalem tonight, beginning a protest campaign against a visit to Gaza by Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Mr.
Arafat's imminent arrival in the Gaza Strip threw preparations by Jewish  settlers and opposition parties into high gear today.


U.S. Closer to End of Ban On Alaska Oil Exports
The Clinton Administration moved closer yesterday to recommending that the ban on exporting oil from the North Slope of Alaska be lifted, issuing a study that showed that such exports would create jobs and stimulate domestic production.
Hazel R. O'Leary, the Secretary of Energy, cautioned, however, that some trade issues would first have to be resolved before Congress could be asked to lift the 1973 ban.


Caddie Can Really Hit the Long Ball
RYNE SANDBERG, the All-Star second baseman who shocked the Chicago Cubs by retiring two weeks ago, surprised the gallery in Lemont, Ill., during the Western Open pro-am tournament when he showed up carrying golfer MARK CALCAVECCHIA's bag.
Calcavecchia, who lives near Sandberg in Arizona, shot a four-under-par 68 on Wednesday.
The PGA Tour event began yesterday. (AP)


Yankees' Weakness Exposed: Leaky Pen
After Terry Mulholland trudged through six innings and made every Yankees advantage seem precarious, Buck Showalter removed him and asked his bullpen to protect a two-run lead.
Showalter's request was denied.
The Boston pinch-hitter Damon Berryhill blasted a two-run triple off Bob Wickman to erase the deficit in the eighth inning, then scored the winning run on Lee Tinsley's slow tapper to first base to vault the Red Sox to a 6-5 victory over the Yankees tonight at Fenway Park.


Deere Sees a Future in Health Care
Starting July 1, thousands of people seeking mammograms, inoculations, prenatal care and other basic medical treatment in Des Moines and Waterloo, Iowa, have a new place to go: Deere &amp; Company, the world's largest manufacturer  of farm and construction machinery.
The clinics, which Deere will own and operate for its employees and retirees  and their families in the two cities, are patterned after a family care center Deere opened last year near its headquarters here.
That center now provides basic medical care for more than 6,000 Deere people, including Hans W. Becherer, the company's chairman and chief executive.


Nigeria Gets a First Place in Its First Trip
The Super Eagles of Nigeria made a triumphant landing in their first trip to  the World Cup.
Their 2-0 triumph over Greece here tonight, combined with Argentina's 2-0 loss to Bulgaria, gave Nigeria first place in Group D.
Nigeria will play Italy here on Tuesday, Bulgaria will play Mexico at Giants  Stadium, also on Tuesday and Argentina will travel to Pasadena to play Romania on Sunday.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: CBS and QVC Announce Their Marriage;Diller Promises New Growth for A Proud Network
Barry Diller had all the right words yesterday for those eager to learn his plan for leading the most storied of American broadcasting companies, CBS Inc.
Many network employees and Wall Street analysts have chafed at what they consider the hidebound strategies of the man Mr.
Diller will replace as chief executive, Laurence A. Tisch.
So yesterday Mr.
Diller promised to propel CBS into the forefront of the telecommunications revolution.


Art in Review
Bruce Nauman and H. C. Westermann Lawrence Markey Inc. 55 Vandam Street South Village Through July 15


Three Centuries of Portrait Medals
Andy Warhol gave it at a scant 15 minutes.
But 500 years ago, when people still believed in eternity, fame was thought to last a bit longer, and considerable talent and money were spent on insuring that it would.
"The Currency of Fame," at the Frick Collection, gives unforgettable evidence of that effort to stop the march of time.
It is an exhibition of nearly 200 bronze portrait medals produced in Europe from the 15th through the 17th century.
This was, roughly speaking, the period of the Renaissance, when a revival of interest in Classical culture brought the human presence back to the  forefront of art, and when everyone with the means to pay -- from kings and princelings to prelates and artists -- wanted his likeness recorded.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
ISMAR SCHORSCH, the chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, is on a pilgrimage that he says is at once painful and restorative.
He is going to Esslingen, Germany, for ceremonies on Sunday to mark the 50th  anniversary of the death of his grandfather Theodor Rothschild.


An Afternoon of Sound By Columbia Records
Columbia Records' show, part of the JVC Festival at Bryant Park, ambled along amiably on Wednesday afternoon, even under the persistent threat of rain.
It opened with the group Black Note, a quintet of young musicians from Los Angeles  that takes its inspiration in part from early Wynton Marsalis, meaning its harmonies are modern and a bit acidic.
The group set up a changing background for solos, a static chord for one improviser, swinging rhythms for the next.
They sounded a bit like a student group, earnest young improvisers moving through their prearranged lines and ideas and never really improvising.
The music rarely moved beyond the polite.
The guitarist James (Blood) Ulmer followed.
Over the years he has become a self-parodist.
He sings on most of his songs now, in a deep, near-Jimi Hendrix growl.
Occasionally he played odd and beautiful guitar solos, metallic and compressed.
He saved his most ambitious piece for last, a composition that moved from swinging sections to hard rock and never ventured into the banalities of his singing.
Mr.
Ulmer's sound and his harmonies, pumped through an electric guitar and overdriven amplifier, are sulfuric at times, chilly at others.
He's distinct, though his concerts hardly ever let an audience know what he's capable of doing.


Restaurants
If you want to know what has happened to food in New York City over the last  few years, just follow the twisting career of a restaurant once known as City Cafe.
In 1989 it was a nice American restaurant with chummy waiters, good corn bread and brownies topped with ice cream for dessert.
In 1992 the restaurant went upscale, hiring a fancy chef who banished the brownies and turned out creative dishes like lobster-and-sweetbread egg rolls.
Now the owners have opted for an even more dramatic transformation: This time even the name has changed.
Say so long to City Cafe and hello to Tavola.


No Headline
This bill, I think, will answer what Americans have been asking for for a long time -- guaranteed access to the health care system, the kind of access that can't be canceled or taken away from them, and the one that they can get in their customary way, through their employer."
SAM GIBBONS, acting chairman of  the House Ways and Means Committee. [A12:3.]


Brilliant Bomber vs. Bomb Squad: Kaboom!
When Tommy Lee Jones turns on his coffeemaker, he could be making a cup of coffee or he could be making a bomb.
At least that's what viewers ought to think for more than the fraction of a second that the seriously mistimed "Blown Away"  allows.
It's no surprise that Mr.
Jones is brewing a bomb, and such lack of suspense is a pretty big problem in a thriller about a mad bomber.
"Blown Away" tries to be much more than that, of course.
The film might have  been the thinking person's "Speed," adding character and dialogue, even ideas, to action.
Jeff Bridges plays a member of the Boston bomb squad, trying to outwit Mr.
Jones as a brilliant bomber who has targeted him and the entire squad.
Unfortunately, the characters are half-formed and the dialogue is stilted.
Those factors would have done in "Blown Away" even if its awkward pacing hadn't.


INSIDE
School Board Change Sought
Mayor Giuliani said he would push the Board of Education to redistribute many powers to borough offices and local school boards.
Page B1.


China Faces U.S. Sanctions in Electronic Copyright Piracy
The Clinton Administration selected China today for possible trade sanctions  unless the Beijing authorities close factories that each year produce about $1 billion worth of compact disks, videotapes and computer programs pirated from the United States without the payment of any royalties or acknowledgment of copyrights.
The move underlines that now that the Administration has renewed China's trade benefits and put human rights issues on the back burner, one of the main sources of friction between Washington and Beijing will be over trade issues and particularly copyright violations.


Fine Supporting Cast Takes Holiday Stage
They are calling it "The Return of Holy Bull." It is the main event in New York racing for the Fourth of July weekend and it will unfold on Sunday in the Dwyer Stakes, with only three or four other horses daring to match strides with  the 3-year-old speed demon.
But a strong supporting cast for the weekend took shape yesterday when nine accomplished turf horses were entered in the Bowling Green Handicap at Belmont Park tomorrow.
They were led by Sea Hero, the winner of the Kentucky Derby and Travers last year; Solar Splendor, one of the war horses of grass racing, and Fraise, who has won $2.5 million racing on grass.
They will run a mile and a half for a purse of $150,000.


100 Depart ASK Group Over Merger
About 100 employees of the ASK Group have quit this week because of what they say is a clash of corporate cultures in the pending acquisition of the company by Computer Associates International Inc.
Computer Associates, based in Islandia, L.I., agreed last month to acquire ASK, of Mountain View, Calif., for $311 million.


Clinton Wins One, Loses One In 2 Votes on Health Care Bills
In a major victory for the White House, the House Committee on Ways and Means approved legislation today that promises health insurance to every American and  requires their employers to pay for the bulk of its costs.
But the narrow 20-to-18 vote, achieved without the support of a single Republican after a fiercely partisan debate, signaled the difficulty ahead for President Clinton in his struggle to overhaul the health care system.


Blue-Chip Stocks Tumble; Dow Skids 42.09
The stock market closed mixed, but sharply lower for blue-chip stocks yesterday, as the turbulent second quarter ended and Wall Street professionals headed out of town for the long Fourth of July weekend.
Bond yields approached the record-high levels of May, coaxing money away from stocks and exacerbating the fall in stock prices.


A Transvestite's Life In a One-Person Show
Undoubtedly the theater has always had a certain therapeutic value for the actors who perform in it.
But in recent years the link between acting and acting out has been forged in steel, with a spate of autobiographical works that turn the stage into a confessional, an analyst's couch and a group-encounter forum.
The tendency has given birth to some memorable productions, from "A Chorus Line" to Sherry Glaser's current one-woman group portrait, "Family Secrets." But nowhere has it flourished more lavishly than in the margins of Off Broadway, where every week seems to bring a new exercise in psychological striptease.


Excerpts From Ruling Backing Limits on Abortion Protests
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in Madsen v.
Women's Health Center, upholding portions of an injunction against protests at a Florida abortion clinic.
Chief Justice Wiliam H. Rehnquist's majority opinion was joined by Justices Harry A. Blackmun, Sandra Day O'Connor, David H. Souter and Ruth Bader Ginsburg and in part by Justice John Paul Stevens.
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion that Justices Anthony M. Kennedy and Clarence Thomas also signed.
FROM THE DECISION By Chief Justice Rehnquist


Despite Crossed Signals, Saberhagen and Mets Survive
Bret Saberhagen threw the pitch, Derek Bell hit it over the wall, and Todd Hundley stood up and started to pace around the plate.
There was a pitchers' duel in progress at Jack Murphy Stadium tonight, every delivery crucial, and Saberhagen had just shaken him off.
"I wasn't too happy," said Hundley, the Mets' catcher.


Corrections
A brief report on June 11 about the winners of the Juilliard School's Gina Bachauer International Piano Competition misstated the hometown of a winner.
Blair McMillen is from Davidson, N.C., not from San Francisco.


The Big Nynex-Bell Atlantic Deal
It took a few months to bounce back from his failed bid to take over the nation's biggest cable television company, but Raymond W. Smith is on a new tear to recapture center stage in the telecommunications industry.
Mr.
Smith's dream of combining with the cable company Tele-Communications Inc. failed in February.
This time, Mr.
Smith, the effervescent chairman of the  Bell Atlantic Corporation, is bent on creating a nationwide wireless telephone network.
The first move came today, when Bell Atlantic and the Nynex Corporation announced an agreement to merge their cellular telephone holdings into one big $1.2 billion wireless network that stretches from Maine through Virginia.


First Whitewater Report Pleases Clinton Advisers
The White House seized today on the first report by the independent prosecutor in the Whitewater affair as evidence that some of the sinister accusations surrounding the Clinton Presidency were unfounded and often politically motivated.
The report by the prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr., essentially embraced what  has been the White House version of the circumstances surrounding the death last July of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel.
And it said there was no evidence that Mr.
Foster's death in a northern Virginia park had anything to do with the Whitewater affair or that it was anything other than a suicide.


Turbaco Journal;With Buyouts for Rebels, Colombia Buys Peace
Traditionally, Colombian guerrillas are retired only by army bullets.
But Flaco, or Slim, like many of his guerrilla comrades, is surrendering his  pistol.
He is to drop his highwayman's kerchief, reassume his real name and at age 43 start a new life driving his own taxi.


DU PONT TO CUT JOBS AND FORM RHONE-POULENC VENTURE
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said yesterday that it would slash 1,200 jobs in the next three years at its European nylon operations, mostly in England, Germany and the Netherlands.
The chemical company said it would also form a 50-50 joint venture with Rhone-Poulenc at a Rhone-Poulenc plant in Chalampe, France, to manufacture adipic acid, one of two raw materials used to make nylon.
The venture will own and operate the Chalampe plant and will expand capacity to meet future needs of both companies.
Du Pont's global nylon business has annual sales of almost $4 billion.
In Europe, the company has 5,000 employees and sales of about $1 billion.


Offering Forces UAL to Dip Into Its Cash
The UAL Corporation, the parent of United Air Lines, sold $1.15 billion in bonds and preferred stock yesterday, after being forced by reluctant investors both to raise interest rates and to cut the amount of preferred stock being sold.
As a result of the shortfall, the company has said it will contribute $300 million from its cash holdings to shareholders if they approve a sweeping reorganization giving employees majority control of the airline in return for wage and benefit concessions.


Transit Talks Go On As Contract Expires
Labor talks continued last night between transit officials and the union representing 32,000 subway and bus workers as time ran out on the current contract.
Although the workers' contract expired at midnight, the executive committee of Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union voted unanimously earlier in the evening to continuing working indefinitely without a contract as long as talks are continuing, union members said.


After the Curtain Falls, a Moment of Truth
In tune with the heat wave, members of Pilobolus Dance Theater are busy taking off their clothes.
There were two topless pieces in the company's third program on Wednesday night, both favorites from the troupe's Child of Nature repertory: "Shizen" (1978) and "Day Two" (1980).
As usual, the latter's curtain calls at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea) left the audience cheering.
"Day Two" may be the only dance work whose success is predicated on what happens after the curtain comes down.


FIRST CITIZENS OF INDIANA BOUGHT FOR $50.8 MILLION
Keycorp said it had signed a definitive agreement to acquire First Citizens Bancorp of Anderson, Ind., in a stock swap valued at $50.8 million.
First Citizens has $350 million in assets and nine offices in central Indiana's Madison County.
Keycorp, based in Cleveland, is the nation's 10th-largest banking company, with $61.5 billion in assets and nearly 1,300 branches.
Under the agreement, each First Citizens share will be exchanged for $37 worth of Keycorp stock, with the exchange ratio based on the average closing price of Keycorp stock in a 20-day trading period.
Keycorp closed at $31.875, down 50 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange before the deal was announced.


Sounds Around Town
Mulgrew Miller Trio


Westinghouse Nuclear Safety Deal
Moving to expand its nuclear power business into the former Soviet Union, the Westinghouse Electric Corporation has reached a tentative agreement to begin work improving the safety of nuclear reactors in Russia and Ukraine, company and Federal officials said yesterday.
The agreement is being negotiated with the United States Department of Energy and does not provide new financial protection to Westinghouse in the event of an accident at one of the nuclear plants.
Other American and European companies  have refused to undertake such work because of fears that Russian and Ukrainian  laws do not provide sufficient financial protection to suppliers should an accident occur.


Pianists vs. the Organists
It wasn't supposed to be a contest, but "A Keyboard Summit," a convocation of acoustic jazz pianists and electric organists at Town Hall on Wednesday evening, felt like a competition to discover which keyboard is the more legitimate jazz instrument.
The JVC Jazz Festival concert gave preferential billing to the organ by featuring it in the second half, but when it came to making music of emotional substance and formal elegance, the piano won hands down.
Each part of the evening brought together musicians with strong generational  and regional ties.
Roland Hanna and Barry Harris, who were featured in the piano segment, are both in their 60's and come from Detroit.
Shirley Scott and Jimmy McGriff, the organists who dominated the second part, are in their late 50's and were born in Philadelphia.


How Commercial Stickball Bat Was Born
To the Editor:
An addendum to your June 24 article about an exhibition on the history of stickball at the Museum of the City of New York: My father, Charles Minoff, inventor of shatterproof glass and a manufacturer of small household items in Brooklyn, was the first to make and distribute a commercial stickball bat.
The year was 1951.


Bill Passed by Panel Would Open Medicare to Millions of Uninsured People
The bill approved today by the House Ways and Means Committee would open Medicare, the Federal health insurance program for the elderly, to millions of people who have no other source of insurance.
If the proposal is adopted, Congressional experts say, nearly half of all Americans will be enrolled in Medicare within a decade.
The proposed new program, known as Part C of Medicare, was conceived by Representative Pete Stark of California, chairman of the Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, who has long favored "Medicare for all" as the best way  to guarantee coverage for all Americans.


On My Mind;Pay the Money, Sam
Vive la France!
A good strong vive from everybody, please, to the French for  taking on what no other country would touch -- flying troops into the hell of Rwanda to save African lives.
The French do not want to occupy the country -- they have not suddenly gone mad -- and there is no economic or strategic gain to be found in that land of corpses.
They went in because their stomachs could not stand it anymore -- that's the reason and it does them credit.


Justices Void Order Requiring Florida Redistricting
The Supreme Court today overturned a court-ordered redistricting of the Florida House of Representatives, ruling that the lower court had misinterpreted the Federal Voting Rights Act as requiring creation of the greatest possible number of districts in which minority-group voters would make up a majority.
The Court emphasized, in a majority opinion by Justice David H. Souter, that  creating districts intended to make it possible for minority groups to increase  their representation was permissible and at times necessary.


Andy Warhol's Legacy Continues to Nourish the Visual Arts
To the Editor:
Your article on the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts (front page, June 12) sounds a false alarm about the foundation's financial situation and presents a distorted picture of its philanthropic activities.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Supreme Court Ups and Downs;Law and Order at Abortion Clinics
The Supreme Court's approval of a buffer zone keeping anti-abortion demonstrators a safe distance from a Florida abortion clinic is a victory for law and order over the disruptive zealots of Operation Rescue.
Writing for a 6-to-3 majority, Chief Justice William Rehnquist provided a model for judges trying to preserve the rights of a clinic's patients and staff to go about their business, unimpeded.
He did so without disturbing the free speech rights of abortion opponents who are content to wage their protests peacefully.
The Chief Justice, who has long been personally opposed to abortion rights, nevertheless had no trouble drawing the line against illegal interference with those rights.
He upheld key parts of a lower court injunction against protesters who intimidated and threatened a clinic in Melbourne, Fla.
That included approving a 36-foot buffer zone to let patients and staff move in and out of the clinic freely.
But Chief Justice Rehnquist struck down stricter restraints, including a ban on protesters' trying to speak to patients within 300 feet of the clinic, as excessively curbing rights of free speech.


On Ship to Philippines, Food for Hungry Minds
Week after week, on a freighter out of San Francisco bound for the Philippines, four brown-paper packages bearing six books apiece can be found, tucked among the heavy-equipment crates, on a journey that began in a Flatbush,  Brooklyn, basement.
Those books, collected from friends and neighbors, are Dr.
Jorge Suarez's way of giving something back to his native land, in particular to the town of Janiuay on Panay Island, 200 miles and a 24-hour ferry ride south of Manila.


Japan's Realignment: Reformers Remain Confident
Despite the magnitude of their loss Wednesday night to the forces that ran Japan for most of the postwar era, the leaders of the yearlong effort to rebuild the country's political and economic order seemed oddly confident today that in  the long run their cause would be strengthened by the setback.
Relinquishing power to the surprise combination of the Liberal Democratic Party, which controlled the country for 38 years until last summer, and the Socialists, was certainly an embarrassment for politicians who a year ago were riding a wave of popularity amid public disgust with the establishment.


PLANT CLOSING IS PLANNED BY DIGITAL
The Digital Equipment Corporation, which has undertaken a substantial reorganization plan, said yesterday that during the next nine months it planned  to phase out its plant in Westfield, Mass., that makes metal housings for computers, and contract the work to outside companies.
The plant employs about 340 people.
Digital, the nation's third-largest computer maker, said it had told its employees about the closing and that it would offer the affected workers several severance benefits.
Digital's stock was down 37.5 cents a share, to $19.50, yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.


2 Nevada Women Battle for Seats on a Bench Marked 'Lawyers Only'
Five thousand marriages have been performed at Riverside Wedding Chapel, said Eleanor (Ellie) Waugh, sole owner and proprietor.
And with all the debris scattered about the anteroom, it looks it.
But in, under and around the spare gazebo, garters, plastic corsages, bridal  slippers and cardboard cupids are some law books: Black's Law Dictionary, Hart and Wechsler on the Federal courts, a copy of Nevada's Constitution.


Transplant Drug Found to Fight Ulcerative Colitis
A drug commonly given to transplant patients offers the first new treatment in 40 years for victims of severe ulcerative colitis and can often spare them removal of their colons, a study has found.
Ulcerative colitis is a chronic bowel inflammation that results in bloody diarrhea and other symptoms.
When steroids fail to stop the disease in a severe  case, doctors almost always have to remove the patient's colon.


Employees Welcome Prospect of Diller-Run CBS
CBS employees, along with some of the network's stars, applauded the prospect of a CBS-QVC merger run by Barry Diller because of Mr.
Diller's estimable reputation for creativity and quick decision-making at Paramount Studios and the Fox television network.
The sentiment among CBS employees was that under Laurence A. Tisch as chairman, the broadcasting company had shied away from pursuits in cable television and other technologies, only to watch Fox wrest away CBS's broadcast  rights to National Football League games and lure away eight of its affiliate stations.


Eagles Sign Giants' Jackson
The Philadelphia Eagles filled a void in the defensive backfield today by signing the veteran free-agent safety Greg Jackson to two one-year contracts.
Financial terms weren't disclosed.
Jackson was paid $650,000 last season with the Giants.
Jackson, 27, played for the Giants for the past five seasons.
A third-round pick out of L.S.U. in 1989, he started 59 games, amassing 311 tackles and 14 interceptions.


HIGH COURT BACKS LIMITS ON PROTEST AT ABORTION CLINIC
The Supreme Court today upheld the core of a Florida state court injunction intended to keep disruptive protesters from blocking access to an abortion clinic.
The 6-to-3 ruling, written by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, was greeted with relief by abortion rights groups and with sharp disappointment by abortion opponents.
Balancing the right of patients and employees to unimpeded access to the abortion clinic against the protesters' right to free speech, the Court upheld a buffer zone of about 36 feet around the clinic in Melbourne, Fla., that kept protesters away from the entrance and parking lot and off a public right-of-way.
Chief Justice Rehnquist said the buffer zone "burdens no more speech than necessary to accomplish the governmental interest at stake." Under the same analysis, the Court also upheld a ban on excessive noise during the clinic's operating hours, finding the restrictions justified by the need to "insure the health and well-being of the patients at the clinic." [Excerpts, page A16.]


Art in Review
Judy Pfaff Andre Emmerich 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through July 15


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8


Holiday on Monday
Monday is Independence Day. Here are holiday schedules
NEW YORK


Sports of The Times;Argentina Won Gamble With Diego
THERE are -- there were -- 528 players in the World Cup.
If you had taken a poll about which player would bring scandal, controversy, dishonor or just plain grubbiness to the World Cup, Diego Armando Maradona would have been the only name mentioned.
He was a ticking time bomb from the moment the cynical Argentine soccer federation brought him back to save the team last fall.
Those officials made a Faustian decision to bring in a troubled, dangerous, fading genius, to help them beat Australia and get them in the World Cup.


Choices Painful for Hartford Politician
In her 14 years in Congress from Hartford, a district where 50,000 people work in insurance, Representative Barbara B. Kennelly of Connecticut has always known how tempting it would be for her colleagues to typecast her as the  Congresswoman from Aetna.
So she has worked hard as a member of the Ways and Means Committee to involve herself in other issues, like overhauling welfare, compiling statistics on people attacked in hate crimes and increasing access to mammograms for older women.
And she has chosen her shots carefully.


For Children
A Lot of Sundries' 'George!' Fraunces Tavern Museum 54 Pearl Street (at Broad Street) Financial District (212) 425-1778 Recommended ages: 5 to 13 Through Sept. 24
Almost 200 years after his death, George Washington remains one of the country's most beloved Presidents.
Is it because of the cherry tree?
A few clues to his enduring fame can be found at these recently opened exhibitions.


Early Closings for Bars Eased in Hoboken
The Hoboken City Council has eased new rules on closing times for local bars  and restaurants that had been intended to control the drunken rowdiness that often spills onto the streets here.
Seeking a compromise between irate residents and an industry that has helped  rejuvenate this city on the Hudson River, the Council voted 7 to 0 Wednesday night to repeal the 1 A.M. closing time it approved on June 17.


Mayor Presses Revamping School Board
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he would push the city's Board  of Education to redistribute many of the powers of its central headquarters to borough offices and local school boards.
He said he wanted the changes to begin  by September.
His proposals, if adopted, would amount to the most sweeping changes since the 1970 decentralization of the system.
The changes include the elimination of some offices and divisions at the board headquarters.


People
Terry Wachalter, director of human resources at Robert A. Becker Inc., New  York, and chief financial officer at Becker's Genecom Medical Education division, was promoted to the new position of senior vice president and director of operations at Becker.


Art in Review
Nobuyoshi Araki Luhring Augustine Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through July 30


Treasury Prices Drop To Nearly 6-Week Low
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday to their lowest in nearly six weeks after stronger-than-expected economic data and a continuing slide in the dollar.
The economic reports, which showed faster growth, renewed concerns of rising  inflation and higher interest rates.
The selling of government securities intensified as the dollar was again battered in the global currency markets, said traders.


Book-of-the-Month Club To End Its Advisory Panel
The editor in chief of the Book-of-the-Month Club, Tracy Brown, said yesterday that he planned to dissolve the club's decades-old editorial board, whose members read, review and recommend the books the club offers each month to its more than one million members.
The decision, which is to take effect at the end of the year, brings to an end a venerable publishing institution that has become increasingly marginalized over the years, as the time between a manuscript's submission and publication has shrunk and market considerations have grown ever more important.


Churchill Eisenhart, Statistics Expert, 82
Churchill Eisenhart, an authority on the use of statistics in research and manufacturing who was associated with the National Bureau of Standards for many  years, died on Saturday at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 82 and lived in Kensington, Md.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Government Sends Out a Consumer Appeal
People who pay New York State taxes and were lucky enough to get refunds this year are finding a little something extra in their envelopes from the State Department of Finance and Taxation.
Inside is an orange-and-white letter signed by Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate, with this message: "New Yorkers are paying some of the highest electric and phone bills in the United States, but now you can do something about it!" The letter goes on to provide information about how to join an advocacy group called the Citizens Utility Board, which represents consumers before the Public Service Commission whenever telephone or power companies ask for an increase in rates.
The price of membership: a contribution of "$10, $15 or even $20."


Pearl Jam Musicians Testify On Ticketmaster's Prices
Two members of the Seattle grunge band Pearl Jam testified before a House subcommittee today as part of the band's effort to break up what they say is a monopoly that increases concert ticket prices to their fans.
The band members Jeff Ament and Stone Gossard told the House Government Operations information subcommittee that they had tried to keep concert prices below $20, but that the Ticketmaster agency added high service fees because it held a monopoly on sales at big arenas in large cities.


FLEET FINANCIAL TO MERGE NEW YORK BANKING OPERATIONS
Fleet Financial Group said yesterday that it was merging its two New York state banking operations to form a new $14 billion bank.
None of the 346 banking offices of the former Fleet Bank of New York, Albany and the Fleet Bank, Melville.
L.I., will close because of formation of the new Fleet Bank.
Terence Murray, chairman and chief executive of Fleet Financial, which is based in Providence, R.I., called the merger a "natural and sensible combination" that will result in "greater efficiency and economy." Fleet Bank, Albany has $11 billion in assets and Fleet Bank, Melville has assets of $3 billion.


Hong Kong Investors Finance a Trump Project
A group of Hong Kong investors stepped in yesterday with the money that Donald J. Trump needs to begin building the first towers of Riverside South, a project that could profoundly alter the Upper West Side of Manhattan by creating homes for thousands of wealthy residents on what is now an abandoned riverfront  rail yard.
Construction could start within a year, Mr.
Trump said yesterday after he signed a financing deal and joint-venture agreement with a consortium that includes the New World Development Company Ltd., headed by Y. T. Cheng and his son, Henry, and the Shui On Group Ltd., headed by Vincent Lo.


Russians in Estonia Feel Lost in a Baltic Limbo
They've turned off the eternal flame at the Soviet-built memorial to those who fought Fascism in World War II and long ago removed the plaques with the names of the dead for "cleaning."
Pavel K. Voronin, who commanded a Soviet antiaircraft battery during the war  and retired from the army at the age of 65, seems shocked at everything in Estonia, once again sovereign, which is running toward the West as fast as it can.
But the mothballed memorial appalls him.


QUAKER OATS CUTTING 300 SALES JOBS
The Quaker Oats Company said yesterday that it would slash 300 salaried sales jobs in the first step of its restructuring.
The food company will close as many as 15 field offices and combine its grocery sales divisions into a single group.
More cuts are expected at the company's headquarters in Chicago and its research facility in Barrington, Ill., but that number has not been disclosed.
Only field sales for the Gatorade sports drink and food service divisions will remain independent.
On May 16, Quaker Oats said it would take a charge of $110 million  to $130 million in the fourth quarter, which ended yesterday, to cover restructuring in the next 12 to 15 months.
Quaker shares fell $1.125, to $69.75, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.


Market Place;At state Blue Cross offices, visions of stock certificates.
BLUE CROSS executives across the country have been talking to investment bankers about taking their nonprofit companies to the stock market, now that the national Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association has given its blessing to their  going public.
A number of Sun Belt Blue Cross plans, as well as several in the Middle West, may be among the first in line.
Even before the association's governors voted last week to let investor-owned companies use the Blue Cross and Blue Shield insignia, at least six of the 69 state and local Blue Cross plans were already considering a public equity financing of a subsidiary, following the example of the California plan's Wellpoint Health Networks.


Belle's 23d Homer Boosts Indians
Indians 4, Orioles 2 Albert Belle hit a tie-breaking two-run home run off Mark Williamson in the eighth inning last night as Cleveland beat Baltimore, 4-2.
It marked the 11th time the Indians have won at Jacobs Field in their last at-bat.
They gained a split of the four-game series with the Orioles.


Corrections
A jazz review in the In Performance column yesterday about a concert by the pianist Dick Hyman on Monday misidentified the site.
It was Town Hall, not Carnegie Hall.


Incomes in U.S. Advanced by 0.6% in May
The income of Americans rose for the fourth consecutive month in May and spending nearly kept pace, the Government said today.
A separate report showed that factory orders increased for the month.
The reports, along with the latest data on claims for jobless benefits, demonstrated that the economy expanded at a comfortable pace this spring, analysts said.


CHRONICLE
While most people are trying to break away from work early today to get a jump on the Fourth of July holiday weekend, RICHARD L. OTTINGER, a former United States Representative, will be starting a new job.
He has been appointed the acting dean of the Pace University School of Law in White Plains.
"I guess they want me to produce fireworks," he said, in reference to the timing of his appointment.


A. J. Phillips Sr., 92, A Retired Executive
Dr.
Albert John Phillips Sr., a retired vice president and director of research for American Smelting and Refining Company, died on Tuesday in Heidelberg, Germany.
He was 92 and lived in Long Boat Key, Fla., and Plainfield, N.J.
He suffered a heart attack while on vacation with his wife, his family said.


25 and Under
You can learn everything you need to know about Col Legno by breathing deeply.
First comes the smell of burning wood, as enticing as a crackling campfire in the woods, from the igloo-shaped oven in one corner of the sedate, squarish dining room.
Then comes the yeasty smell of Tuscan bread, so alluring with its irregular crust that the urge to press a slice to your nose and inhale  is irresistible.
And then comes the smell of fresh herbs, of basil, mint and rosemary, of just-roasted peppers, of tomatoes and of grilled meats.
The woody smell certainly makes sense at a place called Col Legno.
The name means with wood, a musical term for playing a violin with the back of a bow.
In  this case, the term refers to virtuosity of another sort.
Almost everything except pasta, of course is cooked over wood.
The result is simple, lusty yet delicate food invigorated by just a touch of wood, achieved by a chef who plays  the wood fire like a musical instrument.


Devils Chasing A Freed Stevens
The best year in the history of the Devils may also become the one the team loses the best player in the franchise's history.
Scott Stevens becomes a free agent without compensation this morning, and he  is determined to explore the free-agency market to its fullest.


Aviall
During the last two days, Aviall Inc., an aviation maintenance company based  in Dallas, has seen its shares fall by more than a third, almost all of plunge coming on Wednesday.
Management said then that the company's second-quarter earnings would be weak and below the 7 cents a share of the first quarter.
Officials attributed the performance to an industrywide slowdown.
Aviall's stock is now trading at about half its initial price when the company was spun off from Ryder System Inc. in December 1993.


Ray Charles: 45 Minutes Of Intensity
Age steals many virtues from musicians.
It can take away energy, creativity,  even talent.
Until the very end, however, it can't rob musicians of their soul and depth of feeling.
On Wednesday night at Avery Fisher Hall, the 63-year-old Ray Charles was onstage for no more than 45 minutes.
He didn't play his electric piano much, and his vocals were often drowned out by the 17-piece, brass-heavy Ray Charles Orchestra.
But, in the short amount of time he performed at this JVC Jazz Festival event, Mr.
Charles moved many audience members to tears.
Mr.
Charles's emotional impact came from his musical frugality.
His slightest keyboard glissando or squeal of delight added more intensity to each song than any horn section could ever have conjured.
He played the piano as if it were the third rail of a subway track.
Every key his fingers touched sent his body into convulsions.
His vocals were just as spare and expressive.
In "Knock on Wood," he shifted from a long, low melisma to a punchy falsetto, isolating soul music,  the genre that his early work gave birth to, into its separate components of gospel and rhythm-and-blues.


G.O.P. Studies Offer by Perot
Ross Perot, one of the worst enemies of the Republicans in the last Presidential campaign, may soon become a friend.
Mr.
Perot has offered the G.O.P. $1 million to produce a nationally televised program to critique President Clinton's health care plan, Republican officials said.


2.7 Billion Merger for Big Railroads
In a move that would create the nation's largest railroad, Burlington Northern Inc. and the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation yesterday announced a plan to merge.
The new railroad, with a reach even more expansive than its name, would be called the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway Company.
The proposed merger calls for a stock swap valued at $2.7 billion.
The owners of Santa Fe and Burlington Northern stock must approve the transaction.
The deal must also be approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission, which may not  make a decision until late next year at the earliest.


3 Who Work for Justice Even in a Lost Cause
The most charismatic character in "A Place in the World," an elegaic remembrance of the hardscrabble existence in a remote Argentine valley, is a cynical Spanish geologist named Hans Meyer Plaza who calls himself a "hired gun." Hans, played with a fiery gravity by Jose Sacristan, has been employed by  an unnamed multinational corporation to determine the feasibility of a hydroelectric project in the desolate Bermejo Valley, 90 miles from Buenos Aires.
Hans, who has also been checking the area for oil, professes indifference to  the fact that his work might precipitate the eradication of a pastoral society that has existed for centuries.
In his Darwinian view, human beings are "primates who cannot be changed."


On Redistricting
The Justices overturned a court-ordered redistricting of the Florida House of Representatives, ruling that the lower court misinterpreted the Voting Rights Act as requiring creation of the greatest number of districts in which minority-group voters would make up a majority.


For Now, It's Status Quo, but Fallout Is Expected Later
On the surface, nothing changes: an unusual voting system in Georgia stays in place, and a disputed Florida election map stands.
But both critics and supporters of two Supreme Court voting rights decisions today said their main effect would show up in the subtle fallout from the Court's continuing rejection of a broad interpretation of the Voting Rights Act as a guide for political representation.
Saying they were moderate rather than sweeping rulings, critics said the decisions could make legislators feel less bound by the dictates of the Voting Rights Act and make it harder for minorities to gain political representation commensurate with their numbers in the population.
The rulings come on the heels of last year's Supreme Court ruling challenging two new black Congressional districts in North Carolina.


Art in Review


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Shares of CBS and QVC soared, as the top executives of the companies confirmed that they had reached a tentative agreement to merge operations. [D1.] QVC's chairman, Barry Diller, promised to propel CBS into the forefront of the telecommunications revolution. [D1.] CBS's employees and some stars applauded the prospect of a company run by Mr.
Diller. [D15.]


Sounds Around Town
Booker T. and the MG's


M. J. Petrides, School Board Power, 53, Dies
Michael J. Petrides, a key member of the majority faction of the New York City Board of Education and an adviser to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, died early  yesterday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 53.
The cause was cancer, said James P. Molinaro, Staten Island's deputy borough  president and a close friend.
After Mr.
Petrides's left lung was removed last fall, he experienced a partial recovery, but he was hospitalized again in early  June and never recovered.


Robert L. Rooke, 103, a Partner With Merrill Lynch Since 1928
Robert Levi Rooke, a broker who became a partner in Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in 1928 and who dealt in stocks until a month ago, died on Monday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
A former resident of Westfield, N.J., he was 103.
The cause was complications from a stroke he suffered two weeks ago, his family said.


Excuses Stop as Elster Takes Field as a Yankee
By making excuses, Kevin Elster coped with the most frustrating portion of his baseball career, the part in which he barreled toward retirement before the  age of 30.
As his situation grew bleaker, Elster always unearthed another excuse.
When the Mets did not keep him after his second shoulder operation in 1992, the young shortstop reasoned that they were jettisoning another rowdy member of  the 1986 World Series champions.
When the Dodgers looked and passed in 1993, he  blamed his mending arm.
When the Padres released him this spring, he claimed he  had been thwarted by a hip flexor injury.


Spiffing Up Before Going Out for a Drive


12th Wimbledon Final for One, First for Another
Improbable as it might have seemed, those white knuckles that matched the cloudscape above Center Court this afternoon in the semifinal round belonged to  Wimbledon's nine-time champion, Martina Navratilova.
Just one match away from her dream, the acquisition of a record 10th and final Wimbledon crown, Navratilova, playing for her tennis life, was nearly undone by a close friend who was playing on a lark.
Considering her user-friendly draw, which sent the retirement-minded doyenne  out onto her favorite court against 99th-ranked Gigi Fernandez, the lowest-ranked women's singles semifinalist in Grand Slam history, the 37-year-old Navratilova should not have been this fragile.


Simpson Lawyers Seek to Exclude Bloody Evidence Found at Home
When four homicide detectives arrived at O. J. Simpson's home early on June 13 to tell him that his former wife had been slashed to death the night before,  they found blood on the door of a white Ford Bronco parked at the curb and a trail of blood leading to his front door, a police report shows.
By the end of the day, the report says, the detectives had discovered more blood, in the master bathroom and in the foyer.
Outside, they found 13 bloodstains inside the Bronco and a bloodstained glove resembling one found at the home of the victim, Nicole Brown Simpson..


Art in Review
Neil Winokur Janet Borden Gallery 560 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through July 29


Carbide Sells Smog Credits
A Union Carbide plant has become the first major participant in California's  controversial new pollution-credit trading system.
Union Carbide's plant here in Torrance sold 3.4 million pollution credits --  $1.2 million worth -- last week to the Anchor Glass Container Corporation, a private company in Huntington Park, Calif., state officials said.
Each credit gives the owner the right to emit one pound of nitrogen oxide.


WOLVERINE TUBE TO ACQUIRE SMALL TUBE PRODUCTS
Wolverine Tube Inc. agreed yesterday to acquire the Small Tube Products Company of Altoona, Pa., for $51 million in cash and 400,000 shares of Wolverine Tube valued about $9.1 million based on yesterday's closing stock price.
Small Tube Products makes copper and copper alloy tube and had 1993 revenue of $67.3 million.
Wolverine, of Huntsville, Ala., makes copper and copper alloy tubing used by air-conditioning and refrigeration manufacturers, appliance makers, utilities and plumbing wholesalers.
Wolverine shares rose $1.25 yesterday, to $22.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


At the Bar;Search his artificial leg? A lawyer refuses to allow it and so becomes his own advocate.
Illegal search and seizure" is a well-worn phrase in the lexicon of any criminal defense lawyer. Normally, though, it is a claim they make on behalf of  others rather than themselves. Certainly, that's how it had always been for Charles Lindner of Santa Monica, Calif., until he was told recently that he would have to remove his leg to see an imprisoned client.
Now the 47-year old Mr.
Lindner has a new client: himself.
And he is branching out into another area of the law, beyond the murderers, rapists, robbers and kidnappers, accused and actual, he customarily represents.
He is testing the rights of handicapped lawyers and their clients under Federal antidiscrimination laws.


Look Upward, Skyscraper Tourists


Tagamet Market Share Falls
SmithKline Beecham P.L.C.'s anti-ulcer drug Tagamet has lost about one-third  of its United States market share since the patent for the drug expired on May 17, analysts say.
By contrast, the market share for Zantac, the anti-ulcer drug produced by Glaxo Holdings P.L.C., has declined less than half a percentage point, maintaining the company's overwhelming lead in the huge market for prescription  drugs that suppress production of stomach acid.


New Era, New Pie
The Group of Seven industrial democracies will celebrate the 20th anniversary of their annual summit meeting at Naples next week.
The leaders of the United States, Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada should seize the occasion to take a hard look at the international trade and financial system and begin to work together to shape its evolution into the 21st century -- especially by incorporating large emerging economies into the world market system.
Since they possess nearly 70 percent of the world's gross domestic product and the world's key currencies, these countries bear a special responsibility for a stable global economic order.


Edward Carlough, 62, Ex-Chief Of Sheet Metal Workers Union
Edward J. Carlough, a former president of the Sheet Metal Workers' International Association and one of organized labor's most influential leaders  in the last 20 years, died on Wednesday during a trip to New Bern, N.C.
He was 62 and lived in Rockville, Md.
His family said he died of cancer.


Not Criminal, Just Reprehensible
The "Washington" phase of the special prosecutor's Whitewater inquiry is nearly finished.
Questions about the behavior of the former White House counsel, Bernard Nussbaum, remain unanswered.
And the truly important part -- the "Arkansas" phase -- is still to come.
Even so, senior officials at the Treasury Department and White House can breathe easier now that Robert Fiske has concluded that they did not act "with the intent to corruptly influence" a Federal investigation into whether funds deposited in Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan were diverted to President Clinton's 1984 gubernatorial campaign and the Whitewater Development Company.


Blackmun Retires, With Tribute From Court
After 23 years on the Supreme Court bench, Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun stepped down today in a simple court ceremony.
Moments after the Justices issued the term's final six decisions, two of which were written by Justice Blackmun, Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist read  a brief letter from all the Court members paying tribute to their retiring colleague.


Supreme Court Ups and Downs;The Voting Rights Wreckers
The Supreme Court chipped away again yesterday at efforts to give minority voters greater voice under the Federal Voting Rights Act.
The Court allowed a Georgia county to continue depriving black voters of a share of local power.
And it put a ceiling on the creation of state legislative districts in Florida to relieve the past underrepresentation of blacks and Hispanics.
These decisions came exactly one year to the day after the high court undermined a North Carolina redistricting plan designed to give minority voters their first black members of Congress since Reconstruction.
In all three  cases, the Court was driven by a core of justices who evince no respect for Congress.


At Home Abroad;'The Civilized World'
There can be no amnesty for war criminals," Lord Owen, international mediator in the Yugoslav conflict, said last year. "I believe the moral order of this world is marred if those who are guilty of war crimes are not brought to justice."
The U.N.
Security Council voted 16 months ago to create a War Crimes Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
But to date no prosecution has been brought, and many wonder whether any of the murderers and torturers who have ravaged Bosnia will ever be brought to book.


Controllers Cited in Crash
The plane crash that killed 23 soldiers and injured 100 at Pope Air Force Base in North Carolina this spring was caused by a "chain of errors" by civilian and military air traffic controllers, the Air Force said today.
"It was a question of errors made, multiple errors," said Lieut.
Gen.
Michael Nelson, the commander of the Ninth Air Force, in a press conference at Pope Air  Force Base.


Hobson Appeals Suspension
Boston Red Sox Manager Butch Hobson, already under fire for his club's recent woes, was suspended today for five games for shoving an umpire.
Hobson has appealed the decision by the American League president, Bobby Brown, and was in  the dugout tonight as the Red Sox lost the Oakland A's, 6-3, at Fenway Park.
A hearing is pending.
Hobson had to be restrained by two of his players after shoving the third-base umpire, Larry Barnett, three times during an argument in Boston's 10-4 loss to the Yankees Tuesday night.
Hobson shoved Barnett after being thrown out of the game by the plate umpire, Greg Kosc.


SOME CAR AND TRUCK PRICES TO BE LIFTED FOR '95
Mazda Motor of America is raising prices of its 626 and Millenia sedans by 2  percent for 1995 and said that some 1994-model trucks and sport-utility vehicles will cost about 1 percent more, effective immediately.
Prices for the 1995-model 626 sedan now start at $14,695.
On a sales-weighted average, 626 prices are up $356 a vehicle from final 1994 prices, the company said.
Prices for the top two  models of Mazda's 1995 Millenia luxury sedan are up almost $550.
The midlevel Millenia is now $28,895, while the Millenia S is $31,995.
The price of the base  Millenia model remains at $25,995.
The price of Mazda's 1994 Navajo sport-utility vehicle and selected models of the B-Series pickup truck were increased by an average eight-tenths of 1 percent, or $107.


Israeli Protests of Arafat's Visit Draw Only Rightists and Settlers
Asaf Shani, a strapping Israeli who carries a pistol when he goes downtown just in case of an Arab attack, was not particularly troubled by Yasir Arafat's  arrival today in the Gaza Strip.
"As long as he goes to Gaza and Jericho, not Jerusalem, that's O.K.," he said.
"He has the right to come. On a personal level, the man is an arch-murderer, but we've made peace with our enemy, and we don't have much choice."


G.E. IN DEAL TO PURCHASE GTE SATELLITE NETWORK
The General Electric Company has signed a definitive agreement to buy the satellite communications network of the GTE Corporation.
Terms of the agreement  were not disclosed.
Under the agreement, which was announced Thursday, GE American Communications Inc., a unit of the GE Capital Corporation based in Princeton, N.J., said it would buy all seven satellites and related ground stations owned by GTE.
The purchase will double the number of satellites owned by the General Electric unit, making it a leading supplier of space communications in the domestic market.
"We are excited about the expanded service capabilities this acquisition will enable us to offer our customers," Gary C. Wendt, president and chief executive of GE Capital, said in a statement.


Mysterious Envelope Arrives, But Judge Does Not Open It
The mystery of the O. J. Simpson case deepened today when the presiding judge refused to open a bulky manila produced earlier in the day by Mr.
Simpson's chief lawyer, Robert L. Shapiro.
The judge, Kathleen Kennedy-Powell of Municipal Court, presiding over the preliminary hearing, interrupted testimony to announce that she had received a sealed envelope of evidence from the defense.


Veterans System Bodes Ill for Our Health
To the Editor:
As members of the executive and legislative branches roam the country seeking consensus for health care reform, how many Americans know that these same legislators in essence already control the country's largest health care delivery system?


Shoestring Arbitrage With Discounted Stock
PROFESSIONAL traders often spot slight discrepancies in price between two similar products, like a gold contract trading in London and one trading in New  York.
They buy the cheaper contract, instantly sell short the more expensive one and pocket the difference.
The practice is known as arbitrage.
A slow-motion, small-scale variation on this fast-paced high-stakes game can  also be played by individuals -- with minimal risk.
The ante is whatever it costs to become a shareholder of record in companies that sell their stock to the public at a discount.
Because the purchase price of the stock is less than its trading price, investors can profit from simultaneously buying and selling short.


Sports of The Times;Add Three New Pieces To Old Puzzle
AS soon as Yinka Dare opened his mouth Wednesday evening I realized that I had made a mistake.
Not a factual error.
I'd written not long ago about the 6-foot-11-inch center from George Washington University who left school after two seasons to enter the National Basketball Association draft.
Three days ago, the New Jersey Nets made Dare their first-round pick.
That much is accurate.


Clinton Selects Admiral to Lead Forces in Pacific
President Clinton has nominated Vice Adm.
Richard Macke to be commander of United States forces in the Pacific, the Pentagon said today.
A week ago, the Navy withdrew the name of the previous nominee, Adm.
Stanley  R. Arthur, after objections arose in Congress over his handling of a sexual harassment case.


David V. Huntley, Music Executive, 47
David V. Huntley, a vice president of the music publishing firm Boosey &amp; Hawkes, died yesterday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 47 and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a long illness, a spokesman for the company said.


Defendant in Bomb Plot Sought to Cooperate, Prosecutors Say
Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, who has agreed to become a Government witness in the trial of those accused of plotting to bomb New York landmarks, approached Government lawyers on his own initiative in early June seeking to cooperate, prosecutors said in court papers unsealed yesterday.
The papers -- several letters sent to Judge Michael B. Mukasey from the prosecutors in Federal District Court in Manhattan -- say that Mr.
Siddig Ali also asked that his desire to become a Government witness be kept secret from others, including his lawyers, Ronald L. Kuby and William M. Kunstler, and that  they be barred from attending his plea negotiations.


Stay-at-Home SWB, 8, Into Fitness, Seeks Thrills
SO the polar bear in the Central Park Zoo has a therapist. Big deal.
Anybody who is anybody in Manhattan has a therapist, to say nothing of a personal trainer and a nutritionist.
What is this bear's problem?


CHRONICLE
Is KIRK DOUGLAS pursuing a new career?
Mr.
Douglas, introduced to the National Press Club in Washington on Thursday  as "the man with the million-dollar dimple," said that after making 81 movies and writing four books, he was "at the point of making a career change, and what better venue than this to announce it."


Corporate Conscience;Insurer Gives Retreat a Social Mission
When 60 white-collar employees of the ITT Hartford Insurance Group gathered this week to paint a shelter for the homeless their motives were decidedly mixed.
They were not volunteers, and their mission, in painting 20 rooms in seven hectic hours, was corporate, to learn about themselves and how they worked together.
The painting party was a new type of corporate retreat, as insular, self-absorbed and pragmatic in its purposes as any executive-training course, but with a social payoff.
There were "consultant-facilitators" roaming the hallways, elaborate box-and-arrow schematics about goals, regular "processing breaks" to take notes and a full follow-up day to reflect on applications to the insurance work place.


Observer;The Trouble Makers
Button Gwinnett of Georgia was one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence.
There were 56 altogether.
All were dead white males.
No one deplored the utter lack of diversity.
Not even Caesar Rodney of Delaware.
Oliver Wolcott of Connecticut, commenting long afterward, was amazed that Caesar Rodney had not spoken out at least about the group's deadness.


New Data Suggest Slow Economic Growth
More statistical evidence emerged today that the economy is advancing at a moderate pace, though a June survey of factory purchasing managers suggested that inflation may be set to rise.
The Government said its chief forecasting gauge of economic activity, the index of leading economic indicators, was unchanged again in May, while construction spending rose nine-tenths of 1 percent, the third consecutive monthly increase.


Dedicated Lawyers for Indigent Are a Bargain
To the Editor:
"A Smart Move for New York Justice" (editorial, June 20) mischaracterizes the quality and cost-efficiency of legal services that the Assigned Counsel Plan provides indigent defendants in New York City.
Your tone aims at driving a wedge between us and the Legal Aid Society, who have worked in harmony nearly 30 years.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column of the Your Money pages on June 18, for a question about the beneficiaries of individual retirement accounts and Keough accounts, misstated the tax implications for some beneficiaries.
A beneficiary that is a tax-exempt organization does not have to pay income taxes on distributions from such accounts.


No Headline
METRO DIGEST


Corrections
A chart on Tuesday listing White House chiefs of staff and their years of service misstated the starting date for Hamilton Jordan.
He was President Jimmy  Carter's chief of staff from July 1979 to June 1980; he did not start in January 1977.


Bosnian Serb Condemns Mediators' Map
The leader of Bosnia's Serbian nationalists today called the latest international proposal for ending the Bosnian war a humiliation for his people,  and a Serbian counterattack regained slivers of territory lost to Muslims and Croats last week.
The comments by the Serbian leader, Radovan Karadzic, came in response to a proposed map drawn up by diplomats from the so-called "contact group" countries  -- the United States, Russia, France, Britain and Germany.
It would require the  Serbs to surrender to the Muslims and Croats nearly a third of the territory under their control.


New Procedure For Emissions In New Jersey
New Jersey and Federal officials today said that they had agreed on a new auto emissions testing system for the state.
The agreement could result in longer lines at Motor Vehicle Department centers and $20 fees for inspections, which are now free, but will also require vehicle inspections every other year instead of annually.


Golden Oldie Faces Neophyte
Martina Navratilova, right on target for the perfect segue into retirement, wants to win Wimbledon one last time, her 10th time, and collect a 19th Grand Slam singles title on Saturday.
Conchita Martinez wants to spoil Navratilova's farewell and win Wimbledon as her first Grand Slam title.
The third-seeded Martinez has her country's king, Juan Carlos of Spain, in her corner, while the fourth-seeded Navratilova, in her 22d and final singles appearance here, can probably count on the support of everybody else.
Martinez leads the rivalry by 3-1, but the two have never played on grass, Navratilova's  preferred surface.


Q&amp;A
Withdrawing From I.R.A.
Q.
When you choose the "term certain" method for withdrawing I.R.A. money, what  percentage of the total holdings is withdrawn at age 70 1/2?
E.
ALBRECHT, Flushing, Queens


Pirates Delay Taking City Loan
The Pittsburgh Pirates, losing up to $1 million a month, delayed accepting an $8 million public bailout today, saying they must also get Three Rivers Stadium  lease concessions before they can take the money.
The Pirates' board of directors failed in a two-and-a-half-hour meeting to act on the loan, approved by a 7-1 city council vote on Wednesday.
The board also directed the team president, Mark Sauer, to step up negotiations on an estimated $6 million to $7 million stadium lease concession package.


Honda Case Guilty Plea
A former sales executive with the American Honda Motor Company pleaded guilty today to participating in a nationwide bribery conspiracy.
United States Attorney Paul Gagnon said 10 defendants had now admitted to a  scheme in which Honda executives and employees demanded bribes and kickbacks from dealers in exchange for franchises and allocations of hot-selling models, particularly the Acura luxury cars developed by Honda.


Bridge
Good defenders can often take advantage of a slight slip by the declarer, as  witness the diagramed deal played in the semifinal stage of New York's Reisinger Knockout Team Championship last June.
South landed in four spades, an excellent contract with just 22 high-card points in the combined hands.
East and West were Bjorn Fallenius of Manhattan, who represents Sweden, his native country, in international competition, and Bob Jones of Auburndale, Queens.
The opening lead was the club king, which held  the trick, and Jones shifted shrewdly to a heart, attacking South's communications.
Dummy's heart ten won, and South finessed the spade queen, losing to the king.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5


ARAFAT IN GAZA: The Overview;P.L.O.'s Leader Asks Courage of All Sides
Yasir Arafat, the fiery, flawed and indomitable symbol of the Palestinian struggle for a homeland, entered the Gaza Strip today, completing his odyssey to territories that he hopes to turn one day into a state.
With tears in his eyes, Mr.
Arafat knelt after crossing the border from Egypt and kissed the ground -- land he has not seen in decades and that for the first  time has come under Palestinian authority and, for now, his personal stewardship.


N.T.T. To List Shares Outside Japan
The Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation, the telecommunications giant, said today that it planned to list its shares on the London and New York Stock Exchanges to improve its profile abroad and help it raise funds more easily.
It plans to apply in mid-July for a New York listing and in October for a London listing, the company's president, Masashi Kojima, said.


F.B.I. Plans to Open an Office in Poland
Louis J. Freeh, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, announced today that the agency planned to open an office in Warsaw to coordinate efforts to fight the spread of organized crime from the former Soviet Union.
Poland has become a launching pad for Russian gangsters' western expansion, law enforcement officials here say.
Mr.
Freeh estimates that there are hundreds  of Russian criminal groups, and that many operate outside Russia.


Seoul Trade Surplus
Helped by brisk shipments of ships and vehicles and by the soaring yen, South Korea posted a trade surplus of $35 million in June, its first of the year, Trade Ministry officials said today.
The surplus, on a customs-cleared basis, compared with a deficit of $284 million a year earlier.
The surplus in June compared with a shortfall of $562 million in May.
The ministry said exports in June totaled $8.37 billion, up from $7.25 billion a year before and $7.89 billion in May.
Imports amounted to $8.33 billion, against $7.53 billion a year  ago and $8.46 billion in May.


The Crowd Consensus: 'Turn the Juice Loose'
Two weeks ago Denise Brown buried her sister, Nicole Brown Simpson.
Today, again dressed in black, she walked past the vendors selling 10 T-shirt styles all proclaiming O. J. Simpson's innocence -- "Save O. J.," "Turn the Juice Loose" -- past bystanders yelling that O. J. was framed, past the lone man with the megaphone trying to talk about the victim, past the ubiquitous television cameras.
Ms.
Brown, who once modeled for Vogue magazine, looked straight ahead as she  went through a metal detector, rode the elevator to the ninth floor, passed through a second metal detector and entered the small courtroom.
The television  commentators keep telling viewers that Nicole Brown's two sisters, Denise and Dominique, and her mother, Judy Brown, are there, while Mr.
Simpson, they say, has no family members in the courtroom.


137 Cubans Land in Florida; Largest Boatload Since 1980
The largest single boatload of Cuban refugees to land in Florida since the Mariel boatlift in 1980 docked here today, joining a wave of Cubans fleeing their homeland that is the greatest since the 1980 influx, when 125,000 landed in Florida.
The 137 men, women and children who made the 90-mile journey from Cuba in a 75-foot steel-hulled freighter pushed this year's total to 3,854; of that total, 1,173 arrived in June.
With the year now at the halfway mark, the number of Cuban refugees arriving by raft or boat has surpassed the total of 3,656 who fled here in all of 1993, immigration officials say.


Mauritania Crash Kills 94
An Air Mauritania passenger plane crashed today at an airport in central Mauritania, killing 94 of the 101 people on board, aviation authorities said.
A sandstorm appeared to be the cause of the accident.
But officials said they were receiving different accounts from the scene about how the storm caused the Fokker 28 to crash.
The plane was on a flight from the capital, Nouakchott,  to Tidjikja, about 250 miles east.


Tire Recycling Works, And It's Also the Law
To the Editor:
The National Association of Counties has listed waste tires as its No. 1 solid-waste problem.
Unfortunately, a well-financed special interest campaign is distorting the benefits associated with implementing a section of United States  transportation law that requires federally supported highways to use a small percentage of discarded tires in highway asphalt (Section 1038 of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act).


Texan's Cash Will Finance TV Program For G.O.P.
Saying that Americans "need more facts and less propaganda," Ross Perot announced today that he would pay for a prime-time network television program on health care to be broadcast by the Republican National Committee.
"The Republican Party wants an opportunity to explain health care to the American people," Mr.
Perot said in a statement from Dallas.
"I have agreed to pay for this television time so the American people can have more balanced information before they make a decision on this very important issue affecting every family in this country."


Public &amp; Private;Ever So Much
A British publication called Tatler is my new favorite magazine because it is completely irrelevant to my life in every way.
The bad news is that it costs $5.50 here in the States, which is what the folks at Tatler call America.
The good news is that they spell airplane like this: aeroplane.
Ever so much nicer.
In real life I don't ever say ever so much anything but when I've had a read  of Tatler I start to talk the way Tatler talks, which is, I like to think, Trollope by way of Duran Duran.
Very very British.
Or maybe it's just a magazine version of what we in the States think of as very very British.
The good news is that instead of getting fired, in Tatler you get sacked.
Ever so much nicer.


Reno Wants to Reappoint Fiske Under a New Law
One day after President Clinton signed a bill reinstating the independent prosecutor law, Attorney General Janet Reno asked a panel of judges to appoint the Whitewater prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr., under the provisions of the statute to underscore his independence from the Administration.
Lawyers familiar with the law also said it was nearly certain that Ms.
Reno would also soon ask the judges to name an independent prosecutor to take over another case, the Justice Department's inquiry into Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy.


Frank H. Partridge, Immigration Official And General, 100
Frank Huber Partridge, a retired major general in the Army and former assistant commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, died on Tuesday at Mount Vernon Hospital in Alexandria, Va.
A former resident of Arlington, he was 100.
Born in Scranton, Pa., he began his military career in 1917 when he was commissioned as an infantry officer.
He attended the University of Pennsylvania  and also graduated from the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kan.


CHRONICLE
Divorce denied: that's what a jury said to AL GOLDSTEIN after five minutes of deliberation on Thursday.
Mr.
Goldstein, 58, the producer of "Midnight Blue," a  cable television program, and the publisher of Screw magazine, had filed for both a divorce and an annulment after four years of marriage to PATRICIA FLAHERTY GOLDSTEIN, 32.
"I didn't even have time to get off the bench," said Justice DAVID B. SAXE of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, who presided over the trial.
"I have never had a jury come back so fast."


Brooklyn Law Names Woman as Its Dean
Joan G. Wexler, who has served as acting dean of Brooklyn Law School since January, has been named dean, the board announced this week.
Mrs.
Wexler, who is 47 years old, had served as associate for academic affairs since 1987.
She is the first woman to head the school in its 93-year history.


Transactions
Baseball American League


Sampras and Ivanisevic Perform Aces Above Rest
The serve's the thing, especially at Wimbledon, and in today's semifinals, Wimbledon's defending champion, Pete Sampras, and this event's 1992 runner-up, Goran Ivanisevic, used it differently but definitively to gain the privilege of  facing each other Sunday in the sport's most coveted Grand Slam final.
Sampras didn't serve as powerfully as he had hoped, but his biggest stroke never failed him in the pivotal moments and was largely responsible for his 6-4, 6-4, 3-6, 6-3 defeat of Todd Martin, the same player he downed earlier this year in the Australian Open final.


Visions of Blackberry Picking Can Sustain the Straphanger;Dull the Driver's Edge
To the Editor:
I agree in principle with "Freeloaders, Not Bozos" by Stephen B. Dobrow (letter, June 16), about subsidies for people who drive to work.
But there is an effort to improve things that readers should know about.


Robbins &amp; Myers Deal
Robbins &amp; Myers Inc. has completed the acquisition of the Pfaudler, Chemineer and Edlon business units of Eagle Industries for $124 million in cash and notes.
Annual sales of the three businesses amount to about $170 million.
Eagle, based  in Chicago, is a unit of Great American Management and Investment Inc., a holding company controlled by the Chicago financier Samuel Zell.


Dedicated Lawyers for Indigent Are a Bargain;Anti-Taxpayer Verdicts
To the Editor:
Jury awards against public entities in personal-injury lawsuits have grown ominously.
New York City's payout alone has gone up every year since 1986 -- the last time the State Legislature attempted tort reform -- from $103.7 million to  nearly $260 million in this fiscal year.


New Japanese Premier Tries to Calm Fears
Japan's first Socialist Prime Minister in a half-century tried to quell nervousness in Washington and Tokyo by abandoning -- at least for the moment --  virtually all policies he and his party have advocated since the end of World War II.


Nets Are Hoping No. 1 Pick Will Stand Tall as a Rookie
In his first official day as a New Jersey Net, Yinka Dare was asked to stand  next to Willis Reed, vice president and general manager, and Butch Beard, the new coach, for a photo opportunity.
As the three stood side by side, Reed adjusted his tie, smoothed over his hair and glanced to his left at Dare (pronounced da-RAY).
He then had to gaze upward.
Eyes widened, Reed could not help but smile.


RIBI STOCK OFF AFTER SETBACK ON SKIN CANCER DRUG
The stock of Ribi Immunochem Research Inc. tumbled yesterday, a day after the drug research company reported disappointing results for its product to treat skin cancer.
The stock of the company, based in Hamilton, Mont., was off $3.50,  or 46 percent, at $4, on the Nasdaq system, where 2.1 million shares were traded.
Ribi said late Thursday that a trial showed its Melacine vaccine could not enhance the life expectancy of melanoma patients with dark-pigmented malignant tumors.
Analysts said the news gave Ribi a gloomy outlook.


3 Teen-Agers Held in Killings Of 2 In Brooklyn and Queens
Three 15-year-olds who the police said wanted money for the Fourth of July weekend were accused yesterday of killing a Consolidated Edison worker and a visiting California college student during a robbery spree.
The police said the youths, all from East New York, Brooklyn, shot and killed the victims, Gerald Mituniewicz, 43, a utility worker, and Matthew Blek, 21, a student, on Tuesday night while trying unsuccessfully to steal their wallets.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


After a Long Look, Analysts Welcome CBS-QVC Deal
If the merger of CBS Inc. and QVC Inc. is completed, the new company should not incur a slip in per-share earnings, even after paying CBS investors about $2.9 billion in cash.
That was one conclusion that Wall Street analysts reached yesterday after a lengthy, if somewhat confusing, conference call with CBS executives.


Business Digest
Companies Top executives of Federated Department Stores presented their plan to board members of R. H. Macy &amp; Company for merging the two retail companies amid increasing signs that Federated's turbulent courtship of Macy may finally pay off. [Page 33.]


Senate Fails to Lift Bosnia Arms Embargo
By the narrowest of margins, the Senate failed today to muster enough votes to pass a resolution demanding that President Clinton lift the Bosnian arms embargo unilaterally.
The action spares the President a major embarrassment as he prepares to meet next week with European allies who strongly support the embargo.
The closeness of the vote -- the principal measure was defeated on a tie of 50 to 50 -- prevented the White House from declaring a full-fledged victory.
But the Administration can take credit for its intense lobbying campaign, which included bringing European foreign ministers to Capitol Hill.


ALBANY IN ACCORD ON SCHOOL DISTRICT FOR HASIDIC GROUP
Just four days after the United States Supreme Court ruled that a public school district created specially for ultra-Orthodox Jews was unconstitutional,  Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders reached agreement today on a bill that would allow the district to continue operating.
The legislation is intended to address constitutional issues raised by the high court when it struck down the Kiryas Joel Village School District in Orange County, which was created by the Governor and Legislature in 1989 to serve about 200 Satmar Hasidic children with disabilities.


Six Major-Party Candidates Compete in an Open Race to Succeed Weicker
The issues in Connecticut's race for governor have already been decided.
Among the six Democrats and Republicans campaigning to succeed Lowell P. Weicker Jr., everyone agrees that the state needs more jobs and less crime.
But as the Weicker era comes to a close, neither major party is agreed on who will represent its cause on the ballot come November.
At this stage, the public  barely knows who is running.


Preston Caradine, Co-Founder of Cafe And Comedian, 69
Preston (Patch) Caradine, a founder of Serendipity 3, the whimsical East Side ice-cream parlor-restaurant-boutique, died on Monday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 69 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said Jan Ferrell, his friend and former stage partner.


Arafat Enters Gaza to Stake His Claim
Yasir Arafat was heralded today as "the miracle-maker, the teacher, the leader, the fighter" when he was introduced to the crowds awaiting his first speech upon his triumphant arrival in Gaza.
But the exhortations failed to arouse an echo from the tens of thousands of Palestinians gathered to hear the words of the man coming from the outside to lead them.
Indeed, one thing became clear the first day the P.L.O, chairman set  foot in what he called "the first free Palestinian land:" It will take more than a speech to impress these Palestinians.


Unbeaten Germans Remain Distracted
The German team is like a diesel engine," said defender Jurgen Kohler. "It takes a while for it to warm up."
This year, it is taking longer than usual.


BankAmerica Aids 2 Funds
The BankAmerica Corporation has put $50.5 million into two money market funds that had losses related to derivatives trading, the second time in a month the company has made up losses at its mutual funds.
BankAmerica, the nation's second-largest banking company, put the money into  its Pacific Horizon Prime Money Market Fund and Pacific Horizon Government Fund  because of their investments in complex derivative securities known as structured notes.


As French Aid the Tutsi, Backlash Grows
Taking a risk that will make their presence more precarious, the French military decided today to position 50 troops in these mountains to protect several hundred wounded and hungry members of the Tutsi ethnic group.
The French assistance for the Tutsis will certainly inflame the Government, which is dominated by the Hutu tribe and had expected the French, who have come  to their aid in the past, to help them defeat the Tutsi-led rebels.


Winners Named in Ballet Competition
Johan Kobborg of Denmark has been awarded the top prize in the 1994 USA International Ballet Competition in Jackson, Miss.
Mr.
Kobborg, a 22-year-old soloist with the Royal Danish Ballet, won the Grand Prix City of Jackson Award of Excellence by a unanimous decision of a 12-member international jury.
In addition, 22 medals and cash prizes of more than $55,000 were awarded to competitors from 12 countries.
The awards were announced yesterday at the close of the two-week event, one of two independent international competitions held in the United States.
The other is the New York International Ballet Competition, held every three years in New York City.


Bally Seeks 25% of Circus Circus
The Bally Entertainment Corporation has filed with the Federal Trade Commission for clearance to buy as much as 25 percent of Circus Circus Enterprises Inc.
But many analysts said that Bally, burdened with debt, would have a hard time raising the money.
Rather, they said, its reported bid for a stake in Circus Circus, a casino company based in Las Vegas, Nev., could prompt the Circus Circus board to do more to increase shareholder value.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday, about the Johnson &amp; Johnson Company's home testing kit for cholesterol, misstated the current name of the cholesterol-testing device manufactured by Chemtrak Inc.
The device is now known as Accu Meter; Cholestrak is its old name.


Treasury Prices Seesaw In Pre-Holiday Trading
Prices of Treasury securities seesawed yesterday in an abbreviated and thinly traded pre-holiday session after a series of conflicting economic reports that failed to generate more concern about inflation and higher interest rates.
Victoria M. Schwatka, a senior vice president for Legg Mason Capital Management in Baltimore, said there was so little trading activity that she wondered whether anyone had bothered to go to work.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on June 22 about management changes at the Woolworth Corporation misstated the action taken by Frederick E. Hennig.
He remains president and chief operating officer; he stepped down only as acting vice chairman and as acting chief executive of the Woolworth Canada subsidiary.


Religion Notes
Go-Ahead for Altar Girls


Polish Senate Votes to Liberalize Law Restricting Abortions
In a surprising move, the Polish Senate has narrowly voted to ease the country's strict abortion law, approving a similar decision by the lower house of Parliament.
But to become law, the legislation must be signed by President Lech Walesa, or his veto must be overturned by two-thirds of the lower house.
The bill would  permit abortions in cases of "difficult material conditions or a demanding personal situation."


INSIDE
Bosnia Embargo Preserved


For Once, Powerhouse Can't Produce the Votes
For years, Representative John D. Dingell has been one of the most intrepid investigators and dominant committee chairmen in Congress.
He has taken on the Pentagon, the Environmental Protection Agency and the National Institutes of Health.
He has exposed unsafe blood banks, bottled water  and pacemakers.
He has championed civil rights bills and blocked gun control measures.
His fingerprints are on every piece of energy and environmental legislation that has been enacted in a generation.


Federated's Macy Plan Advances
Top executives of Federated Department Stores Inc. met yesterday with board members of R. H. Macy &amp; Company and presented their plan for merging the two retail companies amid increasing signs that their long, turbulent courtship of Macy may finally pay off.
Allen I. Questrom, Federated's chairman and chief executive and one of the country's consummate salesmen, and other members of the Federated team regaled Macy's directors with their plans for converting certain of Federated's stores to Macy's stores, which would give Macy's an even greater national reach.
They spoke of the savings that could be wrung from a consolidated company, estimated  at about $100 million.
And they tried to assuage any concerns directors might have about potential antitrust issues.


Woman Gets Life in Killing of Stepmother
A teen-ager who hired her boyfriend and another teen-ager to kill her millionaire parents has been sentenced to life in prison.
A jury rejected the option of sentencing her to death by injection.
Kristi Koslow, 19, was sentenced on Thursday, a day after being convicted of  murder in the death of her 40-year-old stepmother, Caren Koslow, an oil heiress.
Prosecutors said Ms.
Koslow wanted her parents' fortune.


No Headline
There was a lot of blood, and I just turned around.
I told my wife, 'There's a dead person there, and we should call 911." -- SUKRU BOZTEPE, testifying at the O. J. Simpson hearing. [20:1.]


Bland but Tough, Gov. Wilson Uses Lessons of Nixon
The words rolled soberly off Gov.
Pete Wilson's tongue in his eulogy for Richard M. Nixon: "It was his heart that taught us the great lesson of Richard Nixon's life. Never give up. Never give up. Never, ever, give up."
Mr.
Wilson, an advance man for Mr.
Nixon's unsuccessful campaign for governor of California in 1962, was talking as much about himself that afternoon last April.
The eulogy was sprinkled with passages that suited both men, down to the  Governor's description of Mr.
Nixon's "iron will." It was not lost on followers  of his career that Mr.
Wilson had been given the less-refined accolade of "iron  butt" for his political durability -- a durability evidenced by his improving ratings in the polls.


Rig Count Up 5, to 766
The number of working oil and gas rigs nationwide rose by five this week, to  766, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.
A year ago this time the count was 732.
Of the rigs running this week, 415 were exploring for natural gas and 333 for oil and 18 were listed as miscellaneous.
Since 1940 the Houston-based Baker Hughes has kept track of the rig count, which represents the number of rigs actively exploring for oil and natural gas.


Blossom Tribute To Departed Colleague
Looking like one of Moliere's hilarious fake potentates in a voluminous red robe and huge toque, but actually depicting the Mother Nature of her own vivid imagination, Beverly Blossom stood behind a thick tapestry of falling confetti.
At the end of her dance premiere, "Whither in Winter," she stepped through this  snowfall, spread her arms elatedly and shed her outer garments.
She placed them  on the floor and receded into the darkness behind the white flakes.
Much of the program of "Beverly Blossom in Concert' on Thursday night at Marymount Manhattan Theater had a similar magic, couched in simple but bold theatrical images. The recurring themes were cyclical change: death as linked to life.


S.I. Grand Jury Is Delayed In Investigation of Officers
The grand jury investigating the death of 22-year-old Ernest Sayon in police  custody on Staten Island in April has met once in the last two weeks, has one session scheduled during July and is unlikely to conclude its inquiry before fall, the Staten Island District Attorney said yesterday.
The prosecutor, William L. Murphy, acknowledged that the work of the grand jury was proceeding slower than anticipated, but said the need to hear nearly 100 witnesses had prompted the panel on June 17 to extend its original one-month term to Oct. 31.
As a result, he said, the jurors' previously scheduled vacation and work plans had disrupted their capacity to meet over the summer.


Goals, Surprises and a Big Downer
The shock of Diego Maradona's ouster for ephedrine use left a sour taste on the final day of the World Cup's first round -- a day further spoiled by Argentina's pallid performance in losing to Bulgaria -- but in a tournament of surprises, most shocks have been pleasant.
There have been half a dozen upsets, some unexpected feats by players (who would have dreamed a Saudi Arabian would score the tournament's most beautiful goal?) and more entertaining games than in any cup in recent memory.


Stars and Stripes Along the Hudson


U-S-A! U-S-A!
Round two of the World Cup.
Two dozen national teams have cut each other down to 16, and now enter the elimination matches where you win or you are out.
The final two weeks of the month-long competition for world primacy in soccer, this  planet's most popular sport, begins today.
But the big moment for the U.S.A. is  Monday, the Fourth of July, when it meets the Brazilians.
Brazil, a three-time champion, is a prime contender to win the title again.
But anyone who has watched the first round has learned to expect the unexpected.
The Colombian team, an early favorite, is on its way home.
And Saudi Arabia, a relative newcomer to the sport and a World Cup neophyte, is still here, poised for the round of 16.
Win or lose, the Saudis have already made their mark, with  Saeed al-Owairan's spectacular 60-yard run through Belgian defenders the other day to score the game's only goal.


Corrections
A brief report in the Pop Life column on Thursday about an advertisement on MTV for an album by the rock band Hole misidentified the album.
It was "Live Through This"; "Pretty on the Inside" was a previous album.


Isadore From, Main Theorizer Of Gestalt Therapy, Dies at 75
Isadore From, one of the formulators of the innovative approach to psychotherapy called Gestalt therapy, died on Monday.
He was 75.
Mr.
From died of a stroke during treatment for cancer, said Hunt Cole, his companion for 34 years.


Lakers Acquire Draft Rights to Miller
The Los Angeles Lakers acquired the draft rights to 6-foot-9-inch ANTHONY MILLER of Michigan State in a trade with the Golden State Warriors.
The acquisition of the 255-pound Miller gives the Lakers something lacking in their other draft choices Wednesday, rebounding strength to complement their many outside shooters.


Workers Say Trains Need 2 Operators
Ron Hershenfeld, a conductor, leaned out his window to watch the last passenger sprinting toward his train, vaulting the gap between the platform and  the Times Square-Grand Central Shuttle.
Some passengers wore suits, some wore track shoes, and one wore a clear plastic bag against the rain.
"People!" Mr.
Hershenfeld said softly.
"They don't realize there's a schedule. They think it's the last train."


London Art Auctions: No Gaps
The art world's most visible dealers and collectors were in London this week  for the June auctions of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art.
Some came to bid, others to buy in the public forum of Christie's and Sotheby's salesrooms.
Still others, knowing that many of the world's top collectors would  be on hand, could be spotted quietly doing business in hotel lobbies, restaurants and in the back rooms of galleries.
But the majority came simply out of curiosity, to see whether the sales, which ended on Thursday, would fare better than those in New York just six weeks ago, which were disappointing to many.
The results here were mixed.
Unlike the reaction at the New York sales, no gasps of horror were heard when works by top artists failed to sell, let alone elicit a bid.
If many dealers and collectors came prepared for the worst, by today they were talking about the packed salesrooms and the protracted bidding wars for the most desirable works of art.
"Looking at the week as a whole it appears this round of auctions were generally stronger than the sales in New York, which I consider a positive sign," said Barbara Mathes, a New York dealer.


Holiday on Monday
Monday is Independence Day. Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK


U.N. Officers Freed By Liberian Faction
Six United Nations military officers were taken prisoner by a Liberian militia this week and were released today, officials of the United Nations mission in Liberia said.
The six United Nations hostages -- all colonels, majors and captains -- included two from Jordan, and one each from Egypt, Pakistan, Uruguay and Bangladesh.
The United Nations mission said they had been beaten and refused food while they were being held.


Deterring Nuclear Theft
Chilling stories continue to emerge from Russia about nuclear material for sale.
While Russian security officials downplay the risk, the prospect that the  Russian mafia is getting into the nuclear market is sufficiently alarming that Louis Freeh, Director of the F.B.I., is arriving in Moscow today to take up the  issue with law enforcement officials.
Some reports of attempted sales are under investigation, but it is not clear  the sellers had anything to deliver; no confirmed cases of the theft of a nuclear warhead or significant amounts of fissile material have yet come to light.
U.S. officials are taking prudent steps to control loose nukes throughout the former Soviet Union.
But it is unnerving to think about the potential scope  of the problem and how much remains to be done.


Copper Climbs on Reports Of Shrinking Inventories
Copper prices, reacting to reports of shrinking inventories, climbed yesterday for the third straight trading session.
But, although crude oil prices also rose, the Commodity Research Bureau's index slipped 0.36 point, to 230.03, pulled down by weakness in the hog and grain markets.


Utah Releases Chambers and Eaton
The former N.B.A. all-star TOM CHAMBERS was released by the Utah Jazz after a rollercoaster 13th season in the league.
The Jazz also released the former all-star and two-time N.B.A. defensive player of the year MARK EATON, who sat out the season with injuries.


Giuliani Says Deputy Made A Mistake
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that his deputy, John S. Dyson, had  made a mistake by using the word "watermelon" in discussing whether to hire a company owned by a black woman to market New York City's bonds.
But the Mayor, attempting to defuse mounting criticism over the remark, said  critics should accept the apology Mr.
Dyson had already offered.


Visions of Blackberry Picking Can Sustain the Straphanger
To the Editor:
There is something in today's subway car for the transit-traumatized and the  work weary.
Blooming amid the depressing refuse of "Torn Earlobe?" and "Pregnant? No insurance?" are scattered bits of bright language, windows of worlds beyond the grimy glass of the subway.


Jim Bakker Freed From Jail To Stay in a Halfway House
Four years in prison behind him, the former television evangelist Jim Bakker  moved into a halfway house in the Blue Ridge mountains today to complete the remaining six months of his sentence.
The 53-year-old Mr.
Bakker left a minimum-security prison in Jesup, Ga., at 4 A.M. today.
Smiling broadly and deeply tanned, he arrived here aboard a commercial flight from Atlanta just before lunch.


Five Groups Play Free, Rewarding the Hardy
New York's hardiest jazz fans outlasted a thunderstorm to hear five groups play a free concert on Thursday afternoon at Bryant Park.
The few proud umbrella-bearers were rewarded by hearing two extraordinary young pianists with  their trios, a rambunctious big band and two groups on the jazzy side of pop-jazz.
The pianists were Jacky Terrasson and Cyrus Chestnut, two players who toss around thick, two-handed chords.
Mr.
Chestnut had a light touch in music that spilled over with virtuosic ebullience: zooming, looping runs or laconic, understated Count Basie-ish lines, both leading to opulent chords.
His solos were both luxuriant and rigorous, as he showed off without losing a sense of logic and momentum.


CHEMICAL GETS 99% OF MARGARETTEN FINANCIAL
Chemical Bank N.A., a unit of the Chemical Banking Corporation, said yesterday that it had received 99 percent of the Margaretten Financial Corporation's common stock in its $330 million tender offer to acquire the New Jersey mortgage banking company.
The offer, worth $25 for each Margaretten share, expired on Thursday.
Chemical said it intended to complete the merger later this month.
Shareholder approval is not required, it said.
Chemical stock was up 37.5 cents yesterday, to $38.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Police Roadblocks Casting Wide Net for Drunken Drivers
Edward M. Rochniak can't say he wasn't warned.
Minutes before he was charged  with drunken driving, he drove past the diamond-shaped signs that said "Drunk Driving Check" and "Police Ahead," past an intersection where he could have turned off, and joined a line of cars waiting to be examined by the police.
For the 22 officers who set up the checkpoint, finding drinkers was only a partial objective, and indeed only one person, Mr.
Rochniak, was charged with that crime.
The real goal was to spread fear among people who drink and drive, especially on this Fourth of July weekend, when, national statistics show, there is more drunken driving than almost any other holiday.


Rangers' Richter Leads List of Free Agents
Goaltender MIKE RICHTER, who helped the Rangers end a 54-year Stanley Cup drought, headed a list of 108 National Hockey League players who became eligible yesterday for free agency.
Richter was included among 64 restricted free agents whose rights can be retained should their clubs match offers from others.
Signing of any of those players would require compensation to their former clubs.


Bad News for Investors in World Bonds
Among diversified world bond funds, the news has been mostly bad this year.
The T. Rowe Price International Bond fund, which does not hedge, received a boost from the gains of foreign currencies against the dollar.
As the dollar weakened this year, funds that invest in overseas currencies soared, but they were omitted from this list because they are a small, volatile group.
Among the top performers in that group are Fidelity Yen Performance, with a gain of 9.2 percent for the year, and Franklin/Templeton Hard Currency, which is up 8.6 percent.


Argentina Sees Conspiracy Behind Maradona's Fall
It's a plot.
For Argentina, those are words have echoed through much of its history as an  explanation when "bad" things happened to "good" people.


Griffey Lets One Rip, a Single, to Sting Yankees
Ken Griffey did not hit a home run last night.
In a season that has begun to  take on Ruthian proportions, as his chase of Roger Maris's 61 home runs makes the turn into July, that may take on greater significance with each passing game.
But after eight innings of dramatic twists and turns, Griffey hit a ball hard enough to make a difference.
For one summer night, in The House That You-Know-Who Built, that would be enough.
Griffey's hard line drive, which handcuffed the Yankees' rookie second baseman Dave Silvestri, passed into right field to score Rich Amaral with the winning run in Seattle's 4-3 victory at Yankee Stadium.
Griffey, who has gone six games without a home run, his third-longest drought in a 32-homer season, produced the hit on an 0-2 pitch from the Yankee reliever Steve Howe.


Party in Italy Picks Leader
Reeling from electoral defeat, Italy's former Communists, now the Democratic  Party of the Left, chose the deputy leader today to take over the party.
The winner, Massimo D'Alema, 45, a former journalist, had been thought to be  running behind his sole challenger, Walter Veltroni, 39, editor of the party newspaper, L'Unita, in the race to succeed Achille Occhetto.
Mr.
D'Alema received 249 votes to Mr.
Veltroni's 173, an outcome that some leftists depicted as reflecting the power of the party's traditional power brokers.


SAFECO TO CURB HOMEOWNER POLICIES IN CALIFORNIA
The Safeco Corporation said yesterday that it would suspend sales of new homeowners policies in California as a result of an estimated $175 million in losses from the January earthquake.
Safeco is the fifth insurer since May to limit or halt such coverage in the state, following Allstate, Farmers Insurance  Group, State Farm and Twentieth Century Industries.
"California has been the site of many of the largest catastrophic losses the insurance industry has ever faced," said William E. Thomas, a Safeco senior vice president.


Arafat's Return: Unity Is 'the Shield of Our People'
Following is a transcript of an address by Yasir Arafat today upon his return to Gaza, as translated by The New York Times:
Truth is the word of the Lord; in the name of Allah the merciful, we bring the victory of our servant and of the faithful.


Hiring Your Child Proves to Be a Real Money Saver
Over the years, Sue and Robert Cordell have hired their two daughters in the  family business.
Cordell Engraving, in Foster City, Calif.
While keeping the salary in the family, they have reduced their tax bill.
"This is an example of income shifting," said their financial adviser, Lawrence K.Y.
Pon, an accountant for IDS Financial Services Inc.
Because their daughters are in a lower tax bracket, they pay less tax than their parents would on the income.
For someone in the top Federal tax bracket of 39.6 percent, every dollar of income shifted to a child will save 25 cents in taxes.
Just be sure you can prove to the Internal Revenue Service that you are paying your youngster a reasonable wage, Mr.
Pon said.


LASMO FENDS OFF A HOSTILE BID FROM ENTERPRISE OIL
Enterprise Oil P.L.C. said yesterday that its hostile bid of L1.6 billion, or $2.5 billion, for a rival British oil company, Lasmo, had lapsed after it won only 32.8 percent of Lasmo's shares.
"We are naturally disappointed at the outcome of the bid," said Enterprise Oil's chairman and chief executive, Graham  Hearne.
The news brought to an end a bitter two-month war of words since Enterprise first made a play for Lasmo at the end of April.


Disappointment for Dingell
Representative John D. Dingell had to admit this week that he could not muster the votes to have his panel pass a health care bill.
Page 7.


Grass Is Greener on Other Side for Lure
It's official.
The grass champion Lure will leave for England on July 21 and  will race in the Sussex Stakes at Goodwood six days later.
SHUG McGAUGHEY, who trains Lure for the Claiborne Farm, said the decision was made yesterday, four days after the 5-year-old star won the $500,000 Caesars International at Atlantic City.
"He's shipped well everywhere else he's gone," McGaughey said.
"He seems to thrive on it."


Pfizer Unit to Settle Charges Of Lying About Heart Valve
A unit of Pfizer Inc. has agreed to pay $10.75 million to settle Justice Department claims that the company lied to get Federal approval for a mechanical heart valve that has fractured, killing hundreds of patients worldwide.
Under the settlement, which was announced on Thursday, both Pfizer and Shiley Inc. also agreed to pay $9.25 million in coming years to monitor patients who received the device at Veterans Administration hospitals or pay for its removal.
Both companies denied any liability or wrongdoing.


Musical Tradition of Acrimony
It is a tradition of the celebrated International Tchaikovsky Competition for all piano finalists to play Tchaikovsky's Concerto No. 1
It is just as much a tradition for every competition to at some point break down into scandal, controversy and tears.


Plane Makes Emergency Landing on New Jersey Beach


Corrections
The Funds Watch table in the Your Money pages on June 25 included an erroneous sales charge for the Lexington Worldwide Emerging Markets fund.
The Lexington fund is a no-load mutual fund; there is no 5 percent sales charge.


Settlement in Insider Case
Steven Greenberg, a member of the so-called Society Seven insider-trading ring accused of swapping stock tips at their Long Island summer homes, has agreed to pay $1.5 million to settle the charges against him.
Mr.
Greenberg, a New York public relations executive, became the third member of the ring to settle the 1992 Securities and Exchange Commission civil suit.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Hobday Undetered as Storm Disrupts Play Simon Hobday, playing at a record pace on rain-softened greens, grabbed a two-shot overnight lead yesterday in the storm-disrupted and uncompleted second  round of the United States Senior Open in Pinehurst, N.C.
The South African was  nine-under-par for the tournament -- which would match the Senior Open record for 36 holes -- with one hole to play when the round was stopped by darkness at  8:30 P.M., Eastern time.
Now he will have to wait until today to see if he can match or beat the record.
He was among 33 players still on the rain-soaked No. 2 course when darkness fell at the Pinehurst Country Club.
They marked their positions and were to return at 7 A.M. to complete second-round play.
The third  round is set for this afternoon. (AP)


Brooklyn Subway Station Gets a New Look


Safeguarding Mexico's Election
Mexico hopes to convince investors it will remain one of Latin America's most politically stable and economically attractive countries through the rest of the century.
Whether it succeeds depends on the credibility of its Aug. 21 presidential election.
That is why political and business leaders shuddered last weekend when Jorge  Carpizo MacGregor announced his resignation as the Government's chief election officer.
By Sunday, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari had persuaded Mr.
Carpizo, widely respected for his integrity, to stay on.
But it was an alarmingly close call.


Honoring Billy Taylor's Life in Music
Midway in a concert at Carnegie Hall on Thursday celebrating Billy Taylor's 50 years in jazz, the pianist, composer and bandleader was presented with a plaque by his record company, GRP, praising his work as a musician, historian and educator.
It was a fitting accolade for the man who founded the influential  jazz education organization Jazzmobile 30 years ago.
And during the show, which  was part of the JVC Jazz Festival, Mr.
Taylor played all three roles with an engaging ease and bonhomie.
Where the majority of jazz musicians onstage simply perform their music without bothering to place it in a historical or stylistic context, Mr.
Taylor provided annotation that was useful without being labored.
The composer dedicated the evening's longest and most ambitious piece, "Homage," in which his trio was joined by the Turtle Island String Quartet, to the influential jazz violinists Eddie South and Stuff Smith.


Dollar Shows Some Gains After a Week of Declines
The dollar strengthened against the Japanese yen yesterday for the first time in a week and gained against other currencies in light trading.
But the market remained bearish about prospects for the dollar.
Dealers avoided making big trades ahead of next week's summit meeting of the  Group of Seven industrial nations and a meeting of the Federal Reserve's policy-making board.
Either meeting could have a large impact on interest rates  and international currency policies.


Finance Panel Agrees on Plan Subsidizing Health for the Poor
The Senate Finance Committee, struggling to complete work on health care legislation, agreed tonight on a large package of compromises.
But the committee adjourned without finishing and planned to return on Saturday to wrap up its bill, which would raise less money to finance the plan than its earlier version would but would still promise to subsidize insurance for the poor.


First Brands Selling Its Prestone Unit
The First Brands Corporation said yesterday that it would sell its Prestone antifreeze business to the unit's managers and Vestar Capital Partners, a New York investment firm.


A Move Along the Food Chain
Back in the old days, food wholesalers like the Fleming Companies Inc. stocked the shelves and bins of the general store with fruits and vegetables, canned goods and bread and other staples and left the selling to the grocers.
But now general stores have evolved into supermarkets, combining delicatessens, butchers and fish markets under one roof.
And big wholesalers like Fleming have moved beyond their original roles, crossing into the retail food business and blurring the line between the grocer and the middleman.


Immigration Official Faces Federal Charge
A top immigration official in San Francisco was in Federal custody in Texas today on charges of selling documents to illegal immigrants in the San Francisco area.
The official, William Malcolm Tait, 45, was arrested by the Department of Justice, said Anthony Odom, the chief deputy United States Marshal in Dallas.


Defendant Says His Confession Was Coerced
Sal Inghilleri testified today that he did not molest Katie Beers and that he only confessed to the crime because a detective withheld his heart medication and threatened to jail him on the spot.


Wall St. Watches Its New-Issues Business Tumble
The volume of new stock and bond issues tumbled in the second quarter to the  lowest level since the third quarter of 1991 amid volatile financial markets and rising interest rates.
The decline was bad news for Wall Street, which saw quarterly underwriting fees fall to the lowest level in nearly three years.


Hotels for Homeless Resist City Payment Cuts
Six of the 15 hotels that New York City uses to house homeless families have  refused to accept a cut in the city's payments, and a city official warned yesterday that the impasse could soon lead to a shortage of shelter space for such families.
Joan Malin, commissioner of the Department of Homeless Services, said budget  reductions had forced the department to cut the rate it pays to the hotels by 5 percent.
But some hotel owners have said they would not accept the lower rates, and Ms.
Malin said the city would no longer be able to afford to place people in those hotels.


Tents for Haitians Rise Again at Guantanamo
For the last two days, 1,700 American troops have been working around the clock, once again, to raise a tent city here for thousands of Haitian refugees.
But the boat people are flowing in faster than the soldiers can pitch tents.
Coast Guard cutters delivered 500 more Haitians today, bringing the total to  1,956 since the camps opened on Wednesday.
Hundreds more remain on United States ships offshore.


Testimony on a Bloody Dog Is Attack on Simpson Alibi
Testimony about a dog's plaintive wails and bloodied paws helped prosecutors  today as they tried to demonstrate that O. J. Simpson had enough time to kill his former wife and a friend of hers on the night of June 12.
On the second day of a preliminary hearing that will determine whether the murder case against Mr.
Simpson is strong enough to take to trial, the prosecution called on four neighbors of his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, to testify about the dog, an Akita that wandered around their neighborhood, barking forlornly, until it led two of them to her front gate, where her body was discovered in a pool of blood.


WORTHEN BANKING STUDIES POSSIBLE SALE OF COMPANY
The Worthen Banking Corporation, Arkansas's second-biggest banking company, said yesterday that it was considering "strategic alternatives" that could include selling the company.
Worthen, which has $3.5 billion in assets and 112 offices, said it was "engaged in a comprehensive evaluation"of its alternatives, including remaining independent.
It said it had hired Paine Webber Inc. as an adviser in considering those alternatives.
The company declined further comment.
Worthen's shares closed up $1.125 yesterday, at its 52-week high of $30.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Worthen's announcement comes less than a month after the company, based in Little Rock, hired a new president and chief executive, Jim G. Farmer.
He assumed the titles from Curt Bradbury, now chairman of the holding company.


Simpson on TV In 1 in 4 Homes
As many as one in four homes in the United States tuned in to the opening day of O. J. Simpson's court hearing, a television analyst said yesterday.
"That would be supplemented, of course, by a significant out-of-home audience, since it ran in the lunch hour for most of the country," said David Poltrack, an audience researcher for CBS.
ABC, CBS and NBC pre-empted their regular programs for live coverage on Thursday, earning a combined rating of 16.6 and a 49 audience share for the period from noon to 3 P.M.
Eastern time in the 31 markets covered by the overnight report of the Nielsen rating service.


BENSON EYECARE SET TO ACQUIRE OPTICAL RADIATION
The Benson Eyecare Corporation agreed yesterday to acquire the Optical Radiation Corporation for $26 a share in cash and stock, a total of about $150 million.
Benson, which controls a 9 percent stake in Optical Radiation through a partnership, outbid several other parties for the company, an operator of wholesale laboratories that grind prescription eyeglasses.
Benson Eyecare, based in Rye, N.Y., distributes ready-to-wear reading glasses and prescription glasses through ophthalmologists and retailers.
Each of the 5.9 million shares of Optical Radiation's common stock would be exchanged for $17 in cash and three-quarters of a share of Benson common stock.
Optical Radiation, based in Azusa, Calif., also said it would sell the division's intraocular lens business  to Akorn Inc. for 5.3 million shares of Akorn common stock.


Full-Blown AIDS Cases Estimated at 4 Million
The estimated number of full-blown AIDS cases worldwide increased to 4 million from 2.5 million in the last 12 months, an increase of 60 percent, the World Health Organization said today.
Sub-Saharan Africa had the highest number, with 2.5 million cases, the United Nations health agency said in a report of estimated cumulative totals.
But Asia  experienced an eightfold increase of cases, to 250,000 from more than 30,000, the study said.


Orioles, Angels Amass 11 Homers
Orioles 14, Angels 7


Stocks Rise With Dollar On a Light Trading Day
The dollar paused yesterday and stock traders, or at least the few that were  left on Wall Street, were relieved.
After five consecutive sessions of declines, the dollar rallied against both  the Japanese yen and the German mark.
And in light trading, the stock market rallied moderately as traders began the long Fourth of July weekend.


Guarding Credit Cards From the Latest Scams
FOR the companies that issue credit cards and the people who use them, fraud  is an ever-changing concern.
In one of the newest scams, a criminal steals a legitimate card holder's account, persuades the issuing bank to send another card to a new mailing address and quickly runs up large bills.
The card holder may not be liable for the bills, but there is the aggravation of canceling the card and getting a new one, and the anxiety of knowing that your card is in others' hands.


With Turbulence Over, Mets Are Flying High
The homestand was hideous five losses, one rainout and two failed drug tests  -- combining to send the Mets out of town with an ugly losing streak and their best-loved pitcher in seclusion somewhere in New York.
The plane ride, too, was a nightmare, given that the Mets sat on an airport runway for more than two hours, then bumped and bounced through bad weather that made it impossible to sleep.


Herbert Harris, Obstetrician, 68
Dr.
Herbert Harris, an obstetrician and gynecologist who practiced in Brooklyn for more than 30 years, died on Tuesday at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 68 and lived in Neponsit, Queens.
He died of heart failure,  said a spokeswoman for the hospital, where he was an attending physician in the  Mary Polak Oenslager department of obstetrics and gynecology.
Dr.
Harris had been associated with the hospital since he began his residency there in 1952.
At his death he also was a clinical associate professor at the State University Health Science Center in Brooklyn.


CHRONICLE
PERCY SLEDGE will be singing for the Internal Revenue Service for a while.
The singer, best known for the hit "When a Man Loves a Woman," was given five years' probation and ordered to pay more than $95,000 in back taxes yesterday, The Associated Press reported.
He also received a sentence of six months in a halfway house and was ordered to participate in a substance-abuse program.
He can, however, continue to perform.
Mr.
Sledge pleaded guilty in April to tax evasion for failing to report more  than $260,000 in income.


Boston Journal;48 Years Devoted To J.F.K. Are Over
Dave Powers began working for John F. Kennedy in 1946 and did not stop until  today, when he retired as curator of the John F. Kennedy Library.
He heard Kennedy's first political speech in Boston and his last in Fort Worth.
He was one of the President's closest aides, more of a First Friend than  a policy maker.
And after the assassination in Dallas -- where he helped carry the President from the Lincoln convertible into Parkland Memorial Hospital -- he devoted the rest of his life to preserving the Kennedy legacy.


The Top Contenders to Be King of Zydeco
The hooting accordions and clattering percussion of zydeco music still rule the dance floors of the Louisiana bayous.
But who rules zydeco?
That question sent the documentary film maker Robert Mugge to Lake Charles, Lawtell, Eunice and other zydeco strongholds for his latest music documentary, "The Kingdom of Zydeco," which is the midnight show tonight and tomorrow at Cinema Village.
There are also morning shows today, tomorrow and Monday at 11:45.
It's a question of royal succession.
Clifton Chenier was the undisputed king  of zydeco until his death in 1987.
At that point, Rockin' Dopsie, who had called himself the crown prince, began wearing a crown.
Before Dopsie died in 1993, he  told the Louisiana Hall of Fame that Boozoo Chavis, who made the first commercial zydeco recording in 1954, should inherit the title.
But there are other contenders, chief among them the current dance-hall favorite, Beau Jocque, and a larger issue: How far and how fast should zydeco evolve?


FIRST UNION COMPLETES PURCHASE OF FUNDS ADVISER
The First Union Corporation said yesterday that it had completed the acquisition of Lieber &amp; Company, the firm that advises the $3.1 billion family of Evergreen mutual funds, for about 3.1 million shares of stock, worth $143 million at the current price.
The bank holding company, based in Charlotte, N.C., said the transaction was accounted for as a pooling of interests.
The acquisition more than doubles the assets of mutual funds advised by First Union affiliates to about $7 billion and the number of funds rises to 31.
First  Union had about $72 billion of assets as of March 31 and operates more than 1,300 banking offices in the Southeastern United States and another 200 offices  providing financial services in 39 states.
First Union's shares rose 12.5 cents  yesterday, to $46.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Fed Omission Is Disclosed
Federal Reserve officials conferred by telephone daily for two weeks after the stock market crash of October 1987 but only a partial transcript of one conference call was made, an omission that became evident today when the Fed released 600 pages of transcripts from 1987-88 meetings of its policy-making arm, the Open Market Committee.
A Fed spokesman offered no explanation for the failure to transcribe the other calls, saying only that they had not been taped.


COMPANY NEWS
AMERICAN PRECISION INDUSTRIES, Buffalo, a manufacturer of micro-miniature coils  and electromechanical clutches, acquired Harowe Servo Controls Inc., a unit of Hawker Siddeley Holdings Inc., for $4.5 million to $5 million.


Lester Mallory, 90, Former U.S. Envoy
Lester D. Mallory, a retired career diplomat who had been United States Ambassador to Jordan and Guatemala, died on June 21 in Saddleback Hospital in Laguna Hills, Calif.
He was 90 and lived in Lake Forest, Calif.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife of 48 years, the former Eleanor Mercedes Struck y Bulnes.


Loose Lips, Limp Apology
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani moved in the right direction, but he did not go far enough in chiding Deputy Mayor John Dyson for using racially loaded language in  a discussion involving a black-owned investment firm.
Mr.
Giuliani acknowledged  that his aide erred when he said that Alan Hevesi, the City Comptroller, "ought  to know the difference between a bid and a watermelon." Coming in the context of a disagreement over Mr.
Hevesi's desire to hire a minority firm, the wording was blatantly insensitive.
Mr.
Giuliani correctly noted the need for care with language in a multiracial, multireligious city, but he was mistaken not to demand that Mr.
Dyson issue a forthright, unconditional apology and a public promise to watch his tongue.
Mr.
Dyson's arch construction -- "If someone takes this as a racial  comment, I'm sorry for that" -- does not come close to being adequate.


30th Precinct Called One Described At Inquiry
Last year, a police officer who testified before the Mollen Commission, his face hidden and his voice altered, told the commissioners of an anonymous precinct where supervisors condoned corruption.
The officer, who used the pseudonym "Officer Otto" because he feared for his  career and his safety, described a speech made by a commander before a roll call sometime in 1990 or 1991.
"He stated that some of you may have problems that are so bad that you feel that you have to do certain things in order to survive," Officer Otto testified.
"And if that's the case, then do what you have to do. But if you ever get caught, don't say anything."


Person Is Non Grata for Timberwolves
CHUCK PERSON, acquired to give the Minnesota Timberwolves a can-do attitude,  is a free agent after he could not help the team improve.
The Timberwolves yesterday decided to buy out the final four years of Person's contract after no team was willing to trade for the 30-year-old forward, who gained notoriety in Minnesota not for his long-distance shooting but for his feud with his teammate CHRISTIAN LAETTNER.


Art and Wildlife Tours In the South Pacific
Art and wildlife are the two distinct approaches of tours to the South Pacific in August and October.
The Australian Art Expedition, focusing on aboriginal works, will include four visits to ancient rock-art sites: Ayers Rock, linked to the Aboriginal Creation period; the remote safari camp of Mount Borradaile, near sites spanning 50,000 years; the Chamberlain Gorge, containing the mystical paintings of Wandjina, an aboriginal spirit, and the vast Quinkan Reserves of Aboriginal Art.
There also will be visits with curators in Sydney and Darwin and two nights at the Lizard Island Resort on the Great Barrier Reef.


Erika Munter, Benjamin Weiss
Erika Munter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Munter of Middle Grove, N.Y., was married yesterday to Benjamin James Weiss, a son of Dr.
Jan and Joan Weiss of Caldwell, N.J.
Town Justice Renee Rosch of Milton, N.Y., officiated at the home of Lempi Munter, the bride's paternal grandmother in Middle Grove.
Ms.
Munter is keeping her name.
A graduate of the University of New Hampshire, she is studying for a master's degree in international affairs at Columbia University.


Glitter of New York Beckons (Or Is It Tarnish Elsewhere?)
A city's image ebbs and flows with many tides.
Prices rise, crime drops, perceptions follow.
But precise turning points may slip past, slow to register on such popular barometers as housing prices and dinner-party talk.
The image of New York, of course, is never simple; it has always encompassed fantastic extremes of good and bad.
But in recent decades, the bad has often eclipsed the good in the views of outsiders (and more than a few insiders, too).


Small Police Forces Should Be Retained
The recommendations made by Westchester 2000, as cited in "It's Time to Change, a Planning Study Says" (April 10), are positive ideas for the consolidation of government in the county.
However, a caveat is in order as to the merger of police services.
Recent research suggests that the fragmentation of policing may not be such a bad idea after all and that, in reality, a rich network of interrelations exists among agencies.
For example, informal arrangements involving coordination, sharing or alternating responsibility are common.
Small police departments routinely have access to services provided by larger agencies, including access to crime laboratories, training academies and communications systems.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  COLOMBIAN SOCCER PLAYER KILLED  Andres Escobar, a player on the Colombian World Cup Soccer Team who was accidentally responsible for a fiasco that helped eliminate the team from competition, was killed as he left a nightclub in Medellin. 1  NEW SALVADORAN VIOLENCE  As El Salvador tries to recover from a violent civil war, the children of some of the people who fled are returning, deported as American street gang members, causing new problems for the nation. 3


Businesses That Never Sleep (Or at Most, Catnap)
IN EW YORK has hundreds of all-night services to meet the nocturnal needs of the sick, the tired, the unfortunate and the hungry, not to mention the desperate business-minded trying to make that deadline.
Here are some examples.
Key: B: Will go to Brooklyn Q: Will go to Queens Bx: Will go the The Bronx COURIERS AND MESSENGERS
Able (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 687-5515
Bullit (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 983-7400
DHL (international) . . . (800) 225-5345
Emery (international) . . . (800) 443-6379
Federal Express (international)  . . . (212) 777-6500
Noonlite (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 473-2246
Perfect Courier (B,Q,BX)  . . . (212) 279-4300 DENTISTS
Dentist Referral (B,Q,BX)  . . . (212) 679-3966
All City Emergency Services (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 286-0716
Preventative Dental Associates  . . . (212) 683-2568 DOCTORS
Doctors on Call (house calls, B,Q,BX)  . . . (718) 745-5900
Doctor's on Call (B,Q,BX)  . . . (212) 737-2333 ELECTRICIANS
Irwin Electric (B,Q,BX)  . . . (212)840-6288
Marty Allen (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 254-9600
Michael Altman (B,Q,BX)  . . . (718) 681-2900
Joseph Weinstein (B,Q,BX)  . . . (212) 877-4600 GARAGES/REPAIR AND TOWING
Apollo Towing (B,Q,BX)  . . . (212) 315-2518
Express (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 242-5811
JDS Towing (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 947-2749
Luna Towing (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 246-8895
Mobil . . . (212) 582-9269 LANGUAGE HELP AND TRANSLATIONS
All Language Service . . . (212) 986-1688 LOCKSMITHS
Abbey . . . (212) 535-2289
Ace . . . (212) 727-2222
Central Park West Locksmith (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 410-1607
Champion Locksmith (B,Q,BX)  . . . (212) 362-7000
Columbus Lock and Key (B,Q,BX)  . . . (212) 595-5210
Day and Night Lock (B,Q,BX)  . . . (212) 777-2555
Eagle Locksmiths . . . (212) 877-7787
Eagle Master Locksmith  . . . (212) 532-1075
Murray Hill Security Center (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 532-1652
Rainbow Locksmith (Q)  . . . (212) 860-2219
Speedy Locksmiths (B,Q,BX)  . . . (212)475-6840 MOVERS
AVI (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 391-6727
Meyers (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 505-6640
Moishe's (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 439-9191 PHARMACIES
Kaufman Pharmacy, Lexington Avenue at 50th Street . . . (212) 755-2266
Neergaard Pharmacies, 454 Fifth Avenue, Brooklyn . . . (718) 768-0600 PLUMBERS
Effective (BX) . . . (212) 685-8372  . . . (718) 299-0700
New York (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 496-9191
Roto-Rooter (BX) . . . (212) 687-1661
Sewerooter (B) . . . (212) 473-2024 RESTAURANTS
(A random selection from various neighborhoods and cuisines)
Around the Clock, Third Avenue and East Ninth Street . . . (212) 598-0402
Florent, 69 Gansevoort Street  . . . (212) 989-5779
Veselka, 144 Second Avenue  . . . (212) 228-9682
Wo Hop, 17 Mott Street . . . (212) 962-8627
Empire Diner, 210 10th Avenue  . . . (212) 243-2736
Woo Chon (Korean), 8 West 36th Street . . . (212) 695-0676
Brasserie, 100 East 53d Street  . . . (212) 751-4840
Grandma's, 2937 Broadway, at 115th Street . . . (212) 662-5410 VETERINARIANS
Animal Medical Center, 510 East 62d Street . . . (212) 838-8100
Manhattan Veterinary (until 1 A.M.), 240 East 80th Street  . . . (212)988-1000 OPEN VERY LATE
Cleaners Midnight Express (will pick up and deliver until at least 11 P.M. anywhere in Manhattan)  . . . (212) 921-0111
International TV Repair (will pick up in Manhattan until 11 P.M.)  . . . (212) 243-2362
Larry Mathews Beauty Shop (until 10 P.M.) 536 Madison Ave., at 55th Street . . . (212) 355-1900
Rialto Florist (until midnight), 57th Street at Lexington Avenue  . . . (212)688-3234
Videotown Launderette (video store and laundry), 217 West 80th Street  . . . (212) 721-1706
Zarchy Pharmacy, 60-29 Roosevelt Avenue, Woodside, Queens (fills prescriptions until 11 P.M.)  . . . (718) 424-3286


Corrections
An article on June 12 about the Texas Hill Country misidentified a bird seen in the area.
It is the summer tanager, not the scarlet tanager.
A map with the article mislocated the town of Gruene.
It is on the Guadalupe River about four miles north of I-35, not adjacent to the highway.


Nicola Pugliese, David J. Cobey
Nicola Susan Pugliese, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John N. Pugliese of London, is to be married today to David James Cobey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Cobey Jr. of Hilton Head, S.C.
The Rev.
Maurice Stanton-Saringer, an Anglican minister, is to perform the ceremony at St.
Firmin's Church in North Crawley, Buckinghamshire, England.
The bride is an assistant product manager for the Gillette Company, the razor and toiletries concern in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Lehigh University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the president and chief executive of VRS Refund Services, a financial consulting firm in North Crawley.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Planning the July 4 parade is the central annual ritual in Travis, S.I., small-town America at a far edge of the big city.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Rudy Ortero's workers always believed he'd leave them his parking garage.
The only problem: He didn't leave a will.


Americana Gains Prominent Spot on Holiday Programs
AS Independence Day arrives, the concert scene is aptly dotted with musical Americana.
To celebrate early, listeners can go to Lyndhurst in Tarrytown tonight at 6 for the Sunset Serenade, an evening of Cajun music and dancing with the VooDudes.
Concertgoers can be part of the show, too, since audience participation is requested, and Jim Christiansen will give dance instructions at 5 P.M.
For tickets, call 631-4481.
It is also possible to go "Over the Rainbow" today at 5 P.M., by way of the Phoenix Theater Company's world premiere of a new musical based on the poems and lyrics of E. Y. (Yip) Harburg.
That beloved song from "The Wizard of Oz" is included, of course, but there are dozens of other collaborations, not only with Harold Arlen, but with such other theatrical giants as Burton Lane, Jule Styne and Jerome Kern.


SUNDAY, July 3, 1994; Fly Fishing Expedition to Waters of Central Park
The Central Park bass may not be quite as rare as the Loch Ness monster, but it can be elusive.
Field &amp; Stream, one of the magazines that peddles dreams to office-bound anglers, recently reported on fly-fishing in the lakes and ponds of Manhattan's Central Park.
The story asserted that largemouth bass of seven pounds (descendants of fish stocked for children to catch) had been taken on a fly -- and released -- something that called for serious investigative reporting.
Two separate expeditions were mounted by experienced anglers, producing:
-- Sightings of egrets and herons, which feed on fish -- a good sign.
-- Comments like: "There ain't no fish in here."
-- Or: "You're fly-fishing, aren't you? I know. I saw the movie," meaning, of course, "A River Runs Through It."


New Rules for Indy Cars, But What Will They Be?
Last March, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway shook the sport by announcing plans to start its own Indy-car series, with its own rules and tracks, beginning in 1996.
The statement was a result of the speedway's continuing frustration with the policies of Championship Auto Racing Teams, which runs all the Indy-car races other than the Indianapolis 500.
But besides that rocket, the speedway fired off scant details.
In the last few weeks, however, the speedway has met with current and prospective engine suppliers, like Ford and General Motors, and an outline of its plans is emerging.
And those plans, which CART teams will have little choice but to follow since Indy is their biggest race, could either leave the current generation of Indy engines more tightly restricted or turn them all into very exotic scrap metal.


Video Nuptials: With This Headset, I Thee Wed
THE bride wore an ivory-colored lace gown, a single strand of pearls and a lace cap; the groom wore a tuxedo and a brocade vest.
Everything was perfect, until they tried to kiss after exchanging vows.
That's when their headsets got in the way.
A small gathering of friends, relatives and gawkers, standing around a stage in the main exhibition hall on the last day of PC Expo in New York, applauded and laughed.
Even the officiating judge, who was in Santa Rosa, Calif., had to laugh into his headset.
His smiling face was beamed back to a huge television screen in New York as the bride and groom's images were transmitted to California, courtesy of video cameras whose signals were compressed by computer to fit onto standard telephone lines.


At Birthplace of Uprising, Arafat Appeals for Help
After waking for the first time on Palestinian-controlled soil, Yasir Arafat came here today to the birthplace of the uprising against Israel and appealed to friends and foes alike to help him make the new Palestinian self-rule work.
Mr.
Arafat threaded cold-eyed realities with valued symbols as he sought to assure welcoming but wary Palestinians that he could not only rally them from afar but also govern them from up close now that he had made his heralded return to the Gaza Strip.


How Pop Music Lost the Melody
FLASHBACK.
IT IS A SATURDAY morning in 1953.
On Martin Block's weekly radio show, "The Make Believe Ballroom," the No. 1 hit is the novelty sensation "(How Much Is That) Doggie in the Window?," which has carried "the singing rage, Miss Patti Page" to new heights of popularity.
The chirpy Bob Merrill song, which Ms.
Page croons demurely in a molasses alto, punctuates the title phrase with cute little dog barks.
In the lyric, the singer falls in love with a puppy with a waggly tail that is displayed in a pet shop window.
The picture the song conjures of a sweet young thing pining for an adorable pooch distills the cozy middle-class dream world of early 1950's pop culture.
"Doggie in the Window" is an airtight bonbon of candied sweetness and light.


SUNDAY, July 3, 1994; Red, White and Blue Rainbow
The United States Forest Service has a tradition.
Each year it tries to cope with the Rainbow Family of Living Light, which gathers for the Fourth of July holiday on public land and prays for world peace.
The Forest Service classifies the gathering as a "Type 1" incident, a category that also includes major forest fires and oil spills.
After the 1992 gathering in western Colorado, which drew almost 20,000 people, the Forest Service wrote a report, a kind of how-to manual for future Rainbow managers.
This weekend, rangers will be reading the report as the Rainbow convenes near Big Piney, Wyo. (pop. 500), in the Bridger Teton National Forest.
Among the booklet's observations and suggestions are the following:


Video Nuptials: With This Headset, I Thee Wed
THE bride wore an ivory-colored lace gown, a single strand of pearls and a lace cap; the groom wore a tuxedo and a brocade vest.
Everything was perfect, until they tried to kiss after exchanging vows.
That's when their headsets got in the way.
A small gathering of friends, relatives and gawkers, standing around a stage in the main exhibition hall on the last day of PC Expo in New York, applauded and laughed.
Even the officiating judge, who was in Santa Rosa, Calif., had to laugh into his headset.
His smiling face was beamed back to a huge television screen in New York as the bride and groom's images were transmitted to California, courtesy of video cameras whose signals were compressed by computer to fit onto standard telephone lines.


Americans Dazzle at Henley
The United States will contest all the premier eight-oared Cup finals tomorrow as crew after American crew won quarterfinal and semifinal races today at the Henley Royal Regatta.
The United States national team rowed the fastest time of this year's regatta, defeating the Dutch national squad in what many viewed as the final of Henley's premier event, the Grand Challenge Cup.
The United States eight took an immediate lead in its one-and-five-sixteenths-mile Thames River course.
From the quarter point of the course, the Dutch chipped away at the American lead, but could not eliminate it, losing by one third of a boat length, or 20 feet.
In the final, the Americans face the French national eight, which eliminated Britain.
The French won in the time of 6 minutes 16 seconds, 12 seconds slower than the United States.


Homeless In a Land Of Affluence
For seven years, Maria Gonzalez and her three children have lived out of a suitcase, wandering from motels to welfare hotels to temporary apartments and now to a ramshackle bungalow colony -- all at public expense.
Ms.
Gonzalez is homeless in Westchester, and odysseys like hers are almost the rule for homeless families in this wealthy county.


The Royal's 'Sleeping Beauty' Is a Surprise Package
EVERYTHING LOOKS deliberately askew in Anthony Dowell's new staging of "The Sleeping Beauty" for the Royal Ballet.
The huge columns at the sides of the stage are vertiginously tilted, and Princess Aurora's christening opens, unconventionally, in a crowded banquet hall with a cupola.
A long table set with real china and silverware tapers off toward the rear in a boldly Mannerist perspective.
Just before Carabosse, the wicked fairy, makes her entrance, her attendant monsters hop onto the tablecloth or peer out from under it.
The empty chairs rock and rattle.


Maung Maung 69; Served Brief Term As Burma's Leader
U Maung Maung, a Burmese lawyer who was briefly President of Burma, now called Myanmar, died yesterday in Yangon, the capital.
He was 69.
The cause was a heart attack, The Associated Press reported.


The Cat Came Back
The latest offbeat character in Times Square is none other than the Cat in the Hat.
The Dr.
Seuss celebrity began materializing last week, several stories high.
The colorful cartoon figure, sporting a red hat and tie against a deep blue background, is on the facade of the building at 232 West 42d Street, which used to house a peep show.
The painting is one of several new artworks on the block between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, using as backdrops buildings that have been vacated for future development.
The art project is supervised by Creative Time for the 42d Street Development Corporation.
The artworks are to be completed by Friday and are to be on display through Labor Day.


For Quintessential American Eating
DINERS, with their extensive menus rich with possibilities, offer the quintessential American eating experience.
What is more emblematic of the national craving for freedom than an establishment ready to serve customers at any hour?
Whether it is pancakes at midnight or a hamburger at 7 A.M., diners can represent a world without limits.
Particularly in summer, when routines are relaxed and wanderlust strikes, diners fulfill various needs.
While out exploring, residents can find themselves unable to follow their usual routine, but no matter how adventurous the outing, most people prefer playing it safe when it comes to eating.


Day Lilies: Bet You Can't Hybridize Just One
EARLY morning these days finds two gardeners at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx having their way with certain day lilies that the public never sees.
Greg Pietrowski, who tends the garden's entire collection, dabbed golden pollen from a big, beautiful blue-black day lily called Black Ambrosia onto the delicate pistil of a not-so-beautiful muddy-purple day lily with narrow petals.
This day lily has no name, but it has "good branching," which means, in day-lily lingo, lots of flower buds on well-balanced scapes, or stems.


Corrections
A chart on June 5 about the history of the military aviation industry misidentified one aircraft.
The jet fighter built by the Lockheed Corporation shortly after World War II was the F-80, not the F-86.


Out of the Attic and Asylums And Into the Camera's Eye
IN THE OPENING SCENE OF "Forrest Gump," Tom Hanks, playing the title character, sits squarely on a park bench in a starched cream suit, his shirt buttoned to the collar, holding a box of chocolates.
He turns to a stranger and offers her a piece of chocolate, and a taste of his life.
Forrest speaks in the vowel-laden chords of the South, but the sound of his voice, like the cadence of his speech, is a note off.
Soon Forrest tells us what we already suspect.
With an I.Q. of 75, he has spent a lifetime being labeled dumber than most anybody.
But do not expect to pity Forrest; rather, audiences may leave the theater pitying themselves.
During the course of the film, which opens on Wednesday, Forrest becomes an all-American football player, a Vietnam War hero and an international Ping-Pong champ.
With each accomplishment, Forrest is ushered into the White House to shake the hands of Presidents Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon; through the use of digital effects, Forrest appears in actual film clips.


Wall Street; Shifts in Dollar Accelerate Market Moves Abroad
YOU can lose a lot of money investing abroad, and you can do it very quickly.
That is one of the lessons of the first half of 1994.
While some markets shot up and provided American investors with a double benefit because the local currency gained against the dollar -- the Nikkei 225 in Japan was up 18.5 percent in yen and 34.6 percent in dollars -- some others got a double whammy the other way.
China's index lost 44.1 percent in its local currency, and with that currency tumbling against the dollar, the final loss for an American investor was 62.4 percent.


Euphia Hsu and Carey Smith
Euphia Hsu, the daughter of Elizabeth and Edward Hsu of Mendham, N.J., is to be married there today to Carey Wayne Smith, the son of the Rev.
C.
Wayne and Myra Smith of Gladstone, Mo.
The Rev.
Martha Robson, a Presbyterian minister, is to officiate at the First Presbyterian Church.
The bridegroom's father, a retired Baptist minister, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 23, is studying for a master's degree in public health at Yale University, and is an intern this summer at the Washington office of Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her parents own the I.G.A. supermarket in Roxbury, N.J.


The Hartford Fire, 50 Years Later
WHEN he was 14 years old and the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus came to town in July of 1944, John Stewart Jr. of Hartford was already an old circus hand of sorts.
After carrying water for the elephants for four years in a row, young Stewart was elevated to supervising other teen-agers hired to do chores during the circus's annual two-day run at the Barbour Street circus grounds.
On July 6, the matinee performance had begun and a capacity crowd of about 7,000 people -- mostly women and children -- was jammed into the 550-foot-long Big Top on a scorching hot, humid day.
John Stewart was still at work outside, as he had been for parts of two days.
He planned to use his two passes -- the remuneration for his labor -- at the performance that night.


IN SHORT: FICTION
COMIC FABLE  ANIMAL ACTS  By Rhoda Lerman. Holt, $22.50.


Why Is This Newsstand Different . . .?
While it may seem to be a small matter in a city of graffiti, the recent appearance of a coat of purple paint on a newsstand at 72d Street and Amsterdam Avenue has raised hackles.
The paint violates rules of the city's Art Commission that insure that newsstands fit the character of their location, said Vivian Millicent Warfield, the panel's executive director.


Three Colors in a Close Harmony
PICNICS, barbecues, swimming parties, beach days, fireworks, bike hikes and just general loafing are the regimen for this, the Independence Day weekend.
What could be more obvious than to consider red, white and blue floral combinations to move the celebrations along?
Of course, the most obvious combination is a border of red, white and blue.


Commercial Property/Tenant Options; Landlords Dig In As Market Revives
A LOT of people thought it was a done deal: Burlington Industries was moving the bulk of its operation to North Carolina, leaving only a skeleton crew at Burlington House, the building at 1345 Avenue of the Americas at 55th Street in which it became the major tenant some 25 years ago.
It may still happen, but not just yet.
Last month -- ironically, soon after Mastercard International began re-evaluating its much-publicized decision to make Burlington House its headquarters -- Burlington signed a new 15-year lease in its namesake building for 160,000 square feet.
It is taking the space "as is," meaning no build-out costs for the owner, so it got a below-market rent.
But far more important, Burlington got a "shed right" -- the right to turn back half of the space in three years.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BIOGRAPHY  FIGHTING THE ODDS  The Life of Senator Frank Church.
By LeRoy Ashby and Rod Gramer.
Washington State University, $32.


Postcards From Home
IT'S not enough for a native with leisure time to kill in his city simply to sit at home, idly leafing through back issues of the renovated New Yorker magazine in search of Talk of the Town items about the fire at Windsor Castle, Aintree's Grand National and other Anglicized stretches of the meaning of Gotham.
Baaap! goes the apartment buzzer, down goes the magazine and the outside voice on the intercom should have been enough of a warning to get out into the city, get busy: "Hello there, my name is Sydney, and I know you weren't expecting us but we just dropped by with a question. Do you think the earth just got here by accident or is there a purpose behind it?"


Expos Use Punch At Plate, In Brawl
Expos 10, Giants 9
Five Montreal home runs almost weren't enough on a day when the ball was jumping out of Candlestick Park and the Expos were involved in yet another brawl.


For Opera, A Night At the Auction
The New York City Opera Guild dinner and auction at the New York State Theater, June 20.


How Does Her Garden Grow?
By nature, gardeners are possessed of a split personality.
As sunstruck romantics, they glory in the blooms about them; as spade-wielding realists, they must ruthlessly hoe the line.
The founder of Smith &amp; Hawken's nursery, Sarah Hammond, is a gardener's gardener.
As she takes her dawn constitutional, she drinks in the perfume while surgically dead-heading old roses as she goes.
Hammond's garden sits on a high mesa along the northern coast of California.
Its half-acre combines the lush splendor of an English cottage garden (she's an avowed Anglophile) with the pervasive greenness of a Mediterranean one.
Old roses, spilling forth from overgrown bushes and draped on tall fences, coexist with Mediterranean familiars like lavender, rosemary and yellow Euphorbia, the latter a nod to the Bay Area and its Italianate climate.


For Teams, A Measure Of Agility
"O.K., Jamie, I've programmed it for a 10-second reaction drill. Keep your weight on the left foot and bang the squares with your right." So said Thomas J. Parnon to Jamie Hanford.
Mr.
Hanford, the 230-pound co-captain of the Darien High School lacrosse team, took his position on a large yellow and black pad resembling a tic-tac-toe square, crouched low and fixed his gaze on a small metal box, ready for the five-beep, red-light countdown.


Taking a Positive Step on North Korea
To the Editor:
Re "The Carter Opening" (editorial, June 21), on Jimmy Carter's trip to North Korea.
For months, we have been hearing the same kind of rhetoric from the same kind of so-called experts about North Korea and its intentions and capabilities as we heard in the post-World War II period about China.
The rhetoric then was all the reasons we should not sit down with the Chinese because they had aspirations to control Asia.
History has shown that the rebuff of Zhou Enlai by Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and others was a mistake, and even former Secretary of State Dean Rusk acknowledged in his last book he was wrong in his fear of the "yellow peril."


Strawberry Says He's Ready for New Start
He came with his wife and three children; he came with his new manager and his older brother.
In his first public appearance since disappearing from the Los Angeles Dodgers April 3, Darryl Strawberry came to a conclusion.
"I'm not doing this by myself anymore," the 32-year-old outfielder said.
"I've got people behind me."


Sampling the Season On the State's Stages
ROLL your eyes and say "Nunsense II " twice -- once for Bridgeport, once for Ivoryton.
Or roll out the carpet for Elaine May, live on stage in Westport.
How to perceive the summer theater season in Connecticut?
Your choice.
Say it's a bore.
Example: A tacky British farce ("Don't Dress for Dinner" in Simsbury) seems preferable to a fake American attempt at farce ("Rumors" in Ivoryton, and elsewhere in community playhouses).
Example: A less than fair share of routine cabaret type shows are misplaced in theaters. ("Beehive" in New Fairfield, and "Song of Singapore" just ended in Westport where "Forever Plaid" is coming up.)


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Firecrackers set off, per teen-ager
54
61
Wednesday
Auto sales, June, millions, annual rate
7.0
7.2
Thursday
Wholesale sales, May, percent change
-1.2
0.2
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
353
350
Friday
Nonfarm payroll, June, change, thousands
191
275
Unemployment rate, June
6.0
6.2
This Week's Developments
Monday
July 4; remember to duck
Tuesday
Fed Open Market Committee meets
Thursday
Chain stores release June sales data
Friday
Minutes of May 17 F.O.M.C. meeting released


Editorial Notebook; Wisconsin Rediscovers Wright
This is a a salubrious summer for Wisconsin and its outsize but difficult son, Frank Lloyd Wright.
After ignoring his genius for seven decades, the state government is now the sponsor of a $20 million program to restore Taliesin, the architect's eloquent but neglected home in Spring Green, an hour's drive from Madison.
In Madison itself, state, city and county governments have joined in a business-promoted plan to build the Monona Terrace Convention and Community Center.
Wright drew the original plans without fee in 1938, and revised them before his death in 1959.
No less than eight city referendums sprang from arguments over this project, which has been successively approved, disapproved, reborn, reburied and now, it seems, resurrected.


The Polyglot Metropolis and Its Discontents
IT SEEMS THE BIBLE GOT IT WRONG.
The Tower of Babel should not be taken as a symbol of things gone haywire.
Communication breakdown, the inability of people to work together toward a common goal: these were not, it turns out, a punishment for towering ambition.
They were a preview of the ideal conditions for democratic building -- diversity's divine reward.
Or so a visitor might conclude from looking at "Urban Revisions: Current Projects for the Public Realm" the Museum of Contemporary Art's ambitious attempt to reckon with the Babel of the late-20th- century city.
This is an important show, and a timely one.
Organized by Elizabeth A. T. Smith, a curator at the museum, in consultation with a distinguished group of advisers, "Urban Revisions" is the most important contribution yet offered by a major cultural institution to an urgent cultural task: the moral reconstruction of architecture in the aftermath of the 1980's building boom.
Departing courageously from the familiar art museum preoccupation with visual form, the show sets out to grapple with content -- the social, intellectual and political ideas from which forms arise.


Kassi Berg, Jonathan Beck
Kassi Berg, a daughter of Lewis Berg of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Arlene Berger of North Miami Beach, Fla., is to be married today to Jonathan R. Beck, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Beck of North Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Laurie Coskey is to officiate at La Valencia Hotel in La Jolla, Calif.
The bride, 28, is a trial lawyer for the Federal Public Defender's Office in San Diego.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of California at Berkeley and received her law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father is a philatelist in Miami.


Diller Delights Wall Street, but Will Love Last?
WHEN Wall Street loves a proposed merger so much that it bids up both stocks, watch out.
Trouble is probably ahead.
For when investors get that enthusiastic, they usually overdo it.
The latest test for the theory comes in the planned union of CBS, the proud proprietor of the highest rated television network, with QVC Network, cable television's second most successful peddler of cubic zirconia jewelry.
On the news, QVC stock leaped 17 percent, and CBS added 19 percent.


Differences Between Helen Keller Programs
"The Unexpected Volunteers," a heartwarming piece "Long Island Journal"  [ June 19 ]  were clients from the Helen Keller Services for the Blind in Hempstead, not from the Helen Keller National Center in Sands Point.


The Executive Life; Move Over, Pen Sets: The Cube Has Arrived
FORGET the Ferrari or the showplace home next to the freeway.
The ultimate status symbol in Silicon Valley is a two-and-a-half-inch Lucite cube that costs just $20.
For some people, it is one of their most treasured objects.
"They are icons," said Dr.
Edgar A. Sack, chairman and chief executive of Zilog Inc., a semiconductor maker in Campbell, Calif.
"As I travel around the valley, I see them in the offices of investment bankers and other C.E.O.'s, and I know that we have something in common, that we've both been through the same experience."


Nancy B. Davis, Jason H. Brener
Nancy Beth Davis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Davis of West Orange, N.J., was married yesterday evening to Jason Howard Brener, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joshua Brener of Atlanta.
Cantor Theodore Aronson officiated at the Temple Sharey Tefilo-Israel in South Orange, N.J.
The couple, both 26, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, she summa cum laude and he magna cum laude.
The bride recently received her doctorate in psychology from Princeton University and is to become a project evaluation coordinator at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta next month.


African Despair, and Hope
Africa was given unaccustomed attention last week as the Clinton Administration held a two-day conference on the economic and political afflictions in 30 countries south of the Sahara.
But what the conference unintentionally highlighted was the low priority Mr.
Clinton has given to a region whose enormous promise is blighted by declining economies and soaring fertility rates.
The cold war's demise, however welcome elsewhere, has proved a setback for black Africa.
Superpower rivalry once gave crucial influence to poor lands with prized real estate for military bases, or a grip on maritime "choke points," or large reserves of strategic minerals.
But with the Soviet-American competition now over, the C.I.A. is closing 15 African stations.
Actual U.S. development aid to sub-Saharan Africa has tapered to around $800 billion this year, as the industrialized world pumps an increasing share of multilateral development funds into the former Communist countries.


It's Romantic Piffle, But It's Served Up With Spanish Verve
THE ZARZUELA IS THE bastard stepchild of the lyric stage: too middle-brow for opera lovers, this Spanish form of the Viennese operetta is perceived as a dowdy antique, too old-fashioned for the popular mainstream.
Yet the form produced some of the freshest, most exciting music ever to come out of Spain.
Recent years have seen a resurgence of interest in the zarzuela, led by a remarkable group of Spanish operatic singers who grew up on it.
Placido Domingo and Victoria de los Angeles, to name two, have been doughty campaigners for this neglected art form.
Now the record companies are starting to catch up.
The French label Valois has begun a new series of complete zarzuela recordings with a delightful release of Amadeo Vives's "Dona Francisquita" (V 4710; two CD's), with the Symphonic Orchestra of Tenerife conducted by Antoni Ros Marba.


June 26-July 2; A Year Later Fermat's Puzzle Is Still Not Quite Q.E.D.
One year after a Princeton mathematician convinced the world that he had proved the most famous unsolved math problem, the much touted proof has entered a realm of mathematical limbo.
The proof, by Dr.
Andrew Wiles of Princeton University, said that a 357-year-old problem, known as Fermat's Last Theorem, was true.
The theorem states that equations of the form xn +yn =zn only have solutions when the exponents are whole numbers smaller than 3.
Pierre de Fermat, a French physicist and mathematician, had scribbled the problem in the margin of a book, saying that he had a marvelous proof but the margin, alas, was too small to hold it.


The Nation: Poor Health; You May Fire When Ready, Senators
ONE of the real Bob Doles just stood up.
Not the one Pat Moynihan had been counting on, the World War II veteran whose own life has been shaped by rehabilitative medicine, paid for by the government and his neighbors in Russell, Kan., and whose voice last fall was steady, or pretty steady, for the principle of making sure all Americans had health insurance.
Mr.
Moynihan, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, has said for months that he and Mr.
Dole would cut a deal.
Instead, the Bob Dole who stood up Wednesday to announce a Republican health care plan was the Dole who is all but running for President in a party where the political right is more dominant every year.
He offered a plan for insurance law changes and $100 billion in subsidies for the very poor over five years, and sounded almost embarrassed about it, saying it was "not a gimmick." He boasted about other things it was not -- a program with a "big, big, big bureaucracy," or new taxes, or cost controls -- and insisted he'd never thought insuring all Americans was more than a "goal." His reconstruction: "I didn't object to everybody being covered."


Data Bank/July 3, 1994
Data Bank/July 3, 1994
Personal Income
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.6
0.6
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
0.4
-0.4
0.7
Index of Leading Indicators
Monthly percent change
0.0
0.0
0.7
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
0.9
0.7
2.1
New-Home Sales
Monthly percent change
4.2
-3.4
5.1
Gross Domestic Product
I Q'94
IV Q'93
III Q'93
1987 dollars, in percent
3.4
7.0
2.9
Consumer Confidence
June
May
April
1985=100
92.0
88.9
91.7
Weekly Jobless Claims
June 24
June 17
June 10
In thousands
353
353
349


Ms. Du Hamel, Mr. Licholai
Charlotte Notley Du Hamel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Notley Young Du Hamel of Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to Gregory Peter Oleg Licholai, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Licholai of Edgewater, N.J.
The Rev.
William Dowd performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
John the Baptist Church in Westport, Mass.


John Dyson, Upstart From Upstate, Speaks Up (Again)
It was a John S. Dyson kind of moment.
Gov.
Hugh L. Carey was in office and Republican state legislators were complaining about the appearance of Mr.
Dyson, the 34-year-old Democratic Commerce Commissioner in "I Love New York" ads promoting New York State.


Alexis Arquette: Stories to Tell
NAME: Alexis Arquette.
IDENTITY: Actor; brother of the actresses Rosanna and Patricia Arquette.
AGE: 24.
RECENT STAGE PROJECT: Just finished playing Lee Harvey Oswald in the Steppenwolf Theater's production in Chicago of "Libra," directed by John Malkovich.
CURRENT MOVIE ROLES: Jack in "Jack Be Nimble," a Gothic horror film from New Zealand, and Bill in "Grief," a film about the writers on a cheesy television show.
Q.
How did you approach playing Oswald?
A.
When most people play a villain, they play him as bad.
They forget that people who do bad things don't see themselves that way.
I imagined him as someone who was manipulated, who had a story to tell and never got to tell it.
I played him like an Everyman.
Q.
How did the cast react to the death of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis?
A.
Our show has a lot of technical aspects to it.
We show the Zapruder film.
The night she died, for the first time, we had technical difficulties.
Even the mice in cages backstage got loose, and no one could explain why.
There was talk of our being haunted.
Q.
Tell me about the character you play in "Pulp Fiction," which won the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival.
A.
I haven't seen it yet, so it depends what wasn't left on the cutting room floor.
He's a drug underling who is supposed to make the two hit men doubt their passion for killing.
Q.
The 1990 movie "Last Exit to Brooklyn" was your big break, right?
A.
It was my first acting job really.
My sister Patricia was asked to play the Jennifer Jason Leigh role, but she was pregnant.
She went to New York to tell them no in person.
She said, "Lexy, come with me." The next thing I knew my sister's agent was telling me that they wanted me to play Georgette.
I thought they were just using me to get Patricia to take the role.
Q.
Had you ever done drag before?
A.
Only in a sophomoric way on Halloween.
I began researching by going to drag clubs.
Though the movie is set in the 50's, I figured things were the same.
I befriended these performers who were flamboyant and talented, yes, but they weren't Georgette.
She was an addict.
She didn't dress to be glamorous.
She was a subversive beatnik.
Q.
Since then you've created other drag characters, like Eva Destruction, which you perform at clubs.
Are you worried about being known as "that actor who does drag"?
A.
I'm not a career drag queen.
I certainly don't make money out of it.
Now I mostly do it for benefits.
People try to trivialize it, and say it's just drag.
Mike Myers as Linda Richman and Dana Carvey as Church Lady have become famous with their drag roles.
Q.
Would you ever dress up as one of your sisters?
A.
Patricia was meant to judge a fashion show at a club in L.A.
She couldn't make it.
I threw together an outfit that was identical to her costume in "True Romance." We simply introduced me as Patricia Arquette to the audience.
I came over later and showed her.
Q.
I hear you were upset that Patrick Swayze got the role you wanted in "To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julie Newmar," the road movie about three drag queens that Steven Spielberg is producing.
A.
Patrick Swayze's far too old and far too straight in my opinion.
It's fine if straight actors want to play gay roles because I'm a gay actor who also wants to play straight roles.
Of course, Tom Hanks was great in "Philadelphia." But I do have a problem that three drag queens are being played by three straight actors.
It makes me want to run away and do films in Turkey or India.
Q.
Is that why you went to New Zealand to make "Jack Be Nimble"?
A.
When I read the script, I was just stricken by the beauty of it and the kitsch black humor.
It's my favorite work to date.
It's like all the movies I love, like "Carrie" and "The Exorcist" and "Eating Raoul."  Q.  What's next for you?
A.
The only thing I know I'm doing for sure is a film called "Forget-Me-Nots," with John Malkovich, which is going to be another one that gay groups won't like.
It's about an unstable man who kills his lover after learning that his lover is H.I.V. positive and hasn't told him.
I'm going to be a character that John uses as an alibi.


The Executive Computer; Ready or Not? Client-Server Systems Aren't for Everyone
THE fashionable joke in the computer industry is that client-server isn't a buzzword -- it's two buzzwords.
But for many American companies, client-server is neither a joke nor a cliche.
They are spending billions to install client-server technology that they hope will save them far more money, while making workers more efficient and enabling the companies to respond faster to changes in their markets. (Much of this effort has traveled under the cloak of yet another corporate buzzword, "re-engineering.")


Jill Boudreau, Howard Present
Jill Ann Boudreau, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald L. Boudreau of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Howard Brian Present, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey J. Present of Chesterfield, Mo.
The Rev.
Walter Pitman officiated at the First Congregational Church in Chatham, Mass.
Rabbi Ari Fridkis took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Boudreau, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a marketing manager at Fidelity Investments in Boston.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is an executive vice president of Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.


A Tribute at 90


Rebecca Danziger, Michael Gamzon
Rebecca Bloomingdale Danziger, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick M. Danziger of New York, is to be married today at her parents' house in Greenwich, Conn., to Michael Seth Gamzon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Gamzon of Hartsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Paul R. Siegel is to officiate.
The bride taught reading until last month at the Norwood School in Bethesda, Md.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and expects to begin studying for a master's degree in education at Bank Street College in the fall.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander &amp; Ferdon.
Her mother, Lucy Danziger, is an executive vice president of the Museum of American Folk Art in New York.


Term Limits and the High Court
In the coming year, the Supreme Court will answer the question of whether individual states have the right to limit the terms of members of Congress.
The justices' task is not to decide whether term limits are a good or bad idea as a political matter, but whether an individual state has a right to prescribe the terms for the Federal legislature whose membership requirements are set by the Constitution.
Both the language of the Constitution and the history of its framing make it clear that the states do not have that right.
The Court therefore has an obligation to follow the wisdom of the founders, who saw clearly that state-imposed limits that would apply unevenly to representatives and senators depending on where they lived would foul up the Constitution's design of a national union.


What Verdi From A to O Can Add to the Usual P to Z
GERMANS TEND TO admire Wagner with sober reservations, as Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau -- who wrote a book about Nietzsche's discipleship and break with the composer -- does.
"But," the great baritone offered in contrast to his fascination with the German master, "I love Verdi from A to Z."
There is A to Z to love: not counting remakes and revisions, the Verdi canon is 26 operas long.
A is "Oberto," composed for La Scala of Milan in 1839 by a late-starting, somewhat provincial but obviously much-believed-in novice; Vincent La Selva and his New York Grand Opera will revive it for the curious on Wednesday evening in Central Park.
Z is "Falstaff," composed an unimaginable 53 years later for the same theater but a different world, by a composer who had developed farther from his beginnings than any other save Wagner himself.
Most operagoers know about six of them very well (usually P, Q, R and X, Y, Z) and have a fair acquaintance with six or seven others.


Critics Claim AIDS Services Hurt by Buyout of Workers
One month after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani abandoned his plan to eliminate or scale back the Division of AIDS Services, the administration is facing renewed criticism over job reductions in the program that some say have rendered it virtually ineffective.
Since Mr.
Giuliani took office in January, the division has lost 113 out of 740 workers, nearly one in seven, largely because of the severance package offered in mid-May to reduce the city's work force.
The Giuliani administration says that this is a temporary situation and that more employees will be added to the agency as workers are reshuffled.
But the administration also has capped the number of employees at the agency at 695, even as the number of clients it handles has grown to more than 16,500.


Cooler Days Are Here. Or Are They?
After sweltering every summer for nearly half a century, Stuyvesant Town is finally getting new electrical wiring that will allow the installation of air-conditioning.
But now residents face a new frustration: a shortage of air-conditioners.
For years the lack of air-conditioning has been a recurring issue at Stuyvesant Town, which had not upgraded its electrical system since it opened in 1947.
Cost has been a major consideration; the rewiring is costing $60 million for the 89 buildings.


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine on May 15 about Attorney General Janet Reno misstated the year in which The Miami Herald won a Pulitzer Prize for crime reporting that was done in part by Ms.
Reno's father, Henry Reno.
It was 1951, not 1947.
The Herald pointed out the error in a letter dated June 14.


Concocting a Little Chaos In an Architect's Classic Box
SO MANY PROUD HOPES FOR new concert halls have been dashed on the shoals of acoustics in recent decades that even the least superstitious acoustician might hesitate to evoke a traditional symbol of disappointment.
Yet there was R. Lawrence Kirkegaard the other day, blowing up big red balloons at various locations on the stage of the new Seiji Ozawa Hall at Tanglewood and blithely bursting them.
Mr.
Kirkegaard, whose firm in Downers Grove, Ill., oversaw the building's acoustical design and whose previous credits include a drastic makeover of Davies Symphony Hall in San Francisco and the latest tinkering with Carnegie Hall, was not simply tempting fate.
Along with the architect, William L. Rawn 3d of Boston, he was visiting Ozawa Hall for the first time since the 1,180 cushioned wooden seats had been installed and trying to determine how this change and others had affected the sound.


New Proposal For Shutdown At Chernobyl
The United States and its allies are developing a strategy for closing the Chernobyl nuclear reactors permanently and helping to make Russian-designed nuclear reactors safer, officials at the International Atomic Energy Agency here say.
The immediate centerpiece is a substantial package of Western aid that is expected to be approved, at least in part, after the meeting of the seven biggest industrial nations in Naples next week.
The money would enable Ukraine to close all four reactors at the Chernobyl site and complete construction of up to five new, safer nuclear power plants.


Fashions Worthy Of Van Gogh
The sunflower, which once mesmerized van Gogh, has now cast its spell over the fashion world.
From couturier-embroidered jackets to hair ornaments sold at newsstands and life-size blossoms that appear to be growing from straw hats, the sunflower could replace the rose as fashion's favorite bloom.
These vibrant yellow field flowers have become as American as fireworks on the Fourth of July.
Their appeal knows no age; for everyone from toddlers to mature women, they are a signature of summer.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER WEST SIDE  A Bow to World Cup Soccer At a Summer Film Festival
Looking for an alternative to "The Flintstones," "City Slickers II" and Hollywood's other offerings for a summer's night?
The fourth annual Symphony Space Summer Foreign Film Festival is presenting 19 classics, including a bow in the direction of World Cup soccer in three films that seek to capture the fervor, pride and violence the sport inspires around the world.
The series starts on Thursday and runs through July 31.


Genevieve Ehlers, Joshua Grinker
Genevieve Ehlers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Tom Ehlers of Spicer, Minn., was married there last Sunday to Joshua Grinker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Grinker of Brooklyn.
Assistant Chief Judge Myron Greenberg of the Minnesota District Court in Minneapolis officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Ehler, who is keeping her name, and Mr.
Grinker are both graduates of Macalester College.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in clinical psychology at the Alfred Adler Institute in Minneapolis.
Her father is the president of Boxrud Building Corporation, a real-estate development company in Spicer.
The bride's mother, Sandra McCartney Ehlers, is an artist and author of children's books.


Judge Is Key To Redrawn District Lines
REPUBLICANS and Democrats agree that history is about to be made in Nassau County with a court-ordered government to replace the nearly 100-year-old Board of Supervisors with a legislature that guarantees the constitutional requirement of one-person, one-vote.
Achieving that goal has been difficult.
The six supervisors began wrestling with the problem a year ago, but deadlocked over precisely where to draw the district lines.


In Bleak Area in South Dakota, Indians Put Hopes in Classroom
There are no ivy walls or fraternity houses on the campus of Sinte Gleska University.
It is a small, horseshoe-shaped jumble of aging mobile homes, a log building and squat Government housing.
In the parking lot sit weathered pickups and rusting old cars.
But the college is the jewel of the Rosebud reservation, a dry, shadowless stretch in western South Dakota where the clouds are stingy with rainfall and relentless winds rattle the flimsy walls of tar-paper shacks and house trailers.


New Wrinkles In Fare Rules
THE airlines' rules and restrictions on their fares are in a muddle at the moment.
Travelers may benefit in terms of cost, because the confusion derives from regional fare wars.
And if refundable advance-purchase fares, now offered by a number of lines, at least in particular areas, continue to spread, the nonrefundable fare itself may expire.
In the meantime, it is difficult to know what rules apply.
Here is a rundown on the situation.
Southwest Airlines, a no-frills line and the smallest of the 10 major airlines, began the current cycle.
In February, according to Melanie Jones, a spokeswoman, it made almost all of its advance-purchase fares fully refundable for any reason at no charge, at the same time eliminating the requirement for a Saturday night stay.
The airline's seven-day advance purchase fare, an exception, continues to require a one-night stay, not necessarily a Saturday.
Southwest's one-day advance purchase fare remains nonrefundable.


Crime
The picturesque Outer Banks of North Carolina attract all sorts: commercial fishermen, sports fishers, real estate developers and Sunday yachtsmen -- not to mention loons, sea turtles and other endangered species of marine life.
In SHOOTING AT LOONS (Mysterious Press/Warner, $18.95), Margaret Maron gathers them all up in her storytelling net and prods them into a fierce surf war that begins and ends in murder.
Deborah Knott, a county court judge who does the sensible sleuthing in Ms.
Maron's beguiling regional mysteries, hopes to make a vacation of an assignment to isolated Harkers Island. ("I don't get too many chances to run wild these days," she says, with a flash of droll humor.) But on her very first clamming outing, Deborah discovers the body of an old fisherman who was the chief mediator in a local battle over water rights.
After hearing out all the combatants, she comes to realize that "the whole controversy's turning into a class thing -- traditional livelihoods up against privileged leisure."


Boardman Is the Man in the Yellow Jersey
Chris Boardman astonished the field in the Tour de France as the bicycle race began here today and took a big step, a leap really, toward becoming a national hero, the toast of his native England.
Boardman easily won the short prologue to the Tour, finishing 15 seconds ahead of Miguel Indurain in second place.
The victory for the Gan team's leader was not that unexpected, but the margin was.
It seemed immense -- over 7.2 kilometers (4.5 miles) and over the defending champion in the last three Tours.
Indurain, a Spaniard who rides for Banesto, won the prologue in 1992 and 1993.


In Simpson Case, Violence Comes Off the Field; Uncomfortable Truths
To the Editor:
"Remember Nicole Brown Simpson," Anna Quindlen urges us (column, June 22).
Dare one note that two lives were taken in this brutal murder.
It is time to say also: Remember Robert L. Goldman.
Ms.
Quindlen's column, in its singleminded effort to raise a specific murder into a general theory of battered wives, curiously leaves out the fact that Mr.
Goldman was a victim no less worthy of a long life than Nicole Brown Simpson.
But beyond the obvious myopia of Ms.
Quindlen are several larger, if uncomfortable, truths: There are a multiplicity of thresholds involved in acts of violence.
Very few women subject to battering are murdered.
And before we convert this particular case into another anti-male social movement, the huge jump from a battering in 1989 to a murder in 1994 should be traversed with some care.


Shock of the Real in Modernists' Roots
IN "Against the Stream," the Katonah Museum of Art has a show that hits the spot and promises to remain there long after the Sept. 4 closing date.
This is not just because of the works on view -- 80 or so paintings and drawings produced in the 1930's by Milton Avery, Adolph Gottlieb and Mark Rothko.
Nor is it a matter of insights from the guest curator, Jill Snyder, and from the other contributors to the catalogue, David Anfam and Isabelle Dervaux, who are currently working on a Mark Rothko catalogue raisonne.


A 'Family' Business
EVEN if there wasn't a will, there may yet be a way for the men of the Yorkshire Garage: a way still to park cars for profit, and thus preserve both one man's legacy and the livelihood of his adopted family.
Rudy Ortero, local legend, widower, Cuban raconteur, aspiring benefactor and owner of the parking garage business at 151 West 108th Street, died of cancer at the age of 79 last February.
His last wish, according to his closest associates, was to have his workers inherit his business.


Fatal Crash of USAir Jet in North Carolina


Corrections
An article on June 19 about Hackensack Police Department efforts to recruit more minority members misstated the rank of Ken Zisa.
He is a captain, not the Chief of Police.


Double-Hung Windows Can Be a Fine Refurbishing Project
OLD double-hung windows, specifically those of wood counterbalanced with sash weights, are notoriously cantankerous in disrepair, but can often be restored to function beautifully.
Typically a full restoration involves stripping and repainting wood parts and replacing broken panes and sash cords or chains.
Start by removing the sashes.
Use a utility knife or a serrated tool called a paint zipper to cut through thick paint covering the seam between the window frame and one of the two molding strips that form the indoor sides of the channels in which the lower sash slides.
After prying away the strip from the frame with a putty knife, remove the nails from the strip by pulling them out through the back with pliers.


BEST SELLERS: July 3, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
2
2
18
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
3
2
THE CROSSING, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) A young American comes of age traveling with a she-wolf into Mexico's mythic sierra.
4
5
8
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves.
5
9
12
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
6
7
10
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
7
6
99
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
8
4
137
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
9
13
2
Q-SQUARED, by Peter David. (Pocket, $22.) All creation is at stake when an old enemy asks for help from "Star Trek"'s Captain Picard.
10
10
9
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $23.95.) Spies, traitors and the Persian Gulf war.
11
9
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A young doctor stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
12
15
6
NIGHT PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $22.95.) Lucas Davenport investigates a case involving a body found in a wildlife preserve.
13
1
THE WATERWORKS, by E.L.
Doctorow. (Random House, $23.) Life in the New York City of 1871 as witnessed by a jaded newspaperman.
14
22
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
15
8
3
MISTRESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $19.95.) A former schoolteacher tries to unmask a blackmailer.
16*
14
2
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
2
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the White House during the first year of the Clinton Administration.
2
2
60
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
5
28
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
4
4
7
STANDING FIRM, by Dan Quayle. (HarperCollins/Zondervan, $25.) The former Vice President recalls his life, especially during the Bush years.
5
3
4
D-DAY, JUNE 6, 1944, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) An account of the Allied invasion of Normandy 50 years ago.
6
7
7
BEYOND PEACE, by Richard Nixon. (Random House, $23.) An agenda of foreign and domestic policies for the United States to pursue in the post-cold war era.
7
1
DAVE BARRY IS NOT MAKING THIS UP, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $20.) A collection of humor pieces by the Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist.
8
6
17
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
9
8
5
THE HALDEMAN DIARIES, by H.R.
Haldeman. (Putnam, $27.50.) Notes made by the man who was Richard Nixon's chief of staff from 1969 to 1973.
10
12
2
ALL MY OCTOBERS, by Mickey Mantle with Mickey Herskowitz. (HarperCollins, $23.) The legendary Yankee recalls the 12 World Series in which he played.
11
10
9
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the country singer.
12
13
3
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
13
9
12
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
14
14
25
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
15*
11
11
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
10
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
58
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
10
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of designs.
4
4
24
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 18, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) CALLED OUT, by A.G.
Mojtabai. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) An abstract, intelligent novel, ostensibly about a jet crash in a small town, that renders the reactions of the witnesses to a random disaster in beautiful, somber prose.
CIGARETTES ARE SUBLIME, by Richard Klein. (Duke University, $21.95.) People smoke them because they are dangerous, and for a lot of other reasons as well, according to this polemical, analytical, lit-critical, theoretical, political ode to deathweed by an up-to-date professor of French.
COLORED PEOPLE: A Memoir, by Henry Louis Gates Jr. (Knopf, $22.) A distinguished American scholar's intricate, captivating account of the rich family and community life of black people in Piedmont, W.Va., on the eve of desegregation.
GAY NEW YORK: Gender, Urban Culture, and the Making of the Gay Male World, 1890-1940, by George Chauncey. (Basic Books, $25.) A historian's enormously informative study of 50 years during which a flourishing gay culture carved out public and private space for itself.
IN TOUCH: The Letters of Paul Bowles, edited by Jeffrey Miller. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $30.) Selections from the "out" box of the enigmatic writer, composer and Tangerine; often forthright and withdrawn at once, some of them contain passages as brilliant as any in his printed work.
A JOURNEY THROUGH ECONOMIC TIME: A Firsthand View, by John Kenneth Galbraith. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Born in 1908, the preternaturally lucid and articulate Mr.
Galbraith has kept his eyes open ever since and seen a great deal he didn't care for.
JUSTICE LEWIS F. POWELL JR., by John C. Jeffries Jr. (Scribners, $30.) An illuminating biography of a pivotal Justice of the Supreme Court whose instinctive conservatism was always tempered by his respect for the rule of law and his willingness to listen hard.
MOSES SUPPOSES, by Ellen Currie. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) A welcome first collection of Ms.
Currie's short stories, new and old; in relationships gone wrong, in everyday objects, she discerns hints of large meanings and glimmers of submerged mysteries.
ROOMMATES: My Grandfather's Story, by Max Apple. (Warner, $19.95.) An enthralling novelistic memoir of the infinitely durable Herman (Rocky) Goodstein, who at 93 accompanied Mr.
Apple to college and proved, in the long run, to be worth all the trouble he caused.
SHOT IN THE HEART, by Mikal Gilmore. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Fifteen years after Norman Mailer's "Executioner's Song," Gary Gilmore's youngest brother reclaims his own life in this highly personal account of his family.
THE WAGES OF GUILT: Memories of War in Germany and Japan, by Ian Buruma. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) An examination, by an impressively informed and empathetic journalist, of the ways in which the cataclysms of our century have shaped national identity.


Mayor's Offer on Bond Adviser
Seeking to break a political impasse, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has suggested using a single adviser for two important New York City bond sales while putting off a final decision on whether to hire another, an aide said yesterday.
The Mayor's office has argued that the city needs only one bond adviser, Public Resources Advisory Group of New York.
It has objected to Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi's desire to continue dividing the work with P. G. Corbin &amp; Company of Philadelphia.
The Mayor and the Comptroller jointly select the advisers.


Japanese Miniatures on Display
Nearly 300 contemporary and antique netsuke miniature carvings from Japan are on display through Aug. 14 at the Pavilion for Japanese Art at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
Netsuke, carvings in wood, bone or amber that stand less than one and a half inches tall, originally served as toggles to hold pouches and cases to the obi, the traditional Japanese sash, during Japan's Edo Period (1603 to 1868).


Can This Patient Be Saved?
DEMOSCLEROSIS The Silent Killer of American Government.
By Jonathan Rauch. 260 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $22.


Unfair Criticism Of Marketing
To the Editor:
Al Ries correctly points out the basic misconceptions that change equals progress and that one must make one's mark by radically altering the status quo.


Spain Flicks Off All Efforts By Swiss
Spain advanced to the quarterfinals of the World Cup this afternoon, putting a sturdy Swiss team out of the tournament with a show of defensive invincibility and wickedly fast counterattacking.
The 3-0 score may not have fairly reflected the game's flow, but there was no question about which team deserved to win.
Spain had all the elements: three tremendous saves by goalkeeper Andoni Zubizaretta, machine-like control over the center of the defense by Miguel Nadal, fleet feet for breakaways among the attackers, and an early goal (16th minute) that enabled the Spanish team to keep tightly focused on its goal.


Three Colors in a Close Harmony
PICNICS, barbecues, swimming parties, beach days, fireworks, bike hikes and just general loafing are the regimen for this, the Independence Day weekend.
What could be more obvious than to consider red, white and blue floral combinations to move the celebrations along?
Of course, the most obvious combination is a border of red, white and blue.


The World; Never Mind Yen. Greenbacks Are the New Gold Standard.
YOU want to know the oddest thing about the dollar story?
Right at this moment when all the headlines are about the dollar crumbling against the yen, when traders in Tokyo are supposedly dumping American currency by the wheelbarrow, the dollar has never been more popular around the globe.
Always remember, the dollar is two things: It is a financial asset, the value of which floats against the currencies of other countries, going up or down at any given time.
But the dollar has an additional life overseas.
There, the greenback, that piece of crisp, folding paper with the picture of dead Presidents, is in demand not only as a financial asset for transactions, but also as a store of value -- like gold -- and as a trusty standard against which many developing nations are now pegging their own pesos, dinars or cruzeiros.


Habitats/Bleeker Street Studio; Breaking All the Rules
IT was a very unusual deal.
Like the Odd Couple, the buyer and seller met and bickered and made up -- under the watchful but not intrusive eyes of the real estate agent.
In a real estate market where buyers and sellers sometimes wind up not speaking to each other by closing time, this seller -- who was forced to sell after being threatened with foreclosure -- was paid, after he no longer owned the apartment, to install a hand-crafted iron staircase.


Ms. Lukaszuk, Mr. Goldberg
Franessa Lukaszuk, a daughter of Dorothy Lukaszuk of Douglaston, Queens, and the late Edward Lukaszuk, was married last evening to David Goldberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Goldberg of Bellmore, L.I.
Rabbi Paul Kushner performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.


BATTLE OF THE CLIPPER CHIP
The Clipper chip and all its technological cousins are merely the cyberspace equivalent of the Maginot line ("Battle of the Clipper Chip," by Steven Levy, June 12).
Not only will they not provide the protection their advocates promise, but by lulling our law-enforcement agencies into a false sense of security, they render us more vulnerable to attack.
The Government should be seeking the next generation of crime-fighting techniques that recognize that wire-tapping will no longer be an available option.
C.
KERRY NEMOVICHER Morganville, N.J.


Teresa Gallagher and David Kriegman
Dr.
Teresa Catherine Gallagher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Gallagher of Clarks Summit, Pa., is to be married today to Dr.
David Jay Kriegman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Oscar Kriegman of Wayne, N.J.
Rabbi Marcia Rogick Rappaport is to officiate at the Woodlands Inn and Resort in Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
The Rev.
Peter Crynes, a Roman Catholic priest, is to take part in the ceremony.
The bride, 34, is a postdoctoral fellow in public health at the University of California at Los Angeles.
She graduated from Stanford University, from which she also received a Ph.D. in education.


Of Cats and Dogs
To the Editor:
Although I usually await the arrival of each Sunday's Book Review with eager anticipation, I was disgusted with the coverage given to two obviously un worthy books on June 5: "The Intelligence of Dogs: Canine Consciousness and Capabilities," by Stanley Coren, and -- most revolting -- "Pluto, Animal Lover," by Laren Stover.


Genetics Hallmark At Sarah Lawrence
SARAH LAWRENCE COLLEGE recently celebrated the 25th anniversary of its Human Genetics Program, the first graduate program of its kind in the country and one that spawned genetic counseling, an entirely new profession.
A quarter of a century later, advances in medical technology have caused the field to explode.
Once primarily used for diagnosing existing illnesses in fetuses, today genetic testing can predict a variety of adult conditions.
But the profession now faces new questions concerning the ethical, legal and social implications of the wealth of genetic information available.


Visiting the Global Village the Old-Fashioned Way
AS much as he loves using his personal computer to tool around on the information superhighway, Richard S. Moseson of Bloomfield, N.J., is a ham radio operator first and foremost.
Despite all the allure of the digital age, Mr.
Moseson and many of the 650,000 amateur radio operators in the United States insist that ham radio, as it is called for short, still has a cachet, a mystique and a mission that sets it apart from anything on the Internet.
"They're both democratic, both great equalizers," said Mr.
Moseson, who works for a company that produces books, magazines and videotapes about ham radio.
"But hams are often directly involved in international events, like providing communications out of areas that have been hit by natural disasters. Hams tend to be in the middle of things. On the on-line networks, there's more of a tendency to just talk." It was a Kuwaiti ham operator, hams say with pride, who helped relay vital information to the United States when the Bush Administration was preparing to launch Operation Desert Storm.


Gambling: Who Wins, Who Loses?
To the Editor:
"False Promise of Development by Casino," (June 12) suggested that legalized gaming in regional markets negatively affects local economies.
This is not an accurate picture, however, in markets where casinos are operating.


POP BRIEFS
Various artists: 'Last Night When We Were Young: The Ballad Album'  Classical Action 1001; CD.


Kerry Cudahy, Christopher Boyle
Kerry Ann Cudahy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Cudahy of Floral Park, L.I., was married there on Friday to Christopher Gilbert Boyle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph T. Boyle of Potomac, Md.
Msgr.
Charles Nosser officiated at Our Lady of Victory Church.
Mrs.
Boyle, 24, is an administrative assistant with Natwest Securities in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Providence College, and she received an M.B.A. degree from St.
John's University in Jamaica, Queens.
Her father is a senior account manager at Nynex Systems Marketing in New York.


BROOKLYN UPDATE
*
CLINTON HILL: In a reversal, Pratt Institute has agreed to renew its lease with the Benjamin Banneker Academy for Community Development, one of the city's new experimental high schools.
Jack Minkoff, acting provost at Pratt, said that in addition to renewing the academy's lease for one year, Pratt will also provide the school with more space.
The decision comes months after the institute decided not to renew the lease and at a time when the high school is conducting a search for a permanent principal.
In its first year, the academy's 11 classes were taught in six rooms on the first floor of Pratt's North Hall, but Pratt may clear out some of its offices on that floor.


How Long Can We Afford to Glorify the Frontier Mentality?
To the Editor:
The legal controversy about an armed population seems to turn on interpretations of the Constitution's Second Amendment, precluding Federal limitations because a well-regulated militia was once needed for protection against Indian tribes (native Americans) in league with the French down from Quebec.
However, a more serious argument seems to me to be ignored.
It is that the position of, for example, the National Rifle Association and its supporters, wittingly or not, serves to legitimate the anarchy of American society -- and this in the name of law and order.
It is hardly original to say that the use of civil procedures for the orderly resolution of disputes has distinguished domestic political life from the anarchy of an international order of sovereign units.
In a real sense, the 20th century has been distinguished by the only modestly successful attempts to have states substitute collective security arrangements and collectively established procedures for the anarchic tradition of self-help.


For France, Disney Magic Didn't Work
To the Editor:
Some Virginia residents believe that a Walt Disney Company theme park built near important Civil War battlefields will automatically result in an economic boom.
They are wrong.
A decade ago Disney made similar promises to the French, saying a theme park with European overtones would capitalize on tourists visiting Paris.
At it turned out, EuroDisney not only created an eyesore outside of Paris, but also resulted in a financial disaster because tourists traveling to France do not do so to patronize a theme park.
This is also true for tourists visiting the Washington area.


Mets Find Smile in San Diego
The Mets were looking for something -- anything -- to end their troubles on the field and put their off-field problems in the past.
San Diego appears to be their place.
The Mets arrived at Jack Murphy Stadium this afternoon relaxed and upbeat, many of them sunburned, for the third game of their series against the Padres.
The Mets snapped a five-game losing streak when Bret Saberhagen beat the Padres in the series opener, and Bobby Jones pitched six solid innings Friday night to lead the Mets to a 10-7 victory.
Bobby Bonilla, Kelly Stinnett and Jim Lindeman each blasted two-run homers and John Cangelosi had three hits and three runs scored as the Mets supported Jones with an early 8-0 lead.


Avoiding A Clash Of Rights
WOVEN tightly into the fabric of American democratic tradition is the concept of the public's right to know, a concept that can clash with the governance of condominiums and co-ops.
Owners and shareholders automatically assume they have a right to inspect all records connected with the running of their particular complex or building and they get downright huffy when a request to see them is refused.
Lawyers constantly hear from such people.


At Comcast, a Father and Son Head in All Directions
RALPH ROBERTS and his son, Brian, spent Father's Day salmon fishing in the Queen Charlotte Islands of British Columbia.
But even as they hauled in the salmon, their biggest catch was sitting on deck with them.
The father-son team that runs the Comcast Corporation was fishing with top lieutenants of Rogers Communications Inc., Canada's biggest cable television company.
That same day, Comcast announced it had won the bidding war for the United States cable systems Rogers was about to acquire from Maclean Hunter Ltd., paying $1.27 billion to Rogers for them, the most expensive purchase for Comcast to date.


Donovan Leitch: He's It! He's Hot! He's . . . Who?
RECENTLY, Donovan Leitch and a couple of friends, hoping to see the movie "Speed," showed up at a Manhattan theater where there was a long line.
"You don't have to wait in this line," one of Mr.
Leitch's friends said, loudly enough to be overheard.
"You're famous." Neither the ushers nor most anyone else in line, however, had the faintest idea who Mr.
Leitch was.
When the waters failed to part, he walked away.
The episode distilled the odd status of Mr.
Leitch, a 26-year-old son of the Donovan, the 1960's folk-rock star.
Although he has dabbled in acting, movie producing, modeling and singing in a rock band, none of his efforts have gotten him noticed by the general public.
Yet, in a certain universe, he is indeed famous: the world of restaurants with unlisted phone numbers, fashion shows as downtown events and parties that are written up in the next day's gossip columns.


Q. &amp; A.
A Family Feuds Over A Home Q When my mother-in-law died in 1984, I and my two brothers-in-law inherited the three-family house in which I currently live.
Several months later, two of us bought out the third brother-in-law by means of a $50,000 mortgage split $25,000 each.
About $12,000 is left on each of our mortgages.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST NOVEL  MAUD'S HOUSE  By Sherry Roberts. Papier-Mache Press, $18.


A Victory for Queens Asians
Bowing to pressure from the Asian community in Flushing, the Police Department has reversed its decision to move the Queens Robbery Squad and its Asian Crime Investigation Team six miles to Long Island City.
Instead, the squad will be transferred this summer to nearby Fresh Meadows into the former 107th Precinct at 186-01 73d Avenue, said Inspector Thomas V. Connolly, executive officer of Queens detectives.


Tender Care for Seedlings
Keep weeding and watering, if your garden hasn't had rain.
Sow seeds of perennials and biennials and keep nursery beds moist to insure germination.
You can pre-sprout seeds by placing them between two damp paper towels and then in plastic bags until they germinate.
That way, seeds won't bake in parched ground.
Just plant them in moist soil, and keep them well watered.
By late August, you will have seedlings sturdy enough to transplant.
Perennial hollyhocks, foxgloves, columbine, lavender, bee balm and mountain bluet are a few favorites.
Pick Japanese beetles off roses; spray aphids and thrips with water or insecticidal soap.
Keep an eye out for cabbageworms.
Good controls are Bacillus thuringiensis or nematodes.


Chicago to New York 744 Miles by Kayak
A 1,000-mile race in 1993 for kayakers and canoeists, many of whom were amateurs, marked the first running of the Finlandia Clean Water Challenge.
But increased prize money, and a reputation that stands now on its own two feet, has drawn 20 highly competitive athletes to the second edition of what has become an annual event.
The solo race, on a slightly revised course of 1,200 kilometers (744 miles) from Chicago to Manhattan, began Wednesday.
A month later, on July 29, the racers are expected to make their final sprint to the finish, a relatively easy paddle down the Hudson River from Englewood Cliffs, N.J., to the World Financial Center in Manhattan.


Word of My Father
I don't remember when I learned the word "God," because the word floated in the dark bedroom -- probably as much as "Mama" -- and my mind floated in the word.
By the time I could begin to wonder what God was, a lot had been spun around the word, so that "In the beginning was the Word" was true in my case.
The word came from my father, who showed me the stars and told me how God had made them and kept them aloft.
God was everywhere, keeping things from bursting into the dark nothing.


Carillon in New Canaan, Steel Band at Wesleyan
THE 22d season of Courtyard Concerts opens this week at St.
Mark's Church in New Canaan, each of the four 8:15 P.M.
Tuesday recitals preceded at 7:30 by a program on the 30-bell Paccard Carillon.
Appearing indoors this Tuesday are the soprano Anna Marie D'Ambrosio and the organist Mark Scholtz; weather permitting, the other recitals will be held in the torch-lit courtyard next to the church.
The mezzo Judith Dean Kulp, the pianist Gordon Dean and the Serenata Ensemble will perform July 12, the Tuesday Consort on July 19, the pianist Margaret Mills and the soprano Ellen Sisson closing the cycle on July 26.
For more details, call 966-4515.


For Student Debaters, Success on Their Terms
There are places in the land where the passion of high school debate nearly rivals that of high school football.
New Jersey is not one of those places.
But New Jersey -- specifically, Newark -- is home to a nationally prominent debate team.
In 12 years, the Science High School debate team has won 12 varsity state championships.
This team has taken part in the National Forensic League finals for 10 years in a row and last month traveled to Kansas City to do so again.
It is one of only 90 high schools in the country to hold a chair at the Barkley Forum, a debating honor society at Emory University.


There Are Better Ways to Raise Money
To the Editor:
Wilbur L. Ross offers a halfway solution to municipal money problems ( "Wanna Buy a Bridge to Brooklyn," June 12).
Unfortunately, half a bridge is no better than none, except to those who have the construction contracts.
Rather, municipalities should not give up their seed corn but use their broad range of powers to be equity partners with the private sector in various carefully evaluated enterprises.
The development of additional revenue sources to fund municipal governance should be the preferred alternative.
PAUL D. SPEER Jr.
Northfield, Ill., June 16  The writer is president of Municipal Finance Consulting Services, financial advisers to state and local governments and agencies.


American Center Finally Open in Paris
THERE may be a glimmer at the end of the tunnel, but you couldn't yet call it light.
Bruised feelings abound and question marks remain.
Still, after two years of crisis and nine months past its projected unveiling last September, the new American Center in Paris is open at last.
The opening party, with American and French V.I.P.'s prowling about Frank Gehry's playful, commanding new building on the Rue de Bercy and the adjacent new park, was on June 7; the public was admitted the next day.
The June 7 date was chosen to connect with the June 6 D-Day celebrations, and perhaps initially in the hope that a Clinton or two might grace the center.
In the end, center officials had to go over to the American Embassy in Paris for Hillary Rodham Clinton to proclaim the facility open.


At Work; Solving the Zoe Baird Problem
SOME people achieve celebrity and others have it thrust upon them.
Just ask Zoe Baird, the erstwhile Clinton Administration nominee for Attorney General, whose nightmarish 15 minutes of fame may never end, thanks to the infinite ability of the English language to absorb new idioms.
Whether the uproar over her revelation that she employed two undocumented aliens was fair or not -- and she has many off-the-record defenders -- the phrase "to have a Zoe Baird problem" has roosted in the vocabularies of the professional classes in any large American city with an immigrant labor force.
The phrase is now instantly recognizable code for failing to comply with any of the trillion or so immigration and tax laws that cover the employment of a foreign-born worker, especially a foreign-born worker who is not authorized to work.
At a forum at the Association of the Bar of the City of New York last week, immigration lawyers and immigrant rights groups contended that the Zoe Baird problem was built into the process of finding and hiring someone to provide child care or other types of in-home care for family members.


Ariane Noel and Marco Sodi
FRIENDS describe Marco Sodi, who was born in Florence, as a "Florentine at heart," someone who appreciates art, beauty, nature, books, water-skiing and power boats.
Mr.
Sodi, 35, the managing director in charge of international mergers and acquisitions at Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates, an investment bank in New York, met Ariane Noel, whose background is Brazilian, Swiss and American, on a blind date a year ago.


Tracking the Spread Of Rabies in the State
WHEN the state decided to invest in a new pathobiology building at the University of Connecticut in the 1980's, few people had any idea how busy it was going to be.
By the time the $7 million, three-story brick building was dedicated in 1989, scientists knew a raccoon rabies epidemic was heading straight for the state, but it was expected to take a few more years to arrive.
Today the pathobiologists working at the complex are at the center of tracking the spread of rabies across the state.
Last month nearly 100 animals -- taken to the center by animal control officers, conservation officers and worried residents -- tested positive for the disease.
Summer is a dangerous time of the year for the spread of rabies for several reasons, said Dr.
Louis van der Heide, head of pathobiology at UConn.
With warmer weather people are outside and more likely to come in contact with wild animals.
In addition, if a mother raccoon dies of rabies people might find the babies and take them home, risking bites, Dr. van der Heide said.


IN SHORT: FICTION
HISTORICAL NOVEL  THE GOLDEN OCEAN  By Patrick O'Brian. Norton, $22.50.


Along the Hudson, a Tailgate Party, With a Merengue Beat
Zoraya Payne and her husband, Victor, drive in nearly every weekend from Jersey City in their bright red Jeep Wagoneer with merengue playing on the tape deck.
Hortensia and Victor Droncoso, from Washington Heights, bring their three children and an aluminum barbecue pit for the chicken and sausages.
Their destination is a swatch of Riverside Park near 153d Street that in the last five years has grown into a wildly popular summer gathering place for thousands of Dominicans from the New York area.


R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr.
DAVE GERGEN CALLED ME on Thursday," says R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr., editor in chief of The American Spectator, the conservative monthly. David Gergen is the White House Counselor.
Tyrrell -- "Bob," as he is known -- is telling me about the call as we drive in his Mercedes through suburban Virginia to the supermarket to buy a pie.


Even Fans Learn That Expos Are Worth Price of Admission
The Expos apparently set off a giant alarm clock last week because the people in Montreal finally woke up.
After doing a good job of ignoring one of baseball's best teams (the Expos averaged only 20,000 a game for their first 35 home games), Quebec fans nearly filled Olympic Stadium for three successive nights.
The Expos drew an average of 44,000 a game for their three-game series with the Atlanta Braves, and even better, they won two of the games.


For the G.O.P. Liberals, Stanley Isaacs Was a Model
To the Editor:
Your June 26 account of East Side liberal Republicans ("A Reconditioned East Side G.O.P. Flexes Its Muscles") omitted the mentor of many of those mentioned -- my father, Stanley M. Isaacs.
He was Borough President of Manhattan and Minority Leader of the City Council until he died.
In fact, at one point, he was the only elected Republican in New York City.


Reporter's Notebook; A Sightseer at O. J. Simpson's House Says She Found a Knife in the Grass
A kitchen knife with red stains on its six-inch blade was found today outside the fence surrounding the house next door to O. J. Simpson's home.
Prosecutors have said that they believe "a substantial knife" was used in the killings on June 12 of Mr.
Simpson's former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and a restaurant waiter who was her friend, but they have not said that they have recovered the weapon.
The owner of a downtown cutlery store testified on Thursday that Mr.
Simpson bought a 15-inch folding knife with a 7-inch blade on May 3.
That knife has not been linked to the killings.


Newport
In Newport, R.I., there is a sophistication found in few other American cities of its size.
While highly regarded as a summer resort, Newport thrives year-round on its natural beauty and historic architecture.
Founded in 1639, the City-by-the-Sea has expertly restored and maintained many of the jewels of its past, from simple Colonial houses in the heart of the city to the famous "cottages," elaborate turn-of-the-century mansions along the ocean.


Editors' Note
An article in The Week in Review on June 5 discussed law enforcement in Gaza and the West Bank under Palestinian rule.
The author, Jonathan Kuttab, a Palestinian lawyer, headed his side's legal committee in the self-rule negotiations with the Israelis last May.


To Get Rid of the Cars, Tunnel Under Central Park
To the Editor:
Turn Central Park into a parking lot or an airport?
We New Yorkers would rise up as one to block the bulldozers if either of these ideas, floated in your letters column, were to be taken seriously.


A River View (Almost) in Cold Spring
IT is a pity that the area between the restaurant and the river is still under repair and cordoned off, making the charming gazebo and walkway to the water's edge inaccessible.
For a short while then, diners from their vantage point at Hudson House must visually poke through the orange mesh fence that surrounds the road work to focus on the delightful view beyond the river's edge: the mountainous green slopes along the bottom of which at times a long freight train crawls and the casual river traffic of sailboats, cabin cruisers or an occasional tour boat.


F.Y.I.
A Hint to Pale Riders?
Q.
Why is there a Portofino Sun Center sticker in the right-hand corner of the passenger barrier in 75 percent of New York City taxi cabs?


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'AIN'T MISBEHAVIN' '
Duke Ellington's granddaughter, Mercedes, has directed the Fleetwood Stage Company's production of the Fats Waller musical "Ain't Misbehavin'," opening on Wednesday in Mount Vernon and running through July 17.


SUNDAY, July 3, 1994; Poetic Licensing
When W. H. Auden drew up the curriculum for an imaginary college for poets, he included everything from mathematics to archaeology.
Inspired by the sale of drafts to libraries "for not an insignificant amount," the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet Galway Kinnell has another suggestion: a course entitled "The Draft." The idea is "to start with a finished poem and invent a plausible series of drafts to box and sell, going all the way back to a matchbook cover or restaurant napkin."
Kinnell, who teaches at New York University, came up with his facetious suggestion when considering the earning power of poets, which is essentially nil, and the need not to overlook any source of funds.
Poets sometimes create poems in one or two drafts, which they may throw away.
And those who use computers may erase the whole horrible record of the writing of a poem.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


There's No Easy Out With Gwynn at Work
Tony Gwynn used to come to the ball park at 2 o'clock in the afternoon and find himself rattling about an empty clubhouse except for some of the Padres' coaches.
Every day, he would take five or so minutes of extra batting practice, work he considered necessary to improve his craft.
Most days, he would do it alone.
On Friday, he arrived at Jack Murphy Stadium shortly after 2 P.M. and by 3 P.M. he was out on the field throwing batting practice to his 11-year-old son, Anthony.
Anthony comes to the park with his father almost every day in the summer, and the Padres allow him to wander right field and shag fly balls during batting practice.


Less Stress From a Day In the Courts
Hya Jones was simmering with frustration.
Bad enough she had to be in Brooklyn Civil Court to begin with, she said, but court employees were making things worse by not being helpful, causing her to make mistakes on the forms she had to fill out in her suit against a store that had delivered damaged furniture.
On the other hand, John Foster, a Brooklyn landlord, was perfectly satisfied with the efficient and "very courteous" service he said he had just received in the court clerk's office, where he had gone the other day for information on how to sue a former tenant who owed him rent.


'Not Just Any Austrian Tom, Dick or Harry'
ONE OF THE MORE remarkable 20th-century careers in art can be studied in embryo at the Guggenheim Museum in an exhibition called "Oskar Kokoschka, Works on Paper: The Early Years, 1897-1917."
Throughout his long life (1886-1980), Kokoschka kept alive, almost single-handedly, the idea of a certain now vanished Europe.
How he came to formulate and defend it makes an extraordinary story, one whose first phase is amply documented at the Guggenheim.


Martinez Beats Navratilova at Wimbledon


Midtown East: More Than Lunch
AKBAR * (212) 838-1717; 475 Park Avenue, near 58th Street; $$; all major credit cards
Ornately designed with pilasters, dining alcoves and a stained-glass ceiling, Akbar is a reliable spot for the refined and highly seasoned Mogul cuisine of Northern India.
Among starters are the mildly peppery mulligatawny soup; papri chat, puffed crackers served with cubed potatoes in an invigorating tamarind-yogurt sauce, and tasty little potato-bound vegetable patties called samosas.
Enticing main courses include the tandoor-roasted marinated chicken and moist chicken ginger kebabs.
Other options are vindaloo of lamb, a spicy dish with cinnamon and ginger, and biryani, the house special, a traditional basmati rice dish that combines chicken, saffron and other spices.
Akbar has a nice selection of well-prepared vegetarian dishes including bhurta (mashed, garlicky eggplant) and matter paneer (cubes of fresh cheese with fresh peas in hot sauce). (Review: 3/19/93)  BRASSERIE *  (212) 751-4840; 100 East 53d Street; $$; all major credit cards
Open around the clock, Brasserie has a sweeping, comfortable main dining room with a giant U-shaped eating bar in the center and a smaller room off to the side.
Start with snails in a garlic-herb butter; mixed greens topped with warm goat cheese; crab cakes with a white butter sauce, or vegetable terrine with a parsley coulis.
For entrees there are duck confit with stewed beans and tomatoes; choucroute a l'Alsacienne, a dish combining smoked meats, sauerkraut, wine and potatoes; grilled marinated chicken with a warm lime and lemon-grass vinaigrette; grilled lamb chops with ratatouille, and grilled Black Angus steak served with herbed butter and frites. (Review: 6/7/91; article: 10/30/92)  LE COLONIAL **  (212) 752-0808; 149 East 57th Street; $$; all major credit cards
Ceiling fans stirring the air, potted palms, green shutters mounted on the walls and subdued lighting -- there's an exotic tropical feel at this new Vietnamese restaurant.
Sprightly starters on the current menu include goi cuon, lettuce, shrimp, bean sprouts, skinny slivers of rice noodle and herbs wrapped in sheets of rice paper, served with an aromatic peanut sauce on the side; delicately fried spring rolls, and goi bo, a spicy beef salad with lemon grass, basil and chili.
Among entrees are sauteed shrimp in a sauce of curried coconut with eggplant; roast duck marinated in ginger and served with a tamarind sauce; grilled spiced beef brochette set over angel hair pasta, and crispy whole snapper with a light and spicy citrus sauce. (Review: 4/1/94)  ROSA MEXICANO ** (212) 753-7407; 1063 First Avenue, at 58th Street; $$; all major credit cards
One of the few authentic Mexican restaurants in town, Rosa Mexicano is largely the creation of Josephina Howard, the chef and co-owner, who is a diligent researcher of Mexican regional cooking.
Her menu is relatively light, emphasizing grilled meats and fish as well as casseroles seasoned with mole sauces, various chili combinations and herbs.
A fine way to begin is with the excellent chunky guacamole with lemon and coriander, prepared at tableside to your heat specification.
Other starters include sauteed oysters in a marinade of spiced chilies and shrimp Nayaril, sauteed and served cold marinated in a mustard and chile vinaigrette.
Also recommended are the tablas, or short ribs of beef marinated in beer and lemon, then grilled over an open fire and the posole, an earthy stew combining pork, chicken, hominy, coriander and lime and served with assorted condiments. (Review: 5/28/93)  SOLERA ** (212) 644-1166; 216 East 53d Street; $$; all major credit cards
This comely Iberian spot combines comfort and congeniality with some of the best Spanish fare in the city.
Solera has a colorful tiled tapas bar in the front and a sunny glass-enclosed private room in the back seating 20.
The tapas bar has Spanish tortillas made with golden cubed potatoes, tasty white beans and strips of salchichon (a dried chorizo made with pork and beef); sparkling fresh head cheese with red onions; big marinated green olives, and grilled shrimp with garlic.
Another way to start is with a pheasant and guinea hen terrine with morels, or spicy fried calamari with basil aioli.
Among main courses are grilled salmon set over a grilled vegetable puree with stuffed eggplant; grilled grouper with a red pepper coulis and black olive polenta, and roasted duck breast with lemon and a spiced peach and rhubarb compote. (Review: 6/21/91; revisited: 6/23/94)  TATOU ** (212) 753-1144; 151 East 50th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
This former cabaret is a handsome supper club with a 30-foot-high ceiling and ornate balcony.
A massive chandelier hangs from the center, and faux antique windows run from floor to ceiling.
In this nightclub setting, with live music nightly, Scott Cohen, formerly of La Reserve, turns out some beguiling regional American fare.
Current starters include crab ravioli in a smoky tomato sauce with braised fennel; a terrific tortilla soup with strands of chicken and tortillas, and smoked salmon served with dill pancakes, creme fraiche and salmon caviar.
Among entrees are roasted honey-mustard-marinated salmon drizzled with a basil vinaigrette; grilled Arctic char with a roasted corn vinaigrette, wild mushrooms and brown rice, and broiled chicken with mushroom sauce, sweet potato and collard greens. (Review: 10/4/91; article 1/17/92)  ZARELA ** (212) 644-6740; 953 Second Avenue, near 51st Street; $$; American Express, Diner's Club, Carte Blanche
At this superior Mexican restaurant, named after its exuberant owner, Zarela Martinez, every night is a party.
The place is festooned with colorful paper cutouts.
Antique Mexican masks decorate the downstairs dining room; upstairs, the walls are lined with banquettes covered in bright fabric.
As for the food, the kitchen turns out some of the most authentic and spirited Mexican dishes around.
For starters there are chicken enchiladas with a pumpkin seed sauce; red-snapper hash cooked with tomato, scallions, jalapeno and spices, and guacamole.
Among main courses are roast marinated pork with a tomato, onion and chipotle chilies sauce; grilled marinated skirt steak with salsa and guacamole, and grill-smoked salmon served with a chipotle mayonnaise and cucumber relish. (Review: 8/23/91; revisited: 6/29/94)
Stylish Indian  DAWAT ** (212) 355-7555; 210 East 58th Street; $$; all major credit cards
Dawat is one of the more stylish and innovative Indian restaurants in Manhattan.
Among the best appetizers are shami kebab, disks of ground lamb with mint, and dahi aloo poori, wafers tossed with potato cubes and chickpeas in yogurt.
Excellent main courses include shrimp with coconut milk flavored with mustard seeds, curry and tamarind (konju pappaas); salmon fillet with coriander chutney, steamed in a banana leaf, and chicken badami, in a creamy sauce of ground almonds. (Review: 7/5/91; article: 1/17/92)
Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on June 19 about King Arthur misidentified the county in which Winchester is located.
It is Hampshire, not Kent.


Tambi Saffran and Leon Stollman
Tambi Lee Saffran, the daughter of Risa Saffran of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Henry Saffran, was married last evening to Leon Glenn Stollman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Stollman of Blue Bell, Pa.
Rabbi Stephen Klein officiated at Le Chateau restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.
The bride, 29, is a freelance associate television producer in Los Angeles.
She recently completed "The Ride," a documentary series that is to be shown this fall on the Public Broadcasting Service.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in broadcasting from Boston University.


Two Riverboats Offer Gambling in Missouri
Two riverboat casinos recently opened in Missouri despite the state's ban on slot machines and many other games of chance.
The President Casino on the Admiral is permanently moored on the Mississippi River, just north of the Gateway Arch.
The recently renovated riverboat, which dates from 1907, has 70,000 square feet of casino space with nearly 100 tables assigned to blackjack, poker and craps and 150 video poker games.
Admission is $2 during the week and $5 on weekends.
Boarding is allowed every two hours from 10 A.M. to midnight.
Entrance is restricted to adults at least 21 years old.
For information: (800) 772-3647.


Karen Warkentin, Scott Peterson
Karen Anne Warkentin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Benno Warkentin of Corvallis, Ore., was married yesterday to Carl Scott Peterson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wesley Peterson of Florence, Ore.
The Rev.
Carl H. Peterson, the bridegroom's grandfather and a minister of the Evangelical Covenant of America, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Timberline Lodge on Mount Hood, Ore.
Ms.
Warkentin, 32, is keeping her name.
She owns and runs an ironwork furniture-design business in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.


Worst Drought in 30 Years Brings Rationing to Half of Puerto Rico
At the home of Maria Rodriguez, a 27-year-old housewife with four children, the plants are dead, the washing machine is idle and the driveway is dirty.
She gets water from civil defense trucks that, on most days, stop by to fill up the large drums and assorted buckets that now sit permanently by her front door.
She does laundry with a washboard in a nearby brook.
And she forages for bottled water in supermarkets.


Environmentalist Uses Vines as Art
SOME people can't see the forest for the trees.
The artist Shirley Wallitsch can't see the trees for the vines she collects to make her distinctive wreaths, baskets and furniture.
When Ms.
Wallitsch recently gave a demonstration of her technique to a group of third graders at the West Patent Elementary School here, they watched her at first with wary curiosity as she sat on the floor in front of them, twisting and turning branches and vines into a sculptural form that was quickly transformed into a graceful basket.
Sharing a Vision
During her presentation, in which Ms.
Wallitsch explained the process by which she made furniture, garden trellises and arches, wreaths, sculpture and baskets from tree vines and branches, she continued to crop and cut and create, giving form to the tangle of materials by her side.


Helene Glavin, Stephen Clinton
Helene Elizabeth Glavin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Glavin 3d of Waterford, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Stephen Christopher Clinton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Clinton Jr., also of Waterford.
The Rev.
John J. Brynes performed the ceremony at St.
Mary of the Assumption Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Clinton, 25, teaches English at Waterford-Halfmoon High School in Waterford.
She graduated from Villanova University and received a master's degree in English education from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.
Her parents are partners in Glavin &amp; Glavin, a law firm in Waterford.


Infamy on Trial
To the Editor:
Regarding James E. Young's review of my book "Nuremberg: Infamy on Trial" (May 29), I certainly am not displeased that Mr.
Young thinks my account of the trial reads "like a novel." I set out to bring Nuremberg to life for a new generation of lay readers, rather than academics and legal scholars who have been well served by several more formal histories.


A Full Orchestra Returns, Strings Attached
WHEN the Pelham School District cut string music from its curriculum four years ago, no lightning flashed; no thunderclaps warned of the end of Western civilization as we know it.
Many beginning violin, viola and cello students -- not yet convinced that their scratchy sounds would ever amount to anything anyway -- simply signed up to study band instruments the following year.
Some of the more advanced string players -- those whose families could afford it -- continued with the private lessons they had already begun, while others, busy with sports, student government and other interests, let their musical activities go.


The Nation; A New Lineup, But What Game?
MAYBE it wasn't as exciting as the World Cup, but if you were watching the White House last week you still needed a scorecard, and even then it was hard to make out just what game was being played.
Before the maneuvering, Thomas F. McLarty 3d was listed in the lineup as chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta as budget director and David R. Gergen as counselor.


Double-Hung Windows Can Be a Fine Refurbishing Project
OLD double-hung windows, specifically those of wood counterbalanced with sash weights, are notoriously cantankerous in disrepair, but can often be restored to function beautifully.
Typically a full restoration involves stripping and repainting wood parts and replacing broken panes and sash cords or chains.
Start by removing the sashes.
Use a utility knife or a serrated tool called a paint zipper to cut through thick paint covering the seam between the window frame and one of the two molding strips that form the indoor sides of the channels in which the lower sash slides.
After prying away the strip from the frame with a putty knife, remove the nails from the strip by pulling them out through the back with pliers.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Soccer 101: Wormburners and Nutmegs
SOCCER? Sure, why not.
The New York Times sports editors asked me to help with coverage in the early round of this year's World Cup, several games of which are being played at the Cotton Bowl here.
I'm a huge fan of Gordie-style soccer (he's my 6-year-old), but, like too many Americans and unlike the vast majority of humanity, I knew precious little about the adult version.


Cut Them Some Slack
Americans of my generation," President Clinton told U.C.L.A. students this spring, "have been bombarded by images on television shows, and even one book, about the so-called 'Generation X' filled with cynics and slackers.
Well, what I have seen today is not a generation of slackers, but a generation of seekers."
The Clinton use of the word slacker calls to mind the reaction of President Franklin D. Roosevelt when Republicans complained of continuing depression: "There is an old and somewhat lugubrious adage that says, 'Never speak of rope in the house of a man who has been hanged.' In the same way, if I were a Republican leader speaking to a mixed audience, the last word in the whole dictionary that I think I would use is that word 'depression.' "


Diana Lazarus, William Barker
Diana Ruth Lazarus, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Lazarus Jr. of Washington, was married there yesterday to William Stephens Barker, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Clyde Barker of Haverford, Pa.
Jean Somerville Kotkin, an Ethical Culture leader in New York, performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel.
The bride teaches English at Seneca Valley High School in Germantown, Md.
She graduated from Yale University, as did the bridegroom, and received a master's degree in education from American University.
Her father, now retired, was a managing partner in the Washington office of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson, a New York law firm.


Heavenly Beatrice!
To the Editor:
"High-Concept Classics: A Quiz" (June 5) is clever, but one answer -- "The Inferno" -- is inaccurate: Dante didn't meet up with Beatrice until "Paradiso." The answer demonstrates the sad fact that most readers go no farther than "The Inferno," and tend to think that's all there is to "The Divine Comedy."  LOUISE M. FORSCHER  Bedford, N.Y.


A 'Peter Pan' Staging That's Like a Splashy Party
AT the Paper Mill Playhouse, "Peter Pan" is having a starry-eyed production with a surprise star.
Spilling over with storybook fancy and musical-theater savoir-faire, the new staging by Robert Johanson is New Jersey's party of the year.
Watch the loony trees prance as if to prove that even if Disney does overtake Broadway, no one in these parts is about to be a wallflower.


Double-Hung Windows Can Be a Fine Refurbishing Project
OLD double-hung windows, specifically those of wood counterbalanced with sash weights, are notoriously cantankerous in disrepair, but can often be restored to function beautifully.
Typically a full restoration involves stripping and repainting wood parts and replacing broken panes and sash cords or chains.
Start by removing the sashes.
Use a utility knife or a serrated tool called a paint zipper to cut through thick paint covering the seam between the window frame and one of the two molding strips that form the indoor sides of the channels in which the lower sash slides.
After prying away the strip from the frame with a putty knife, remove the nails from the strip by pulling them out through the back with pliers.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 3, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
2
1
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
3
20
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
4
6
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer pursues his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
5
2
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $6.50.) A model young woman is abducted by a onetime award-winning film maker.
6*
3
DARK APPRENTICE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) Volume 2 of the "Star Wars" Jedi Academy Trilogy.
7
7
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A former naval officer versus a woman who heads a terrorist conspiracy.
8
3
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
9
11
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
10
2
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers and dope smugglers.
11
5
HILL TOWNS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Americans on holiday in Italy learn a lot about themselves.
12*
1
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Bantam, $6.50.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
13*
1
HONOR AMONG THIEVES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Saddam Hussein plots to steal the Declaration of Independence.
14
10
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for murder.
15
100
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
25
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
9
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
3
7
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
4
556
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5*
6
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
6
5
FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated in combat in Vietnam and recently committed suicide.
7
3
THE LONGEST DAY, by Cornelius Ryan. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $11.) The Allied assault on Normandy, June 6, 1944.
8
72
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
9
25
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
10
8
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
11
11
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
12
35
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
13
142
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
14
9
BALKAN GHOSTS, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Vintage, $12.) A history since World War I of the peninsula where fighting is now going on.
15
57
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
16*
1
LENIN'S TOMB, by David Remnick. (Vintage, $14.) The decline and fall of the Soviet Union.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
172
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
5
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
3
114
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
179
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 18, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


As Haiti Embargo Tightens, Poor Children Get Hungrier
Minerva Guillaume, bright-eyed and alert, rushed past hundreds of other children to the front of the food line.
She was caught and whisked to the back.
She flashed an impish smile.
"I am hungry," said Minerva, a wisp of a 7-year old, who wanted to get her share of the day's fare, gruel mixed with okra.
"I want to eat."


TV Sports Without End In Cruise Ship Cabins
As television continues to make wider inroads into cruise ship cabins, passengers on the ships of at least six lines can now tune in to the 24-hour programming of ESPN.
The sports network, which has added the ships as subscribers in recent months, distributes internationally the Super Bowl, the World Series, the Stanley Cup, the Davis Cup and the British Open in addition to regular-season games, daily scores, interviews and highlights.
The lines offering ESPN include Celebrity, Crystal, Gold Star, Norwegian, Premier and Princess.


Somethimes a Great Ocean
ALONGSHORE By John R. Stilgoe.
Illustrated. 443 pp.
New Haven:  Yale University Press. $35.


Mariners Make Sure That Key Can't Stop Yankees' Slide
The response had become so consistent that it was too easy to take for granted.
Yankees lose, Key wins.
They would lose a game and he would immediately respond -- effortlessly, it seemed -- and a losing streak would be averted once more.
Jimmy Key's sterling season, which has already inspired memories of left-handers with the names Guidry, Ford and Gomez, included a 5-0 record following a Yankee loss.
Yesterday was not one of those days, but it did serve a purpose.
Seattle's 12-6 victory, the third consecutive Yankee defeat, carried the reminder that Key's craftsmanship does not come easily.
He just normally makes it seem that way.


For France, Disney Magic Didn't Work; National Park Langford
To the Editor:
Thank you for "Rebelling Against Disney" (editorial, June 19), on the proposed Disney theme park in Virginia.
It sometimes seems there is no concern for our historic heritage.
I was especially interested in your "little history lesson" about Ulysses S. Grant and the establishment of Yellowstone National Park.
Nathaniel Pitt Langford, my great-granduncle, was a member of the Washburn Expedition in 1870 that explored the Yellowstone area that became the first national park.


Earle Draper, 100, T.V.A. Executive
Earle S. Draper, a top executive with the Tennessee Valley Authority in the 1930's, died on Friday at his home in Vero Beach, Fla.
He was 100.
He had been in declining health for a month, said his son Lieut.
Col.
Frederic F. Draper.


Mellow Hiking in the North Cascades
IF THERE are commuters in heaven, perhaps they commute on something like the North Cascades Scenic Highway.
For many travelers this great stretch of road, part of State Route 20 across northern Washington, is its own best reason for being -- a marvel of engineering that turned virtually impassable mountain terrain into an easy sightseeing drive.


Conceived in Sin
A NEW WORLD An Epic of Colonial America From the Founding of Jamestown to the Fall of Quebec.
By Arthur Quinn. 534 pp.
Boston: Faber &amp; Faber. $35.


In Simpson Case, Violence Comes Off the Field; Remember the Children
To the Editor:
In the early 1960's my father was my hero, much as O. J. Simpson was America's hero.
Though not an athlete, my father had surmounted the poverty and segregated schools of New Iberia, La., He had served honorably in the Marine Corps during World War II and later became an Army officer.
A brilliant student, he earned a master's degree in economics and graduated near the top of his law school class in the 1950's before starting out on what promised to be a stellar legal career in Baltimore.


On a Day of Sadness, an Aging Player Is Germany's Hero
He was the last aging German star to heed the call of Berti Vogts, the oldest member of a team on which players in their late 20's qualify as young.
Today at Soldier Field, Rudi Voller shrugged off the years and made his coach very grateful.


American Realism, a 'Persistent Trait'
SUMMING up the art of a state maybe harder than estimating the state of its art.
It is, nevertheless, a task for which Robert Koenig is well suited, not least because of his experience as director of the Montclair Art Museum and, more recently, at the Noyes Museum.
So it is no surprise to find out that as guest curator of "More Than Meets the Eye," at the Morris Museum here, Mr.
Koenig has produced with dispatch and not a little flair a show that includes most of the stars in the New Jersey art firmament between 1900 and 1994.
That all of them are figurative artists may reflect the curator's contention that, notwithstanding such departures as Abstract Expressionism and Minimalism, Realism has been the "pervasive and persistent trait in American art."


Using Gooseberries and Blackberries for Summer Desserts
WE are so used to getting raspberries and strawberries all year long now that when local ones appear in the summer, we hardly notice.
But other kinds of berries are coming into season.
Red currants, gooseberries and blackberries, hard to find at other times unless they are flown in from as far away as New Zealand, are now available at greengrocers and farmstands.
Gooseberries are not well known in the United States.
But in Europe, particularly in northern countries where they thrive because the sun is not too hot, they are a popular summer fruit.
In England they show up mainly in pies and are mixed with cream in a dish called Gooseberry Fool, which dates from the Middle Ages.
Their tart flavor also goes well in sauces for game, ham, pork, chicken and mackerel.
In Colonial America, gooseberries were frequently used for wine, pies and preserves, but by the 19th century they had all but disappeared.
For years, their cultivation was discouraged because they carry a fungus that causes white pine blister rust.


INSIDE
Arafat Back at the Source
Yasir Arafat visited the Gaza Strip refugee camp where the Palestinian uprising began, and he gave reassurances that he can govern up close as well as lead from afar.
Page 8.
Malnutrition in Haiti
As the international embargo steps up pressure on the military rulers, experts warn that the chaos in Haiti is resulting in severe nutritional deficiency in many children.
Page 12.
New Violence in El Salvador
Some children of Salvadorans who fled the civil war joined American street gangs.
Now deported, they cause trouble at home.
Page 3.
Play Ball, bBut Where?
With New York's softball fields in great demand, the city's Parks Department is worried that its permits are, in effect, being scalped.
Page 21.


Unfair Criticism Of Marketing
To the Editor:
As a management consultant and long-time member of the American Marketing Association, I take exception to "Marketers, Stop Your Tinkering" (Viewpoints, June 12) and Al Ries's argument that the dismal state of many large American enterprises is related to the number of A.M.A. members in their ranks.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 24 of The Times Magazine today, with an article about hate crimes in Billings, Mont., misidentifies the child sitting on the lap of Tammie Schnitzer, who was a victim of anti-Semitic harassment.
The child is her daughter, Rachel, not her son, Isaac.


Flavors of Naples
To the Editor: "Tastes Swing Back to Flavors of Naples" by Maureen B. Fant (May 1) evoked memories of Italian food in a far distant time.
Fifty years ago, in July 1944, I was a young company officer with an infantry division in Italy training for the invasion of southern France.
My regiment was encamped 10 miles north of Pozzuoli.
Army cooking was beginning to pall, so several of us vowed to seek out fine Neapolitan fare.
What ensued was one of my great gastronomic disappointments.


Softball Teams, Hardball Tactics; Controlling the Permits to Use Ball Fields Can Be Profitable
A breeze rustles, a bat cracks and, for an hour or so, a game of softball in a city park can feel like a new coat of paint to a weary soul -- if you can get a diamond.
The New York City Parks Department is worried that its ball field permits have become so prized that they are, in effect, being scalped.


A Saint in the Back Seat, A Wrestler in the Boat
UPTOWN -- At 2 A.M. last Saturday, Liza Minnelli was backstage at the Beacon Theater, congratulating the pop star K. D. Lang on her performance at a fund-raising concert for Lifebeat, a music-industry organization fighting AIDS.
Ms.
Lang, the first openly lesbian singer to attain mainstream success, had just finished whipping the crowd into a gleeful froth by belting out her romantic hits and a version of the old Tom Jones standard "What's New Pussycat?" that gave it a new spin.
Still dressed in the men's pajamas that she'd worn on stage, Ms.
Lang looked like someone's kid tomboy sister who was up past her bedtime.
"Are you coming to the party?" Ms.
Lang asked Ms.
Minnelli, who wore the understated black pantsuit of an older sister who's seen a bit more of the world.


The Homeless, The Police And Penn Station


America's Most Wanted: Cars and Trucks That Have Buyers Lining Up
These are days of plenty for the American auto industry.
Nearly everyone, it seems, is shopping for cars, trucks, vans, mini-vans - anything with four wheels and an engine.
The assembly lines of Detroit, and many of those in Japan and Germany, can barely keep up with sales.
Of course, some models are harder to find than others, as are some colors and optional equipment.
Mini-vans, sports utilities and other trucklike vehicles are continuing to gain in popularity.
Hues of greenish-blue and fancy CD players are all the rage.
A consumer seeking a particular vehicle of a certain color with special equipment can expect to do more shopping, calling and negotiating than usual.
And if the cupboard is bare at one local showroom, a dealer across town may have several models in stock.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Ducky
ON the last day of school a group of youngsters marched out of Massapequa High School like ducks in a row.
That's because they were ducks in a row.
Although their row wasn't exactly straight.
The 13 ducklings that were shepherded through the halls of Massapequa tended to bunch together.
So it was hard to tell whom they were following, their mother or the human leading them, Russell Cera, the Pied Piper of education.


Correction
An article last Sunday about Ken Bode, the new moderator of the PBS program "Washington Week in Review," misstated the age of his younger daughter, Josephine.
She is 14, not 11.


Profile; Mix and Match: A Shoe for Women, a Survivor's Tale
SHERI POE is nothing if not determined.
A year ago, the 41-year-old founder and chief executive of Ryka Inc., an obscure $14 million maker of women's athletic shoes, decided she wanted to see Princess Diana, a noted aerobics buff, in Ryka shoes.
Characteristically, she turned it into a mission.
She instructed her British distributor to seek out the Princess's personal trainer and deliver several pairs of shoes -- plus a note from Ms.
Poe to Princess Di.


Jill Koslowsky, William Neff
Jill Lois Koslowsky, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard Koslowsky of North Caldwell, N.J., is to be married today to William Gregor Neff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gregor Neff of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Cantor Elliot Levine is to officiate at the Marriott at Glenpointe in Teaneck, N.J.
The Rev.
William Larson, a Lutheran minister, is to take part in the ceremony.


Flea Market Plan Raises Opposition
IT is just a matter of time before the Roosevelt Raceway flea market will be evicted from the the former racetrack in Westbury.
But a proposed move two miles south to the Nassau County Veterans Memorial Coliseum is generating opposition from chambers of commerce and other civic groups.
Citing concerns over unfair competition, traffic, litter and parking, some people are trying to block the shift, which the County Board of Supervisors has to vote on.


Christine Cardace, Kenneth Fujimoto
Christine Marie Cardace, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominick A. Cardace of Mountain Lakes, N.J., is to be married there today to Kenneth Noboru Fujimoto, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Akira Fujimoto of Conshohocken, Pa.
The Rev.
Richard Carton is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Church.
The bride, 26, graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from the University of California at Los Angeles last month.
She is to join Bankers Trust as an associate in Los Angeles in August.


Gambling: Who Wins, Who Loses?
To the Editors:
The real losers in government-sponsored gambling are the taxpayers.
The bottom line revenue generated is quite small after deducting the inordinate expenses and winnings, particularly when compared with the size of overall local and state budgets.
In addition to the economic costs cited by your article, the net income is even more illusory for state-run lotteries because a portion of the money is simply recycled tax dollars spent by welfare recipients.
We know that gambling cuts across all economic strata and the emphasis on accessible "cheap" tickets, is far more appealing to those on the lower economic rungs.


Getting It Right And Going Light On the History
WHEN RUTH PRAWER Jhabvala began writing the screenplay of the latest Merchant-Ivory film, "Jefferson in Paris," she faced a major problem.
She was dealing with a man who, after penning the Declaration of Independence, went on to become Governor of Virginia, Secretary of State, Vice President and, finally, the third President of the United States.
Yet, she concluded, "no one is going to go and see a film about politics."
Her approach, then, was to look for the man behind Thomas Jefferson the Great American.
And, in that sense, she was lucky.
The years that Jefferson spent in Paris as President Washington's Ambassador, 1784 to 1789, provided a rare window to the hidden passions of this introspective man.
The resulting film, now being shot in and around Paris, has as its Jefferson Nick Nolte, who co-stars in "I Love Trouble," which opened on Wednesday.


Russian Alcoholics Taste Freedom and Vodka
Russia released more than 30,000 people this week from prisons for alcoholics that had been a link in the iron chain of Soviet law and order since the 1960's.
Unlike some programs in the United States and Western Europe, where outpatient care is available for released psychiatric patients, there isn't even a faint hope of follow-up.


The Nation; Filibusters: A Changing Breed
THE Senate filibuster has two classic images.
One is from history, of Southerners fighting against civil rights legislation or pacifists forestalling war, talking all day and night.
The other is from the movie "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington," when Jimmy Stewart as Jefferson Smith held the floor trying nobly to expose corruption.
Neither example bears much relationship to the current use of the filibuster.
Refusing to agree to set a time for a vote has become a routine Republican tactic designed to defeat or dilute all kinds of bills of less than epoch-making importance, like the Family and Medical Leave Act or the National and Community Service Act.
If the 44 Republican Senators are united, they can prevent the Democrats from assembling the 60 votes the rules now require to force a vote.
Sometimes they even refuse to agree to a vote on a motion to start debating a bill.
Using one parliamentary device or another, it is possible to filibuster one measure at least four times.
Nor is there much theater to the filibuster any more.
Round-the-clock sessions to tire out the angry minority and expose them to ridicule were a manageable tactic when a filibuster came only once every year or two.
But they would exhaust the Senate today when filibusters come almost every week.
Since the 1960's the Senate has fought filibusters by just having a series of votes to end debate, and doing other less controversial business in the meantime.
That may change this summer.
If Republicans refuse to agree to a vote on health care legislation, as some have threatened to do, round-the-clock sessions are likely.
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, will probably set up cots in the corridors and do everything he canto enable television to treat the Republicans as obstructionists.
With the growing national sense that Congress is a waste of time and money even when it is working hard, that is a label many Republicans fear.
ADAM CLYMER


'Watchers' Keep Eye on the Police
About 80 people sat in the Amtrak waiting room at Penn Station near midnight on Tuesday.
Most chatted quietly, read, stared into space or dozed.
One man nodded off with a cold pizza slice draped across his lap.
There appeared nothing unusual about the group, except for a small, white-haired woman who angrily wagged her finger and jabbered into the air.
But at least half the people were homeless and not waiting for trains -- at least according to advocates for the homeless who send three or four volunteer observers there every night.


Janet L. Baker, Michael Walker
Janet Lucylle Baker, the daughter of Lieut.
Col.
William Baker, retired, and Dr.
Bettye F. Baker of Exton, Pa., was married yesterday to Capt.
Michael D'Anthony Walker, the son of Patricia Walker Coleman of Opelika, Ala., and James Jones of Woodbridge, Va.
The Rev.
Elizabeth Vandegrift officiated at the First and Central Presbyterian Church in Wilmington, Del.
Mrs.
Walker, 26, graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in public affairs from Syracuse University.
She is studying for a law degree at the University of Virginia.
Her mother is the director of instruction of the Kennett Consolidated School District in Kennett Square, Pa.


On Sunday; Learning to Be A Good Father, The Only Way
It was a stirring diploma ceremony, with steel-drum thrummings in place of "Pomp and Circumstance," and more than 150 unwed teen-age mothers coming forward, juggling sheepskins and babies: yowling, gawking, grinning, tiny-digit-pointing babies, the fortune of young people's passing love.
Maurice Lyons, unwed father, watched it all from the back of the auditorium in lower Manhattan, sounding like an urban Billy Bigelow onstage in "Carousel," wondering about life's turnings.
"I wanted a girl baby, but I got a boy, my little Tyler Delsean Lyons," he said.
"I know what I went through as a boy, and I'm like, 'Man, my son will be going through the same thing, running around, wanting to hang out.' You see, with a girl you can put the lock on the door and be, like, if she's a certain age she can't stay out late. A guy, y'know, they have more freedom. But a girl -- you got to make sure your girl stays on track."


Sound Bytes; Networking Pioneer Resurfaces in Nonprofit Role
WHEN Dr.
Harry Saal resigned last July from the Network General Corporation, a networking technology company he founded seven years earlier in Menlo Park, Calif., he thought he was finished running a high-growth Silicon Valley technology concern.
But to his surprise, Dr.
Saal is now president and chief executive of another high-technology, networking start-up company, Smart Valley Inc.
The nonprofit company, based in Palo Alto, Calif., is a year old and, among other things, connects the homes, schools, businesses and public agencies of sprawling Santa Clara County in northern California through a high-speed digital network.


Lauren G. Gross, Harold L. Segall
Lauren Gail Gross, a daughter of Herman and Irma Gross of Providence, R.I., is to be married there today to Harold Lawrence Segall, a son of Drs.
Stanley and Helen Segall of Stafford, Pa.
Rabbi Leslie Gutterman is to perform the ceremony at Temple Beth-El.
Ms.
Gross, 36, is keeping her name.
She is a counsel for Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island, on the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee in Washington, where she is also a legislative assistant to Mr.
Pell for health, human services and civil rights.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Yale University; she received her law degree from New York University.
The bride's father, now retired, was president of Fairhope Fabrics, a textile manufacturer in Fall River, Mass.


Corrections
A listing on page 16 of the Travel section today, with an article about hiking in the North Cascades National Park, identified a resort in Winthrop, Wash., incompletely.
It is the Sun Mountain Lodge, not Mountain Lodge.


Riffs on Rap, Rock, Jazz, Modernism
THERE ARE NOW TWO CULTURES IN THE Western music world, each seemingly impervious to the other: art music and popular music.
The art-music tradition is weighed down with long experience, with repertory that goes back hundreds of years and knowledge that has been accumulating for a millennium.
The American pop-music tradition sometimes seems restricted to the last four or five decades; it cherishes novelty and is always promising to overturn the past.
It has created more stylistic names during the last decade than art music has in a century.
We don't really know how to compare these cultures.
Every so often someone tries to argue that they are equivalent -- that, say, the contemporary popularity of Madonna and the 19th-century acclaim for Verdi are aspects of the same phenomenon -- but these assertions make everybody uneasy.
There is obviously a difference between the Rolling Stones and the Ensemble Intercontemporain.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, a report in the Vows column last Sunday about the wedding of Christopher Clark misspelled the last name of the bride.
She is Stephanie Mooney.


June 26-July 2; The Bald Eagle Bounces Back. Will Other Species Follow?
With 4,000 pairs of adult bald eagles now nesting in the lower 48 states, the Clinton Administration declared last week that the species is no longer in imminent danger of extinction and removed the national bird from the endangered species list in most of its range.
To celebrate, and to draw attention to the Administration's efforts to strengthen and extend the Endangered Species Act, officials released a 10-pound female eagle, her broken wing repaired, into the wild.


MANHATTAN MINUTE
BATTLE OF 18TH STREET: After furious community pressure, a plan to open a residence for mentally ill people on Little Restaurant Row at 117 East 18th Street goes awry.
Community Access, a group that had sought to buy the building from the First Nationwide Bank, says the bank has suddenly backed out of the deal.
The group is filing a complaint with the Government, charging the bank and the Irving Place Community Coalition with violating the Federal Fair Housing Act.
Attempts at deadline to get comment from the bank are unsuccessful. . . .WHAT IS ART?: The conga drummers at Tompkins Square Park win one.
Some area residents seek to end the drumming at 9 P.M., instead of the current 10 P.M.
But after an outpouring of support for the drummers, Community Board 3 decides to keep the status quo.
Says Jose Valdes, a singer and composer: "This is not only about drumming; it's about keeping the creativity of Loisada." . . .
REJOICE: After 2 1/2 years of protests and petitions, the scaffolding encircling the Atrium, an apartment and commercial building on Bleecker Street at Sullivan and Thompson Streets, is coming down.
"Now we'll have sunshine instead of that dark, dirty, stinking shed," said Lisa Goldberg, co-chairwoman of the Bleecker Area Merchant and Resident Association. . . .
MOVING ALONG: The Planning Commission approves the Lower Manhattan Business Improvement District -- without the South Street Seaport and the Fulton Fish Market.
The proposal now goes to the City Council.
MARVINE HOWE


Elizabeth Parisi, Timothy O'Brien
Elizabeth Bianca Parisi, the senior associate art director for the young-adult book division of Scholastic Inc., and Timothy O'Brien, a freelance illustrator, were married yesterday.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Timothy Forbess, a Methodist minister, officiated at a house in Eagles Mere, Pa.
The bride, who will retain her name, is a daughter of Anne Rutledge of Gainesville, Fla., and Dr.
Peter E. Parisi of Bayville, L.I.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her father is the director of journalism and an associate professor of communications arts at the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University in Brookville, L.I.
Her mother is the director of the legal drafting program at the University of Florida College of Law in Gainesville.


MANHATTAN MINUTE
BATTLE OF 18TH STREET: After furious community pressure, a plan to open a residence for mentally ill people on Little Restaurant Row at 117 East 18th Street goes awry.
Community Access, a group that had sought to buy the building from the First Nationwide Bank, says the bank has suddenly backed out of the deal.
The group is filing a complaint with the Government, charging the bank and the Irving Place Community Coalition with violating the Federal Fair Housing Act.
Attempts at deadline to get comment from the bank are unsuccessful. . . .WHAT IS ART?: The conga drummers at Tompkins Square Park win one.
Some area residents seek to end the drumming at 9 P.M., instead of the current 10 P.M.
But after an outpouring of support for the drummers, Community Board 3 decides to keep the status quo.
Says Jose Valdes, a singer and composer: "This is not only about drumming; it's about keeping the creativity of Loisada." . . .
REJOICE: After 2 1/2 years of protests and petitions, the scaffolding encircling the Atrium, an apartment and commercial building on Bleecker Street at Sullivan and Thompson Streets, is coming down.
"Now we'll have sunshine instead of that dark, dirty, stinking shed," said Lisa Goldberg, co-chairwoman of the Bleecker Area Merchant and Resident Association. . . .
MOVING ALONG: The Planning Commission approves the Lower Manhattan Business Improvement District -- without the South Street Seaport and the Fulton Fish Market.
The proposal now goes to the City Council.
MARVINE HOWE


Kirsten Hegan, Herbert Detrick 2d
Kirsten Parke Hegan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Hegan of Mount Kisco, N.Y., was married yesterday to Herbert Howard Detrick 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Detrick of Birmingham, Ala.
The Rev.
Dr.
Timothy Ives performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Chappaqua, N.Y.
Mrs.
Detrick, 29, is an associate product manager for Bristol-Myers Products in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received an M.B.A. degree from Dartmouth College.


A Time for Judging a Book by Its Cover
AN exhibition at Rutgers University proves that some bibliophiles do judge a book by its cover, and wisely so.
The 55 books in the show were chosen for their handsome or exceptional bindings.
The eight collectors who lent the volumes to the Archibald Stevens Alexander Library are probably far less interested in the printed words inside, since a good number were written in Latin, and one is in Czech.


Word for Word/Taslima Nasrin; A Cry for Tolerance Brings New Hatred Down on a Writer
FOR much of the last two weeks, Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh, has been the scene of demonstrations over the fate of a 31-year-old writer, Taslima Nasrin.
Now in hiding, she has angered Muslim zealots by calling herself a humanist in a country that calls itself Islamic.
Worse, she has written an Asian best seller, "Lajja," ("Shame") that tells a story of the intolerance and violence of Bangladeshi Muslims against Hindus and other religious minorities.
With this theme, she has touched a central fact of life on the Indian subcontinent: For 50 years, hatreds between fanatical adherents of Hinduism and Islam have repeatedly provoked slaughter and undermined the principle of secular government.
Bangladesh, which is 90 percent Muslim, separated from predominantly Hindu India as East Pakistan when Britain left in 1947, and seceded from Pakistan in 1971.


Police Merger Stirs Anxiety in Housing Projects
During a police narcotics sweep of the Red Hook projects in Brooklyn a few weeks ago, Beatrice Byrd watched in horror as she saw officers from the 76th Precinct seize one of her neighbors and frisk him.
The young man was not involved with drugs, she said, and was running across a roof only because he was taking a shortcut to do an errand for his sickly father-in-law.
Ms.
Byrd stopped the arrest by alerting a nearby housing police officer that a mistake had been made.


Shakespeare Cooler


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the wedding of Ariane Noel and Marco Sodi misstated the first name of the bride's father and referred incorrectly to his investment management company.
He is Walter M. Noel Jr.; his firm is Walter M. Noel &amp; Associates.
An account of the wedding appears today in the Vows column, on page 36.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
98.70
100.55
108.58
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5975
1.5835
1.6878
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3820
1.3900
1.2873
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5375
1.5525
1.5080
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$386.70
$391.00
$386.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Summery Evening at a Country Inn
SOME restaurants, like wine, really do improve with age, and it warmed the cockles of this professional diner's heart to reaffirm this on a recent return trip to the Boulders in New Preston.
The Boulders is an inn as well as a restaurant, and its glassed-in dining room and open, three-level dining terraces, beneath huge, sheltering maple trees, have the same hillside view of mirror-smooth Lake Waramaug as do many of its guest rooms.
Boulders is an apt name, for the 1895 shingle-sided house is buttressed by support columns of huge field stones.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BESTIARY OF BIG ONES
Regularly as clockwork one seems to hear of another species of life on earth that has become endangered or has disappeared altogether.
Responding to the need for protecting diversity in the animal kingdom, the Peabody Museum of Natural History at Yale has organized a major exhibition of its collection of mounted animals, calling it "Large as Life: A Peabody Bestiary." The exhibit opens on Saturday and will remain on view through December of 1996.


A Croissant, a Latte and a Potboiler, Please
As early as 1685, a Sicilian named Francesco Procopio opened up a library and cafe for down-and-out students in Paris that later drew in the likes of Voltaire and Rousseau.
San Francisco, Washington and Berkeley, Calif., have had popular bookstore-cafes and bookstore-espresso bars for years.
But it is only recently that bookstore-cafe hybrids have caught on in New York, drawing the ridicule of bookstore purists.


Humor Me
According to The Wall Street Journal, companies are now hiring humor consultants to reduce employee stress and to inject the restorative powers of laughter into the workplace.
So I -- a freelance writer who works out of his own apartment -- recently called Joel Goodman, who, as director of the Humor Project in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., has conducted humor seminars for I.B.M., the C.I.A., the F.B.I. and the I.R.S., and asked him to perform a two-hour consultation in my home.
Having been audited by the I.R.S. some years ago, I can speak with some authority: this is a funny, funny group of people.
I live in Greenwich Village, in an area I think of as the Adorable Restaurants District, and my building has no elevator.
As I stood on my fourth-floor landing, I could hear Joel as he negotiated the ascent: he had activated a tape of recorded laughter, filling the halls with guffaws and chortles.
Once in my apartment, he dispensed with the three myths of humor: that all funny people are born funny, that being childlike is childish, that jokes are the only form of humor.
It is important, he explained, to be playful in the workplace -- or, in Humor Project parlance, to "discover the elf in yourself."


Their Finest Minute
The way the windows face the streets in Billings, nearly everyone can see what happens to everyone else.
The town of 81,000 is the largest in Montana and lies in the southeastern part of the state, flat as an airstrip.
There are two sides of the railroad tracks, but the difference between them is not stark.
Modest frame houses of pink, brown, beige, green and blue are strung out in straight lines along simple grids in plain view of one another.
Along the wide commercial strips, schools and churches mix in with gas stations, Wal-Mart and a couple of Hardee's.
Horses and sheep are auctioned not far from where businessmen eat first-class steaks in first-class restaurants.
Most buildings are one level, with only a few high-rises, like the Sheraton Hotel, poking up 23 stories into Montana's celebrated big sky.
Billings is as flat as it is because the town was originally a river bottom --the valley floor cut out by the Yellowstone River, which still supplies the town with water.
To the north, the town is protected from the winds by the steep sandstone cliffs of the Rimrocks, or Rims, which were the site of a murder not long ago, a rare thing in Billings.
One man pushed another over the side.
To the east lie the plains.
At a distance to the southwest rise the Beartooth Mountains and to the northwest the Crazies, or Crazy Woman Mountains, named for a pioneer woman who left her wagon train, got lost in the mountains and went mad.


A Tempest in a Teapot That Dali Would Have Loved
FIVE YEARS AFTER HIS DEATH, SALVADOR Dali has given rise to a mini-controversy of the sort he would have loved.
At "Dali: The Early Years," an exhibition at the Hayward Gallery in London, it seemed to a visitor that one of the paintings was upside down.
Thinking it unlikely that Dali, at the age of 24, would have painted a drooping phallus, if such it was, Martin Bailey, a journalist and art historian, queried Ana Beristain of the Reina Sofia Art Center in Madrid, curator of the show.
Ms.
Beristain answered that "visitors to Dali's house said they had seen it the way it is hanging in London." But when she consulted Antoni Pitxot, director of the Dali Theater-Museum in Figueres, the artist's birthplace, he agreed with Mr.
Bailey: the painting in question, "Four Fishermen's Wives of Cadaques," an almost abstract picture painted in 1928, was indeed upside down in London.


At Least 18 Are Killed in USAir Jet Crash
A USAir jet carrying 55 people crashed into a house tonight near the Charlotte-Douglas International airport as it tried to abort a landing during a thunderstorm, officials said.
At least 18 people were killed and many others were injured, the authorities said.
The plane, a DC-9, took off from Columbia, S.C., about 6:18 P.M. as USAir Flight 1016, said Kathleen Bergen, the manager of public affairs for the Federal Aviation Administration in Atlanta.
The aircraft crashed near the northwest section of the airport about 30 minutes later .


Planning Unit Has Role In Regulating of Esthetics
To the Editor:
Responding to my letter of June 19, Michael Parley in his June 26 letter, "Advice for Planning Unit: Stay Away From Esthetics," says that the Landmarks Preservation Commission is the best arbiter of esthetics regarding historic structures.
I agree, but unfortunately many worthy buildings are not under Landmarks protection.
On the other hand, the City Planning Commission has a much wider jurisdiction, and urban design is certainly an important part of urban planning.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
HOW GEORGIE RADBOURN SAVED BASEBALL Written and illustrated by David Shannon.
Unpaged.
New York: Blue Sky Press/Scholastic Inc. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


France's Rwanda Connection
If there were any doubts as to why France sent troops to protect hunted civilians in Rwanda last week, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur has dispelled them.
"France sees itself as a world power," Mr.
Balladur explained in an interview on national television.
"This is its ambition and its honor and I wish for it to preserve this ambition. And its main field of action is Africa, where it has an important role to play because of longstanding tradition -- especially in French-speaking Africa."


A Final Tribute to a Board of Education Member


Beyond Mickey Mouse
To the Editor:
In his article "Step Up, Folks! Check It Out! Nationhood!"  [ May 29 ] , Michael Wines reminds us that Washington, D. C., a relatively unhistoric site, nevertheless embodies history through an urban magic that shares roots with our great world's fairs.
But as a planner and landscape architect involved since 1975 with Washington's monumental core and more recently with the Walt Disney Company's support for contemporary design, I reject the notion of a Washington-Disney grudge match.


Kathryn Burns, Michael Greeley
Kathryn Anne Burns, the director of acquisitions at the ITT Sheraton Corporation in Boston, was married yesterday to Michael Alexander Greeley, a vice president and senior investment officer of GC Companies, venture capitalists in Boston.
The Rev.
Frederic W. Reynolds performed the ceremony at St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in Kennebunkport, Me.
Ms.
Burns, 32, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew J. Burns of Kennebunk, Me.
She graduated from Tufts University, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Harvard University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Eastland Woolen Mills in Corinna, Me.
Her mother, Deborah Parsons Burns, is the vice president and treasurer of Harvard Equities, an investment company in Kennebunk.


Journal; The Diller Instinct
Quick holiday quiz:
Who is "the Darth Vader of cable"?


FASHION
Cutoff khakis: James Dean and Jack Kerouac may have worn khakis (as the Gap ads say), but were they hip enough to cut them into knee-length shorts, a trend this summer?


Suzanne M. Mahon, Eric A. Gurry
Suzanne Michele Mahon, a daughter of Ruth Proffer of Flint, Mich., and Dr.
Michael Mahon of Fenton, Mich., is to be married today to Eric Anthony Gurry, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Gurry of Ridgewood, N.J.
Rabbi Richard Weiss is to officiate at the Barton Hills Country Club in Ann Arbor, Mich.
The Rev.
David Harvey, a Roman Catholic priest, is to take part in the ceremony.


Blood, Sweat and Gears: Touring France on a Bike
When Miguel Indurain and 180 other cyclists hopped onto their bicycles yesterday in Lille, France, they were embarking on a three-week test of endurance that would require everything from masseurs to mechanics to two-way radios.
It is individual cyclists who win the 2,400-mile Tour de France, but is their teammates and their support staff who propel them to the victory stand.
In fact, individuals cannot even enter the tour; instead they have be part of a team that ultimately relies on strategy and sacrifice and a little bit of luck to raise their arms in triumph on July 24 in Paris.


Windshield, Streak Broken
The owner of that white Chevy with the California plates who parked beyond the left-field wall at Fenway Park learned a lesson today that also applies to American League pitchers: Don't write off Tom Brunansky just yet.
A rejuvenated Brunansky hit his seventh career grand slam as Boston ended Oakland's eight-game winning streak with a 10-2 triumph over the Athletics.
His towering homer went far over the screen atop the Green Monster and hit a car, smashing the windshield.


Some Classics In Silver: Spoons, Shovels, Subway Maps
NEW YORKERS HAVE adapted the tribal art of silver giving to all sorts of peculiar personal and civic events: Engraved silver spoons were distributed at the 17th-century funeral of a minister upstate.
Silver medals were struck in 1826 to mark the completion of the Erie Canal.
And Tiffany &amp; Company produced a silver-bladed shovel in 1900 for the ground-breaking ceremony of Manhattan's first subway.
The proof of the precious metal's role in the city's history is captured in "A Treasury of New York Silver," a dazzling exhibition at the Museum of the City of New York, remaining through Dec. 31.
The show also reveals the evolution of the silversmith's craft, from making items in Colonial workshops for the elite to the 20th-century mass marketing of anonymous-looking silver products for all segments of society.


Using Gooseberries and Blackberries for Summer Desserts
WE are so used to getting raspberries and strawberries all year long now that when local ones appear in the summer, we hardly notice.
But other kinds of berries are coming into season.
Red currants, gooseberries and blackberries, hard to find at other times unless they are flown in from as far away as New Zealand, are now available at greengrocers and farmstands.
Gooseberries are not well known in the United States.
But in Europe, particularly in northern countries where they thrive because the sun is not too hot, they are a popular summer fruit.
In England they show up mainly in pies and are mixed with cream in a dish called Gooseberry Fool, which dates from the Middle Ages.
Their tart flavor also goes well in sauces for game, ham, pork, chicken and mackerel.
In Colonial America, gooseberries were frequently used for wine, pies and preserves, but by the 19th century they had all but disappeared.
For years, their cultivation was discouraged because they carry a fungus that causes white pine blister rust.


Informant Sought Anonymity
In a secret meeting last month, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, a principal defendant in the plot to bomb New York City targets, told a judge that he wanted his efforts to become a Government witness kept confidential for fear of retaliation from other Muslims, according to a transcript of the meeting.
"Because of the sensitivity of my position in the Islamic community and because of the sensitivity of the case itself, it would absolutely be dangerous for me and my family" for others, including his former lawyers, to know about his discussions, Mr.
Siddig Ali said.


For Navratilova, the Impossible Dream Is Just That
At 37, and on her last legs so far as Wimbledon singles is concerned, Martina Navratilova was hoping for a fairy tale ending to the halcyon two-week gallop that carried her into the final of the Grand Slam tournament she holds most dear.
Here at Wimbledon, where she holds a record nine singles titles , the retirement-bound Navratilova was hoping that her 22d and final visit would bring a record 10th crown.
It was a fragile hope that began as an impossibility and gradually assumed a reality all its own; the further she marched through the draw, the more it seemed that a 10th championship was not only her desire but her destiny.
This morning, in anticipation of a full day's work on her favorite court against Conchita Martinez of Spain in the women's final, Navratilova prepared for a potential 19th career Grand Slam singles title by breakfasting on half a dozen eggs following a good night's sleep.


Helen L. Aman, Michael J. Epley
Helen Louise Aman, a painter, and Michael Jay Epley, a computer consultant, both in New York, were married yesterday in Arlington, Va.
The Rev.
Andrew T. P. Merrow performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Epley, 27, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Lincoln Aman 3d of Arlington.
She graduated from the University of Georgia and studied American fine and decorative arts at Sotheby's in New York.
Her father is the president of the Hersand Companies, real estate developers in Fairfax, Va.
Her grandfather Thomas J. Broyhill retired as the chairman of American Realty Trust, formerly in Arlington.
The bride is also a descendant of Abraham Lincoln.


Louise D. Bell, Dennis W. Conner
Louise Daintry Bell, a freelance writer, was married yesterday to Dennis Walter Conner, the American yachtsman who led his crew to four America's Cup victories.
The Rev.
Jeffrey H. Walker officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Conner graduated from Southern Methodist University and works in Greenwich.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Boyle Bell Jr. of Greenwich.
Her father is the chairman of John Boyle &amp; Company, an industrial textile manufacturer in Statesville, N.C.


Alice Souskova, Mark Sanders
Alice Souskova, a daughter of Milos and Libuse Souskova of Prague, was married there on Friday to Mark Sanders, a son of David and Judy Sanders of Secaucus, N.J.
A civil ceremony was performed at the New Town Hall.
The bride is a legal assistant in Prague for the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
She is also studying for a law degree at Charles University in Prague.


Honoring Students Who Care
United Way says thanks at Fordham University, Lincoln Center, June 20.


Dining Out In the Wyckoff Area
In Valerie Sinclair's review of Geoffrey's on May 22, she said there was "a seeming lack of other restaurants nearby."
I am a frequent diner-out, and the statement is rather astonishing, when there are several first-class establishments within 10 to 15 minutes of the Wyckoff address of Geoffrey's -- the Saddle River Inn, Cafe Panache, Esty Street, Citrus Grill, Ho-Ho-Kus Inn, Ruga and Il Villino.


SPERM IN A JAR
After reading Anne Taylor Fleming's "Sperm in a Jar" (June 12), about her efforts to become pregnant at age 38, I felt an odd lack of sympathy -- odd, because I readily admit that my own experience of motherhood was a high point in my life.
But in Fleming's account, the psychology of "having it all" seems to be at work.
Here, possibly, is a privileged person whose life would be perfect but for that one missing piece.
Perhaps this baby would complete the picture, but it might also face great difficulties, in having elderly parents with competing agendas.


Encountering a Nation
To the Editor:
Reading Susan Brownmiller's "Seeing Vietnam: Encounters of the Road and Heart" was for me like spending a perfect weekend on a terrace listening to Ms.
Brownmiller spin her tale of a visit to Vietnam.
Her descriptive power and depth of detail combine to create a strong sense of place for Vietnam today and during the war years.
There is much to learn here about the country's history, food and accommodations.


Robert T. Orr, Biologist, 86
Robert T. Orr, an expert on animal biology and behavior, died on June 23 at his home in Larkspur, Calif.
He was 86.
He had a long illness, The San Francisco Chronicle reported.


Those Buildings On the Mountain
Re: "Condominiums on Mountain Are Called Eyesore by Some," Parsippany Journal, May 22:
Often, when in the vicinity, I wondered about the buildings atop Watnong Mountain in Parsippany.
Now I can identify the mass of materials and activity up there.
And how great it is to be able to put a name on the hill!


Don't Denounce The Dazzle
To the Editor:
In his summation of the current theater season, David Richards voices perhaps undue alarm over what he describes as the theme-park attitudes of this (and next) season's more commercial successes  [ "On Stage, Survival of the Fizziest," June 12 ] .


From Abundance, Help for the Needy
THE bride may cut the cake.
But she rarely eats it.
Or the tortellini, prime rib or veal marsala.
"I know I'll be too nervous to eat," said Eileen Solimeno of Huntington as she prepared for her wedding last weekend.
At Long Island receptions leftover food is legendary.
Even the heartiest of appetites like that of Miss Solimeno's groom, Dennis Swanton of Williston Park, can't consume all the dishes made to please every palate.
That is why the Swantons were delighted to learn that the food not eaten at their wedding reception last weekend at the Sans Souci in Sea Cliff would not be thrown away, but delivered to the needy.


POSTINGS: 'Fortress' on the Hudson; Transforming a Castle in Tarrytown
A familiar sight to motorists on the New York State Thruway is the Norman-style castle that sits atop the highest hill in the Village of Tarrytown, in Westchester County.
Built between 1900 and 1910, the fortress-like structure overlooking the Hudson River was once the residence of Howard Carroll, a businessman.
In more recent years, it was home to Axe-Houghton Associates, a mutual fund company, and became known as Axe Castle.


As a Tax Break for Some Condos Ebbs, Costs Soar
AS the 10-year tax abatements run out on condominiums built under the city's Section 421a program in the mid-80's, monthly carrying costs in these buildings are soaring -- in some cases equaling the once higher monthly costs of nearby co-ops.
This rise in what brokers call "out-of-pocket" charges in these condominiums has made the apartments generally harder to sell, according to many real estate agents.
Some buildings, however, because of their location, size of apartments or cachet, may not have been hit as hard as others.


Mutual Funds; Banking Strong Through Turmoil
AS years go, this one has ranged from dull to dreadful for a good number of mutual fund investors.
Nearly all fund categories suffered losses from January to June as stock prices tumbled, interest rates shot up and the dollar weakened.
Only the financial services group stood out, bolstered by the strength of bank funds.
That group, up 2.8 percent, and the natural resources group, which barely broke even, up 0.1 percent, were the only two to show gains.
Among the biggest losers were aggressive growth funds, down 9.7 percent, and small-company funds, off 8.1 percent, which were hurt by tumbling technology stock prices.
Health care funds fell 9.4 percent, and utility funds, rocked by the rise in interest rates, fell 9.1 percent.
Gold, down 11.1 percent, is fast losing its reputation as a hedge.


Suzanne Kennan, Daniel Metrick
Suzanne Kennan, a daughter of Carolyn Ann Kennan of Chappaqua, N.Y., and the late Theodore M. Kennan, was married yesterday to Daniel Charles Metrick, the son of Allan and Eleanor Metrick of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The Rev.
Douglas Phillips performed the Presbyterian ceremony at Waveny House in New Canaan, Conn.
The bride, who will keep her name, is a clerk at the Waterfront Hilton in Buffalo.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Cornell University.
Her father was a manager of information systems, in Purchase, N.Y., at the International Business Machines Corporation.


An Acting Company Seeks a Theater
WANTED: Permanent home, year after year, for newly formed professional theater company in Mount Vernon vicinity.
Must vacate present performance space end of July.
Dedicated staff.
Will renovate.
Terrific image boost for the right property.
Call Fleetwood Stage.  699-6449.
Ask for Lewis.
Owners of empty theaters and convertible spaces take heart.
Fleetwood Stage has two professional productions ready to go and long-range plans for a resident theater in the county.
It has an opening night on Wednesday.
And a roof over its head for only 25 days after that.


Economic Pulse: Indian Country; Economies Come to Life On Indian Reservations
On this rolling expanse of tall-grass prairie, where many Shakopee Mdewekantan once eked out a living by stripping copper and selling cigarettes, or scraped along on welfare, tribal elders would remind children growing up in rickety trailers that life had not always been so stingy.
The elders spoke of a time when great herds of buffalo thundered on the plains with a promise of abundance for American Indians.
Today, the thunder has returned.
It is the unceasing sound of coins being poured into slot machines at the tribe's Mystic Lake casino.
The gambling hall took in millions of dollars last year, enough to pay each of the tribe's 200 members more than $400,000.
And this year's payments are expected to exceed $500,000 each.


Making It Easier to Seek Help
As the number of AIDS cases among women grow, women infected with the virus that causes AIDS are starting to find help.
Among the agencies geared toward the special needs of these women and helping to provide services for them and their families, is the United Way of New York.
The agency recently received $800,000 from the New York State Department of Health AIDS Institute to expand the number of community-based agencies providing H.I.V.-related services to women.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


E. F. Mandelstam, Paul Engelmayer
Emily Felice Mandelstam, the daughter of Charles and Gloria Mandelstam of New York, is to be married today to Paul Adam Engelmayer, the son of Louis and Ilene Engelmayer of New York.
Rabbi Devorah Jacobson is to officiate at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Judge Patricia M. Wald of the United States Court of Appeals in Washington is to take part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Mandelstam is keeping her name.
She was until recently a program development specialist at the New York Association for New Americans, a refugee resettlement organization.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a master's degree in criminology from the University of Cambridge and a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.


Bookshelf
THE PEACEABLE KINGDOM.
By Ewa Zadrzynska.
Illustrated by Tomek Olbinski.
Painting from the Brooklyn Museum.
M.M.
Art Books, 11 Daniel Drive, Englewood, N.J. 07631. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 12) The Brooklyn Botanic Garden abuts the Brooklyn Museum, and in this fable three animals from one of Edward Hicks's most famous paintings, which hangs in the museum, appear in the garden one Sunday morning.
AM I BLUE?
Coming Out From the Silence.
Edited by Marion Dane Bauer.
HarperCollins. $15. (Ages 12 and up) The 16 original stories by well-known writers for young people in this collection address gay or lesbian themes.
The subject matter, sophistication and sexual explicitness of the stories vary widely.


Sports of The Times; The Great Chase Begins for Junior
IN the Yankee clubhouse Friday night, right-hander Donn Pall handed two new baseballs to Nick Priore.
"Can you do me a favor?" Pall asked Priore, the Yankee clubhouse man.
"Can you get Junior to sign these?"


Planning a Glorious 84th
JOHN GLEN -- "that's with one N, not two like the astronaut's" -- planted his feet beneath the shifting shade of a magnolia tree and stared out onto Victory Boulevard, the main drag that plows through the heart of Travis, a sweetly sleepy hamlet near the western shore of Staten Island.
For Mr.
Glen, who has lived most of his 71 years in Travis, the stretch of Victory, now busy with cars and commerce, easily dissolves into visions of marching bands, drum and bugle corps, strutting local dignitaries and awestruck children lining the street.
It has been so for every Independence Day he can remember, a vestige of small-town living in a tiny corner of a borough that just months ago voiced its desire to be cut loose from its ties to the big city.
And Mr.
Glen is looking forward to adding yet another Travis Fourth of July Parade, the 84th, to his mental scrapbook tomorrow.


Day's Biggest Surprise? Twining to Meet 'Bull'
Belmont Park opened its Fourth of July weekend with a barrage yesterday when the 31-1 long shot Turk Passer won the Bowling Green Handicap over Sea Hero, Fraise and a strong field of turf stars.
But the big news was being made backstage where the owners of the undefeated colt Twining decided to test him in the Dwyer Stakes today against the speed king of the 3-year-olds, Holy Bull.
The decision to race Twining was made by Helen Alexander of the King Ranch, who owns the colt with Sheik Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum of Dubai.
It was apparently made against the objections of the trainer, Scotty Schulhofer, who for weeks has been saying with finality that Twining needed more seasoning before daring to match speed with the swift, imposing gray colt who has won eight of his 10 races, most often leading every step of the way.


The New Faces of U.S. Manufacturing
IN his green surgical scrubs, Norman R. Jaffe entered the conference room as if he were a surgeon who had just implanted an artificial heart valve and had come to explain its features to the patient's relatives.
A sample of the beige-colored valve, made from pig's tissue, was on the table in front of him.
But there had been no operation.
The conference room is in Mr.
Jaffe's factory, not in a hospital.
And Mr.
Jaffe is not a doctor.
Instead, he represents the best in American manufacturing: a scientist-entrepreneur restlessly trying to improve the heart valves that he manufactures.
"This second generation of heart valves that we are making appears to last longer in patients without having to be replaced," said Mr.
Jaffe, using a pencil as a pointer to explain how the valve works.
"We are developing a third-generation valve that should extend durability even more."


Update; Fallen Larchmont Oak Awaits New Life as Naval Timber
The 226-year-old oak tree that was felled in a March storm in Larchmont, N.Y., has been trucked to the Charlestown Navy Yard in Massachusetts, where it may be used to repair furniture on the U.S.S.
Constitution.
Gary Morrissette, production controller for the Naval Historic Center Detachment Boston, said naval inspectors decided it was worth storing logs from the tree until renovations began in November 1995 on the Constitution, the 197-year-old wooden frigate known as "Old Ironsides." The ship has been in drydock at Boston since September 1992.


POP BRIEFS
Sam Phillips: 'Martinis and Bikinis'  Virgin 7243 8 39438 2 1; CD and cassette.


'Who Stole Feminism?'
To the Editor:
I feel morally obligated to express my outrage over Nina Auerbach's vitriolic review of Christina Hoff Sommers's "Who Stole Feminism?"


Jennifer R. Sher, Jeremy Marshall
Jennifer R. Sher, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephan Sher of Allentown, Pa., was married at the Water Club in New York last evening to Jeremy D. Marshall, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mel Marshall of New York.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Seigel officiated.


Plucking a Souvenir To Stay 'in the Now'
Even walking off with the woman who defeated her, Martina Navratilova remained in close touch with the moment, or, as she would put it, "in the now." She left Conchita Martinez and walked back onto Center Court.
She reached down and plucked a pinch of grass from the hallowed lawn, the timing and effect of this gesture as perfect as any serve-and-volley connection she had ever made.
"I just have it, that's all," she would later say of the souvenir, after losing the Wimbledon final, 6-4, 3-6, 6-3, to Martinez.


The Nation; Women Doing Crime, Women Doing Time
WOMEN wearing judges' robes or corporate pinstripes have become everyday images of society's changing gender roles.
But what about women attired in Day-Glo prison jumpsuits?
The number of women in state and Federal prisons increased from 12,331 to 43,845 from 1980 to 1990, according to the Justice Department.
That is an increase of 256 percent, compared with a 140 percent rise in the male prison population.


In Simpson Case, Violence Comes Off the Field
To the Editor:
For me, a thrilling play on the football field does not symbolize freedom, as some of the coverage of the O. J. Simpson case seems to say.
Instead, I see tackling, sacking, physical blocking and charging as the epitome of the aggression and brutality that define any gladiator sport.
If we had delusions that those who engage in such sports are able to distinguish between the playing field and reality, the fans along the Los Angeles freeways dispelled them.


June 26-July 2: Hebron Massacre; Israel Says Gunman Acted by Himself
To no one's surprise, an Israeli Government inquiry into the Hebron massacre put the entire blame last week on Dr.
Baruch Goldstein, the Jewish settler who gunned down 29 Muslim worshipers on Feb. 25.
Dr.
Goldstein acted alone, a five-member commission concluded, making no attempt to delve into the killer's motives, let alone to puzzle out the web of anger and violence both by and against settlers in Israeli-held territories.
The panel's failure to name other names troubled critics of the findings.
But the final report, while cautiously worded, was hardly a whitewash of the Israeli authorities.


Main Street Memories
In his 19th book, SMALL TOWN AMERICA (Abrams, $49.50), the photographer David Plowden focuses on the last vestiges and artifacts of the rural communities once considered the wellspring of everything American.
Mr.
Plowden himself grew up in such a town -- Putney, Vt. -- during the 1940's, and has set himself the mission of documenting the few remaining examples of the culture that evoke his youth: barbershops, general stores, gas pumps, clapboard houses, main streets, hardware stores, quiet bars and whimsical meeting halls.
The book's straightforward black-and-white photographs are the result of Mr.
Plowden's travels on the country's roads, setting to work with his camera and tripod in backwaters where CVS pharmacies, Wal-Marts and Toyota dealers have not yet reached.
Like an archeologist, Mr.
Plowden seems to be engaged in a treasure hunt, uncovering and recording what he calls "once commonplace things" that provide clues to life in another time and place.
Pleasure in the genuine article underlies all his images, from handmade doors and homely interiors to the faces of small-town folk who, as he makes clear in his text, represent a rugged individuality that has all but disappeared.
The last photograph, taken in Mayetta, Kan., neatly summarizes Mr.
Plowden's sense of loss.
The glorious steam locomotive of the past has been reduced to a painting on a brick wall, advertising antiques and used furniture.
Beyond it an abandoned building sits on the far side of the empty street, and in the foreground weeds push through cracks in the neglected pavement.
ROSEMARY RANCK


Andrea Schreiber, Mitchell Kaplan
Andrea Beth Schreiber, the daughter of Robert and Helen Schreiber of New City, N.Y., is to be married today to Mitchell Rory Kaplan, a son of Simon and Carol Kaplan of Boca Raton, Fla.
Cantor David Rosensweig is to officiate at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel.
The bride graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in marriage and family therapy from the University of Miami, where she is a candidate for a doctoral degree in counseling psychology.
Her father is an executive vice president for Smith Barney in New York.
Her mother is the president of a real estate investment concern in New York.


Wage a Cold War Against Serbia
The Clinton Administration has reluctantly decided to join our European partners in an attempt to end the war in Bosnia as soon as possible by giving half that country to Serbia.
We are thus a step closer to blessing Serbia's victory and just a step away from pardoning this conquest by lifting the economic embargo on Serbia.
In Geneva on Tuesday, Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev of Russia and their Western European counterparts are expected to approve a plan to divide Bosnia.
The Bosnian Government and the Serbian side will then be asked to accept the plan before the summit meeting of the Group of Seven industrial countries in Naples three days later.


2 Million Tons of Lead From Incinerator Ash
The United States Supreme Court decision on toxic incinerator ash pits human values against scientism  [ "Deadline Looms for Disposal of Toxic Ash," May 15 ] .
As reported, engineers instantly framed the issue as a question of scientific measurement.
But that might not be helpful.
Toxic lead is a case in point, although there are more than 200 pollutants in mass-burn incinerator ash.
Lead could go undetected, because it is a minuscule portion of "bottom ash," which is 90 percent of all incinerator ash.
For all five Long Island incinerators bottom ash probably will be about 784 million pounds annually and contain over two million pounds of toxic lead.
Even if scientists can't measure this portion of lead, does that make two million pounds of lead safe for human consumption annually?
Certainly not.


Page P. Curran, Royall Victor 4th
Page Perkins Curran, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Curran of New York, was married yesterday to Royall Victor 4th, the son of Alice Victor and Royall Victor 3d, both of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Edward Anderson performed the Episcopal ceremony at the summer home of the bride's parents in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Victor, 31, is studying for a master's degree in education at Mills College.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a vice president of merchandising activities at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Tougher Exams And True Education
In reference to "State High School Exam Is Tougher," May 22:
Good teaching is more than "teaching to the test." Test scores may, indeed, show tremendous and demonstrated improvement; true education goes beyond the successful manipulation of test items.
That would simply be a byproduct of the learning process.


P.S.C. Oversaw 'Shoreham Rat Hole'
The three trustees of the Long Island Power Authority -- Irving Like, Stephen Liss and Sheldon R. Sackstein -- who want to delay a decision on converting Shoreham to a gas-fired plant until there are elections for the power board are right on target.
If the Shoreham saga has taught us anything, it should be that the citizens are not dummies, but much smarter than their leaders and so-called experts like the members of the State Public Service Commission.
Allowing decisions on our energy policy to be made by political appointees who are not directly responsible to the people is sure to result in disasters like Shoreham.


Rolling On the River
A dinner-dance benefits Historic Hudson Valley, June 22.


Miss Rosenzweig, Mr. Pearl
Denise Rosenzweig, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Carlton Rosenzweig of White Plains, is to be married today to Adam Pearl, the son of Susan Rothenberg of Suffern, N.Y., and Gerald Pearl of Fort Lee, N.J.
Rabbi Arnold Turetsky is to perform the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on June 12 about Bucks County, Pa., misstated the closing day for the James A. Michener Art Museum.
The museum is closed on Monday, not Sunday.


Alison L. Tepper, Daniel M. Singer
Alison Lee Tepper, the daughter of Rita and Gerald Tepper of Nanuet, N.Y., is to be married today to Daniel Mark Singer, the son of Linda Singer and Neil Singer, both of Washington.
Rabbi George Stern is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 27, is the assistant to the executive editor in Washington at Knight-Ridder Financial News.
The bride and bridegroom graduated from Yale University, she magna cum laude and he summa cum laude.
The couple received M.B.A.'s from Harvard University.


Paper's Small But Issues Are Life-Size
Ginnie Rumore is a school nurse, but she also considers herself something of a cub reporter.
Each month, she gets together with her colleagues at Public School 396, attended by disabled children in the Brownsville section, and publishes the Chester Street Chatterbox.
Unconcerned with fiscal matters and local politics, the tiny newspaper instead celebrates small victories at the school, and its sister sites, like the acquisition of a security fence around the playground at P.S. 189 in Crown Heights.
The kinds problems addressed on its editorial page include the struggle to raise enough money to buy Special Olympics T-shirts for the children.
The features are almost entirely about activities of the students, many of them severely retarded, autistic, blind or deaf, and about subjects that concern their parents.
One article, for instance, focused on a proposal before the Board of Education to decentralize District 75, which many parents think would shortchange special-education programs.


Celebrating a Birthday and a Battle
TINA LANDAU'S "STONEWALL: Night Variations," the new site-specific production by En Garde Arts, is in the great American tradition of the hometown historical pageant.
The show is the kind of busy, upbeat spectacle that celebrates a birthday or a battle with, it seems, almost as many actors as there are people watching.
With a cast of more than 50 performers playing against the magnificent backdrop of the Hudson River and the Jersey skyline, "Stonewall: Night Variations" celebrates both a birthday and a battle.
The occasion: the 25th anniversary of the Greenwich Village riots that are now accepted as the start of the gay liberation movement.
It was on the night of June 27, 1969, that a routine police raid on the Stonewall Inn, a Christopher Street hangout for homosexuals, run by the Mafia, prompted not cowed obedience from the customers but uncharacteristic fury and outrage.
Just why is anybody's guess now.
Some say it was the heat of the night.
Others say it had something to do with the death of Judy Garland five days before in London.
Whatever the reason, patience had run out.
Bricks and bottles were thrown.
In the aftermath of the melee, gays and lesbians left closets, never to return.
At the end of the decade that had witnessed marches on Washington on behalf of civil rights for blacks and protests against the war in Vietnam, gay pride was born.
Its time had arrived.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Why We Still Can't Stop Watching O. J. on TV
JUST what has made the O. J. Simpson story fascinating enough to dominate news coverage and talk show (and living room) conversations for days?
Certainly there is something a little ghoulish about the whole spectacle: 95 million Americans watching the 90-minute car chase to see if the whole awful story would end in further violence, a car crash perhaps or a cinema verite gunshot; and on Thursday, an estimated one in four households tuning into the first day of the preliminary hearings, as though a new murder mystery miniseries had debuted.
Many of those who watched last week's installment -- concerning the bloody murder scene and efforts on the part of Mr.
Simpson's defense team to suppress evidence they say was improperly gathered by the police -- chastised themselves for their voyeurism, even as they continued to channel surf avidly from network to network.


U.S. View of Sanctions: Turn Up Heat Half Way
It should come as no surprise that in his foreign policy showdowns, President Clinton has made economic sanctions his weapon of choice, even though such measures have, at best, had a middling record of success.
The reason sanctions appeal to Mr.
Clinton, who is well aware that Congress and the public are uneasy with the use of force, is clear: They go beyond talk, but stop short of war.
They send a message of toughness, they usually hurt their target and they cause little pain at home.


Using Gooseberries and Blackberries for Summer Desserts
WE are so used to getting raspberries and strawberries all year long now that when local ones appear in the summer, we hardly notice.
But other kinds of berries are coming into season.
Red currants, gooseberries and blackberries, hard to find at other times unless they are flown in from as far away as New Zealand, are now available at greengrocers and farmstands.
Gooseberries are not well known in the United States.
But in Europe, particularly in northern countries where they thrive because the sun is not too hot, they are a popular summer fruit.
In England they show up mainly in pies and are mixed with cream in a dish called Gooseberry Fool, which dates from the Middle Ages.
Their tart flavor also goes well in sauces for game, ham, pork, chicken and mackerel.
In Colonial America, gooseberries were frequently used for wine, pies and preserves, but by the 19th century they had all but disappeared.
For years, their cultivation was discouraged because they carry a fungus that causes white pine blister rust.


A TASTE OF INDEPENDENCE
Traditionally, a Fourth of July feast is an ode to its locale.
Crab cakes, for instance, sing of the Eastern Shore of Maryland; so do sandwiches made of deep-fried soft-shell crabs pressed in a soft bun layered with mayonnaise and shredded lettuce.
Wisconsin has its traditional trout boil, while the Pacific Northwest feasts on planked salmon and fresh peas.
A meal of sweet corn and the season's first beefsteak tomatoes is the way many Midwesterners ring in the day.
Specialties from the barbecue belt -- vinegary pork from the Carolinas, smoky brisket from Texas -- are now as all-American as chicken, hot dogs and hamburgers from the grill.
There are, after all, hours to while away between the morning's parade and the fireworks after dark.
Tending a slow fire on the Fourth of July makes a certain kind of sense.


Clinton Acquires Taste For Solitary Weekends
Bill Clinton has finally decided that there is nothing wrong with a Presidential retreat.
For his first 17 months in office, Mr.
Clinton rarely set foot in Camp David, the rustic compound that his predecessors loved but he shunned as too remote.
But now, the President who cannot get enough human contact appears to have discovered a yearning for peace and quiet.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
HANNAH IN BETWEEN By Colby Rodowsky. 152 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $15. (Ages 10 and up)


Smoking Aloft
To the Editor: My smoking-section story in response to the Practical Traveler ("A Non-Smoker vs. an Airline," May 29) has a happier ending.
In December 1985 I flew with a dozen colleagues from London to Bombay for a peace conference.
We changed planes in Kuwait; when we were again airborne my new right-hand seatmate lit up.
I virtually leaped out of my seat.
When the Kuwait Airways cabin attendant responded to my call, she told me that everyone had been mixed together -- there was no nonsmoking section.
While my mind raced for alternatives to suggest, she hesitated.
"How many of you are there?" she asked.


Could a Beloved Bookstore Turn Into Shakespeare &amp; Cafe?
After 13 years of selling just books, the owners of Shakespeare &amp; Company, at 81st Street and Broadway, say they are drawing up plans to build a cafe in the bookstore to match the community-center atmosphere that the nearby Barnes &amp; Noble superstore has successfully fostered with its espresso bar and comfortable chairs.
It is a move that has dismayed some of Shakespeare's longtime customers, but is one that William Kurland, one of the two brothers who own the store, said is necessary if his business is to remain a vital part of the intellectual life of the Upper West Side.


The Biggest Star You Never Heard Of
YOU'VE PROBABLY NEVER heard of Cynthia Rothrock.
But whose fault is that?
Certainly not the motion picture industry, which pumps out star vehicles for her with alacrity.
Certainly not cable television executives: pay services like HBO, Showtime and Cinemax program her movies -- sometimes three or four a week.
And certainly not Cynthia Rothrock, who -- armed with an amazing talent, an interesting biography and a high tolerance for pain and sex-based inequity -- has been battling for your attention for years.


Angry Crowds in Jerusalem Protest Arafat's Visit to Gaza
In a show of strength by Israel's rightist opposition, thousands of people jammed the center of Jerusalem tonight in a raucous demonstration, protesting a visit to Gaza by Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, and vowing to block any pilgrimage he should make here.
The demonstrators, many of them religious Jews and settlers from the West Bank, waved banners and held up signs denouncing Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin for making a pact with Mr.
Arafat and permitting him to visit the areas of Palestinian self-rule.


Former Antique Row Loses an Oldie
It has been four months since the owners of the James Robinson antique store packed up their sapphires, diamonds and sterling and left Bugs, Tweety and Sylvester behind on 57th Street.
They set up temporary quarters just blocks away, on Park Avenue at 58th Street.
Now they're packing up again.
Next Monday, the store's owners, Edward Munves Jr. and his daughter, Joan Munves Boening, will move two doors to a new showroom at 480 Park Avenue.


Downshifting In a 12-Cylinder, 421-Horsepower 512 TR
The oversize Pirelli P Zero tires shudder a warning before breaking loose from the wet pavement.
But my reaction is a few tenths of a second slow.
The $130,000 sports car spins out of control with a screech despite my desperate efforts to countersteer to the right.
"No problem -- much better than last time," soothes my passenger and instructor, Gianni, a master of euphemism and good cheer.
Habits formed from decades of driving cars as spongy as department-store Santas, we agree, cannot be changed overnight.
Besides, neither we nor the 320-horsepower Ferrari 348 TB was in any real danger.


Christine H. Herbst, James H. Singer
Christine Heidi Herbst, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joachim Herbst of Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to James Henry Singer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Singer of Wilton, Conn.
The Rev.
Arnold Thomas officiated at the First Congregational Church in Williamstown, Mass.
The Rev.
Hugh Connaghan, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Singer, 31, is a registered nurse at New York University Medical Center.
She graduated from the University of San Diego.
Her father, now retired, was the executive vice president of Allied Stores International in New York.


Co-op Learns to Age Gracefully
Disoriented people roaming the halls.
Flooding from faucets that were turned on and then forgotten.
Residents with unpaid rent bills -- and uncashed Social Security checks.
A naked woman wandering onto a roof and freezing to death, apparently unable to find her way back inside.
These incidents took place at the Penn South housing cooperative in the 1980's.
Why?
Penn South had become something it was not intended to be: housing for the elderly.


POSTINGS: Landmarks Agency Clearance; Yeshiva Proposal for Estate In Riverdale Is Approved
A plan by an orthodox Jewish boarding school to build classrooms, dormitory space and a prayer room on the recently landmarked Anthony Campagna Estate in the Riverdale section of the Bronx has been approved by the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
Previous proposals had engendered community opposition and concern by the commission about their effect on the landmark.
But in giving the plan its unanimous approval on Tuesday, the commission said that the proposal, prepared by Richard Blinder of the architectural firm of Beyer Blinder Belle, entailed "a minimum of disruption to the estate's significant features."


Ms. Kolbrener, Mr. Leibovich
Meridith Kolbrener, the daughter of Barbara and Jack Kolbrener of Roslyn, L.I., is to be married today to Mark Leibovich, the son of Joan Leibovich of Waban, Mass., and Dr.
Miguel Leibovich of Cambridge, Mass.
Rabbi Albert Axelrad is to officiate at the Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
The bride, a graduate of Brown University, is a medical student at Stanford University.
Her father is the president of Jack Kolbrener &amp; Associates, a marketing company in New York.
Her mother is a special-education teacher at the Harbor Hill School in Roslyn.


403(b) Plan Compliance: Another View
To the Editor:
"Nonprofits Under I.R.S. Microscope" (Your Own Account, June 12) has created undue concern among participants in tax-deferred annuities under section 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
As the largest provider of 403(b) contracts in higher education, we at the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association-College Retirement Equities Fund would like to make the following points:


Ms. Goldman, Mr. Snodgrass
Judith Anne Goldman, the daughter of Rabbi Gerald A. and Roberta Goldman of Plainfield, N.J., is to be married today to James Sheldon Snodgrass, a son of Col.
W.
McCurdy and Enedina Snodgrass of Portsmouth, R.I.
The bride's father is to officiate at her parent's summer home in Becket, Mass.
Ms.
Goldman, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a post-doctoral fellow in clinical psychology at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
She graduated summa cum laude from Boston University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received master's and Ph.D. degrees in clinical psychology from the University of Rhode Island.
Her father leads the congregation at Temple Sholom in Plainfield.
Her mother was until recently the executive director of the Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity in New York.


For Women With AIDS, a Model for Living
Lea Foster no longer lives with fear.
Instead of contemplating death every time she catches a cold, she thinks about the work that's left to be done: teaching women how to live with H.I.V.
As a coordinator of an AIDS support group, Ms.
Foster, a 45-year-old former teacher, does not need textbooks or experts to tell her about AIDS.
Since November 1988, when she herself was first found to be H.I.V. positive, Ms.
Foster has become her own expert.


The Nation; Fierce Combat on Fewer Battlefields
THE Supreme Court term that ended Thursday was a struggle: While the Justices decided fewer cases than in any term since 1955, many of the decisions they produced revealed deep divisions and some bore the marks of raw ideological combat.
On a Court largely without a prevailing ideology, cases have to be won and coalitions built case by case.
The fleeting promise of unanimity that an early ruling in a sexual harassment case appeared to offer back in November faded quickly once the Court began to wrestle with private-property rights, redistricting, religion and public schools, and the free-speech rights of abortion protesters.


'Who Stole Feminism?'
To the Editor:
As the membership director of the National Organization for Men, I think The New York Times Book Review used poor judgment in assigning Nina Auerbach to review "Who Stole Feminism?" The editors were guaranteed a skewed result by choosing someone who is obviously on the other side of the feminist spectrum.
Ad hominem remarks -- "Christina Hoff Sommers is a wallflower at feminist conferences. In revenge, she attends them obsessively"; "I suspect that the John M. Olin Foundation, which helped finance this book, was . . . generous, though one wonders why it didn't find a less muddled writer to feed" -- expose a reviewer with an adverse agenda.
Readers of the Book Review need impartial appraisals, not passionate and amateurish attacks.


Peddlers Called Bane of Downtown
To the Editor:
In your "An Engine for Economic Improvement Downtown" on May 29 some industry leaders suggested measures for uplifting the area.
However, not one mentioned the continued failure of the vaious city agencies in dealing with peddlers.
Recently I visited a client in lower Manhattan.
At 12:30 P.M., lower Broadway from Wall Street to the tip of Manhattan looked more like a market area for peddlers than the site of the New York Stock Exchange.


Putting Fine China Back Together Again
IT is one of those home scenarios that live on long after the initial shock.
Someone is carrying a fine porcelain plate -- or a vase, or other object of real or sentimental value -- and suddenly trips.
For a split second, the object hangs in the air, almost tauntingly, while the person who tripped makes a frantic grab for it.
SMASH!
There it lies, in pieces.
The recriminations follow, about carelessness, about which relative must be spinning in the grave now that the family heirloom is destroyed, dearly departed, gone forever.
Or maybe not.


Sports of The Times; Sick Minds Transcend All Borders
THIS is not just about soccer.
Let us make this clear.
This is about a society run wild, a society so crazed with drugs and money and power and guns that it enables the wipeout of an athlete who dared represent his country, the nation of Colombia.
Until we hear otherwise, the assumption is that Andres Escobar was gunned down in Medellin early yesterday morning for the sin of wearing the national colors, for daring to take chances in front of millions, for valiantly and professionally diving after a twisting loose ball, for not being able to stop it from rolling into his own goal.
The blame belonged to the entire Colombian team, for allowing the United States to score -- and disgrace -- Colombia a week ago Wednesday.
Then Andres Escobar was killed, and that is sick.


Being Brazil's Coach Includes Ignoring 150 Million Opinions
Ana Paula Olsen was explaining the fanaticism of soccer in Brazil.
Every fan has a favorite player.
And every fan has a favorite player's favorite body part.
"The television cameras will stop people on the street, and they will say, 'I like Dunga's legs and Rai's butt,' " said Olsen, a native of Brazil who owns a bikini shop in this Silicon Valley town, where Brazil's World Cup team is lodging.
"It's always the legs and the butt."


Star Chef Essays a Landmark's Kitchen
A LEGEND and a landmark recently came together in Westhampton Beach.
The legend is the chef, Starr Boggs, and the landmark is the restaurant, Hampton Square.
A product of this marriage is Starr's Hampton Square.
Starr Boggs, widely referred to as Starr, even by the youngest of his busboys, is a creative chef and acknowledged authority on local ingredients.
He built a reputation at his first, small restaurant just a few blocks from Hampton Square.
Two years ago, he moved to Dune Deck, a hotel on the beach, and continues there in addition to the newly opened Starr's Hampton Square, a large year-round site.


A New U.S. Import in El Salvador: Street Gangs
As trucks loaded with the day's unsold fruit pulled away from San Salvador's central market on a recent evening, a group of young people began to gather in the parking lot.
Their tattoos, baggy pants and shirts several sizes too big marked them as different from other young people living in the surrounding slums.
But it was the way they walked, a slouching, belligerent gait learned as members of street gangs in the United States, that made them unmistakable and drew stares of fear and admiration from other youths.


Help in Knowing What to Ask a Lawyer
IT was hit and run.
He caught me off guard.
I had no inclination that he wanted a divorce.
I was totally unprepared.
After all, he was my husband, and we had been married for 20 years."
The speaker, a professional woman in her early 50's who agreed to be interviewed only on condition that she not be identified for fear that her husband would sue her for libel, was still obviously troubled over the circumstances of her divorce, which had occurred several years before.
She continued, "What was ironic is that my ex-husband is a matrimonial lawyer. He knew every trick in the book. I was in a daze, but I knew about LAW, and they and Diane White, saved my sanity.


The Pleasures of the Land Draw Retirees
COUNTRY life never seems to lose its appeal to those who spent a happy childhood experiencing it.
The yen to experience it again certainly never left Clyde V. Maughan, who grew up on a farm in Idaho and retired eight years ago after 36 years with General Electric in Schenectady, N.Y.
Undismayed by the deporable condition of the main house, he bought a 120-acre farm in 1980 just outside the village of Schoharie, 30 miles west of Albany, thinking he would move there in retirement.


Playwrights Horizons Adrift?
To the Editor:
David Richards's statement that Playwrights Horizons has drifted artistically leads me to believe that he is unaware of what our institution really is.
Here's our mission, spelled out in all our materials: "Playwrights Horizons is dedicated to the support and development of new and established playwrights, composers and lyricists, and to the production of their work." Or, to quote my predecessor, Andre Bishop, "I've always thought our mission was to be a useful theater."


Things That Go BLAM! KA-CHUNG! in the Night
IN HOLLYWOOD, THE BIG-BANG theory works like this: When in doubt, blow it up.
If doubts persist, blow it up again, only bigger.
This summer's movie season has served up a rich pyrotechnic feast.
In "The Crow," Brandon Lee wreaks revenge from beyond the grave, flambeeing a pawnshop in righteous anger, and in a nifty set piece, sending a dynamite-laden car off a pier and blowing it up like a Roman candle.
In "Speed," Dennis Hopper turns a city bus into a fireball, incinerates a SWAT team and straps enough explosive material onto a second bus to take out most of Los Angeles.


ABOUT BOOKS
Sights on the Road  THERE is an image of New Jersey that perhaps should be lost, but not if Peter Genovese, the author of "Roadside New Jersey," can help it.
The hordes of writers waxing poetic over the gently rolling hills and wide sandy beaches miss the mark, Mr.
Genovese says; what is great about the state is what he found and photographed while driving over hundreds of thousands of miles of roads.


SPERM IN A JAR
I'm grateful to Anne Taylor Fleming for acknowledging that life is sad sometimes, and for recognizing that we are as limited by our choices as we are enlarged by them.
She does not resist an essential truth -- that no one, no matter how smart, determined or resourceful, can have everything.


Dining A Deux, Splendidly
THE menu cover shows a dandy of the late 18th century, ruffled neckcloth, pastel-striped greatcoat and all.
In his upraised hand he holds a heart-shaped contrivance, the ornate "V" monogram of the Grand Vefour restaurant.
Sketchily rendered arcades suggest the Palais Royal, for two centuries the playpen for the Parisian monde, both haut- and demi-; should we miss the point, the words "Palais Royal" appear in the elegant script of the himself fashionable artist, Jean Cocteau.
Grand Vefour is by many accounts the prettiest restaurant in Paris.
What better place, then, to celebrate a wedding anniversary, even if the anniversary is a month away.
My husband, Tom, and I are on vacation in this most romantic of cities, and by the time the actual date rolls around, we shall be back in workaday New York.


Gunmen Kill 2 Women Outside Brooklyn Bar
Two men sprayed gunfire at a crowd standing outside a Brooklyn bar before dawn yesterday, killing two women, including a 24-year-old who was two months pregnant, the police and witnesses said.
The shooting, which the police said was apparently caused by a spurned romantic advance, occurred in front of Whispers, a small barroom at 4410 Avenue H in the Flatlands section around 3:30 A.M.
Three other patrons were struck by bullets, but their injuries were not critical, the police said.


Rebels Have Little to Show for Efforts to Topple Saddam Hussein
In a small, nondescript house, with armed guards out front and the windows bricked shut, the men and women who would seize power from President Saddam Hussein plot their way to Baghdad.
In cramped, dimly lighted rooms they stuff miniature copies of their opposition newspaper into matchboxes to smuggle past Iraqi lines into the capital.
They record blistering attacks against the Government to be broadcast on their radio and television stations.
They pound new information into computers in an effort to flesh out profiles of officers who might be willing to stand with them against the Iraqi leader.
And in a camp just outside town, 500 militiamen train with former Iraqi officers.


Leyritz Plays by His Own Rules and Still Comes Up a Winner
Elvis is not dead.
He is playing for the Yankees.
He is setting imposing goals and no one is smirking anymore.
He is dreaming about skating with Mark Messier or shooting with John Starks.
He never stops discussing his desire to start every day.
He is Jim Leyritz, one of his many nicknames is Elvis and he is not leaving the building.
Leyritz also suggests something of the Lone Ranger. (Or the Lone Yankee.) He wears cowboy hats, disguises his eyes with athletic sunglasses and is succeeding in his promise to register smashing statistics in the major leagues.


New Age Wimpiness
To the Editor:
In response to Rand Richards Cooper's review of my book "Dreamkeepers: A Spirit-Journey Into Aboriginal Australia," which was included in your roundup of travel books (June 5): If my description of the death of a small bird "pushes New Age wimpiness to extremes," let me hereby proclaim myself the prototype of all New Age wimps.


A BILL TO REQUIRE H.I.V.  COUNSELING BACKED IN ALBANY
As the State Legislature staggered blearily toward its summer recess, legislative leaders and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo agreed today on a bill that would make New York the first state to require doctors to counsel pregnant women and new mothers about the benefits of H.I.V. testing.
The agreement effectively doomed any chance of passage of an alternative bill that would have required doctors to notify parents of the results of H.I.V. tests that the state currently performs anonymously on all newborns.


Cellular Phone Racket Is Reported Smashed
THE Westchester County District Attorney's Office has announced the breakup of what it says is the largest cellular telephone scheme in the New York City area.
Four men have been arrested for stealing several hundred cellular (or cell) phone numbers, which they in turn sold on the street for $150 to a variety of customers, including stockbrokers and drug dealers, District Attorney Jeanine Pirro reported.


C. D. Christy, 96, Headed Y.W.C.A.
Catherine Damon Christy, a former president of the Young Women's Christian Association of Brooklyn and a former member of the boards of various charitable organizations, died on Wednesday at her home in Wilton, Conn.
She was 96 and formerly lived in Brooklyn Heights.
The cause was cardiac arrest.
She had been suffering from arteriosclerotic heart disease, said Joseph Pagliaro of the Hoyt Funeral Home in New Canaan, Conn.


Business Diary: June 26 - July 1
COMPANIES Barry Diller Can Stop Sending Out His Resume  In its simplest terms, the huge CBS-QVC merger, one that reshapes the television industry, can be seen as a couple of guys changing jobs.
Barry Diller, head of QVC, is rarin' to go at 52.
He'd worked on programming at ABC and created the Fox network, and he's wanted to get back into prime time -- as witness his failed effort to buy Paramount.
Laurence Tisch, at 71, has really treated CBS as an investment and is ready to cash part of it in.
But don't think, as David Letterman suggested, that the "60 Minutes" stopwatch will now be "yours for $49.95." CBS will, however, get a desired foothold in cable.
So why did both CBS and QVC stock jump so sharply?
Perhaps because, as one CBS executive put it, Mr.
Tisch just "put the money in the bank," and now Mr.
Diller will breathe life, and growth, into the company.
Or perhaps, heaven help us, we're in for another bidding war. (Disney has been mentioned as eyeing CBS.)


Double-Hung Windows Can Be a Fine Refurbishing Project
OLD double-hung windows, specifically those of wood counterbalanced with sash weights, are notoriously cantankerous in disrepair, but can often be restored to function beautifully.
Typically a full restoration involves stripping and repainting wood parts and replacing broken panes and sash cords or chains.
Start by removing the sashes.
Use a utility knife or a serrated tool called a paint zipper to cut through thick paint covering the seam between the window frame and one of the two molding strips that form the indoor sides of the channels in which the lower sash slides.
After prying away the strip from the frame with a putty knife, remove the nails from the strip by pulling them out through the back with pliers.


Major Bust, but Drug Sales Go On
The indictments of 48 suspected members of a powerful drug gang in Manhattan Valley last month have returned a semblance of normalcy to a stretch of West 107th Street that had long been the violent gang's center of operations.
But the indictments and the arrests so far of 41 accused members of the gang, the Young Talented Children or the Yellow Top Crew, have failed to rid the area of a drug trade whose volume, police officers say, is extraordinary given the small territory in which it is concentrated, roughly from 105th to 110th Streets between Central Park West and Amsterdam Avenue.


Happy Birthday, Mirabella!
A fashion magazine turns 5 at the Museum of Modern Art, June 20.


Jennifer E. Fudge, Patrick M. Ryan
Jennifer Elizabeth Fudge, a daughter of Barbara Murray of New York and Peter Fudge of Huntington, L.I., is to be married today to Patrick Martin Ryan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William D. Ryan of Chatham, Mass.
Judge Charles Mehrmann, a retired acting village justice of Freeport, L.I., is to officiate at the de Seversky Conference Center in Old Westbury, L.I.
The bride, 27, is an assistant vice president in institutional marketing at Alliance Capital Management in New York.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Columbia University.
Her father is a senior vice president at Republic National Bank in New York.


Three Colors in a Close Harmony
PICNICS, barbecues, swimming parties, beach days, fireworks, bike hikes and just general loafing are the regimen for this, the Independence Day weekend.
What could be more obvious than to consider red, white and blue floral combinations to move the celebrations along?
Of course, the most obvious combination is a border of red, white and blue.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Kmart Mostly Has Eyes For Penn Station
Kmart's search for a store location in Manhattan has focused on Pennsylvania Station and the 100,000 square feet of retail space that is being created there.


Guides for the Pocket
Recently updated, two popular travel guides are still lightweight and easy-to-carry.
The 16-page Phone Booklet lists hundreds of toll-free travel-related telephone numbers for the United States and Canada, from airlines and cruise lines to car rentals and hotels.
Available by mail order, guides cost $2 each, or $3 for two copies.
Write: Scott America Corporation, Mail Station 1572, Box 88, West Redding, Conn. 06896.


A Voice From the Old Left: Still Marching On at 82
"I LOVE street fairs," said Ruth K. Goldberg, ignoring my wildly rolling eyes.
"They are noisy and crowded with life. You never know what you are going to see."
"You are going to see," I said, "the same old greasy sausages and the same new genuine bogus Guatemalan shirts."


In a Mexican Border Town, Dog Days Just Won't Quit
It's 119 degrees.
The grim gray mountains shimmer.
The asphalt of Free Trade Boulevard looks like black slush spilling toward the border.
The only people in sight are Miguel Zaragoza and his brother Carmelo lazily crossing the boulevard on their chestnut mare.
They've got a few dozen head of cattle to drive to the Ojinaga pens.
This is not quite the dynamic scene envisioned by city officials two years ago when they changed the name of their central street to Free Trade Boulevard from Chihuahua Avenue.
The hope was that by rolling out a municipal red carpet they could insure that the benefits of the free trade agreement arrived in this sun-baked town of 40,000.


SUNDAY, July 3, 1994; A Boss Body
When Longevity magazine picked the best bodies of 1994, along with Elle Macpherson, Jane Fonda, Mario Van Peebles and Sting the judges chose Kathy Keeton, the "agile and willowy" president of Longevity and wife of the chairman of the board, Bob Guccione.
An editor's note says of the winners: "Let us assure you that none were chosen at whim."


Q and A
Retracing World War II
Q.
I will be in London in September and would like to try to find a record of a young American friend who was killed in the Battle of Britain in World War II.
I think he joined the Royal Air Force in 1940. -- Rhoda Hoffman, Brooklyn


World Markets; Coffee and Oil Feed Boom in Colombia
WORLD attention swiveled to Colombia last week after a freeze damaged coffee crops in Brazil and sent coffee prices spiking up to eight-year highs.
But the world's second-largest producer of coffee is riding more than a bean bonanza.
For the first half of 1994, Colombia had one of the best performing stock markets in the world.
Bucking a slump in emerging markets, Colombia's stock market index jumped to 1019.7, or 30.6 percent in dollar terms, this year, behind only Japan's market, which has risen 34.6 percent this year.
Other top performing markets include Chile, at 21.7 percent, and Peru, at 15.4 percent.


Who Says Shoreham Couldn't Be Evacuated?
"L.I. Power Authority to Consider Converting Shoreham to Gas"  [ May 22 ]  perpetuates one of the myths used by the plant's opponents to frighten public.
The article says, "The closing was based on findings that people could not be safely removed in a reactor accident." Findings by whom?
Not by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which, after extensive hearings found that an operating license to Lilco.
Had the N.R.C. determined that the area around the plant could not be safely evacuated no license would have been issued.
It was Nora Bredes, Gregory Blass, Peter Cohalan, Richard Kessel, Wayne Prospect and the other 20th-century Luddites whose opposition to the plant, against all environmental and economic logic, who perpetuated the myth that the area around the plant couldn't be evacuated and who also told the public that there was a "used and useful doctrine" that guaranteed that if the plant was never operated, the ratepayers wouldn't have to pay for it.


Reflections on the Rebbe and City Politics
The death last month of Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson not only deprived the Lubavitcher Hasidim of their spiritual leader, but also took from the city a longtime political touchstone.
Few campaigns have dared to delete the Eastern Parkway headquarters of the world Lubavitch movement and its Rebbe, as he was known, from their itinerary.
An analysis of election returns challenges the totem that members of the Hasidic sect in Crown Heights reflexively vote as an organized bloc in every election.
But the analysis suggests that while they account for fewer voters than some other Hasidic sects and their concerns about Israel may weigh more heavily in their political calculations, when they are galvanized by an issue or a candidate, members of the Lubavitch movement, like those of many other groups, can be monolithic.


IN SHORT: FICTION
AMERICAN INDIAN NOVEL  THE LIGHT PEOPLE  By Gordon Henry Jr.
University of Oklahoma, $22.95.


In Simpson Case, Violence Comes Off the Field; A Balanced Scale
To the Editor:
William Safire, in " 'Like a Battered Husband' " (column, June 20) is right when he state that "responsibility rests . . . on the murderer, whether an admired celebrity or a hated hoodlum." When a celebrity is involved in a crime, the perception of justice undergoes a change in the eyes of the public and the media.
We are so willing to lock them up and throw away the key for an alleged drug addict caught with one vial of crack, but at the same time we are discussing the ways we can skirt the justice system for O. J. Simpson, an alleged double murderer.
Experienced criminal lawyers around the country are adding to this frenzy and offering ideas from how Mr.
Simpson should plead to trial strategy for his lawyer Robert Shapiro.


All the President's Problems
THE AGENDA Inside the Clinton White House.
By Bob Woodward.
Illustrated. 352 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.


JUNE 26 - July 2; Yasir Arafat Makes His Entrance


Habitats/Bleeker Street Studio; Breaking All the Rules
IT was a very unusual deal.
Like the Odd Couple, the buyer and seller met and bickered and made up -- under the watchful but not intrusive eyes of the real estate agent.
In a real estate market where buyers and sellers sometimes wind up not speaking to each other by closing time, this seller -- who was forced to sell after being threatened with foreclosure -- was paid, after he no longer owned the apartment, to install a hand-crafted iron staircase.


June 26-July 2: The Cigarette Wars; F.D.A. and Tobacco Makers Seek a Compromise
After several weeks of disclosures of internal documents from tobacco companies, the two sides in the cigarette fight appear to be seeking common ground.
Though still nervous enough to insist on anonymity, senior executives in two major tobacco companies were willing to say last week that they privately expect, and are willing to accept, some new regulations on tobacco, provided that no tobacco ban is attempted and no great damage is done to the industry's current markets.


Fast Food by Room Service
When most people get an urge at 3 A.M. for a Quarter Pounder with cheese, they usually go back to sleep.
But guests at the nine-month-old El Conquistador Resort and Country Club in Las Croabas, P.R, can call room service.
In May, the 918-room resort, set on a bluff in a fishing village 31 miles east of San Juan, opened a full-service McDonald's outlet.
Open 24 hours a day, the new restaurant also provides hotel guests with room service around the clock.


MICHAEL MILKEN
Gee, maybe Milken did accomplish a lot of good.
Gee, maybe the 80's wasn't the decade of greed, except for those crapshooting in the commodities markets.
Gee, he even paid his nanny tax, when and as required.
STEPHEN H. HAYS Tampa, Fla.


Maria Hermida and Thomas Day
Maria del Carmen Hermida, an associate at Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman &amp; Dicker, a law firm in New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Raine Day, a vice president at Dean Witter Reynolds, the securities brokerage in New York.
The Rev.
Arthur Leone performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Good Counsel Church in Manhattan.
The bride, 28, graduated from New York University and received her law degree from Fordham University.
She is the daughter of Sofia Blanco and Jose Hermida, both of New York.
The bride's mother teaches kindergarten at Public School 72 in Manhattan.


Council Matches Artistic Grants
SEVERAL free performances this month are among the cultural events and projects to be financed by a new grants program recently begun by the Westchester Arts Council.
Under the council's municipal challenge grant program, artists or organizations that win pledges of financial support from their cities or towns can apply for an equal amount from the Arts Council.
"We believe arts funding should begin at home," said Janet T. Langsam, executive director of the council.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
FOURTH OF JULY
Ridgefield Park will strike up the band with extra gusto at this year's Fourth of July parade tomorrow because it is the 100th and, the sponsors assert, the longest consecutively produced one in the nation.


'Who Stole Feminism?'
To the Editor:
Nina Auerbach's inept and shamefully biased review of Christina Hoff Sommers's amusing, invigorating and superbly researched expose, "Who Stole Feminism? How Women Have Betrayed Women" (June 12), beautifully demonstrates the moral and intellectual bankruptcy of the academic feminist establishment.
CAMILLE PAGLIA  Philadelphia


Auto Biography
It is more than a year now since Hemmings Motor News, a monthly magazine the size of a big-city phone book and every bit as eye-catching, supplanted The World of Interiors as my bath-time reading.
There are no articles in H.M.N., only wall-to-wall classified ads for cars all over the country.
There are very few pictures, most of them tiny grainy black-and-white snapshots submitted by eager owners to whet the interest of potential buyers.
The cover is brown paper.
But the reader's imagination picks up where the magazine leaves off.
While before I would lie in a tubful of suds and ponder all the ways in which life might be different if I had a tortoise-shell bathroom, now I wonder how the world would look from behind the wheel of a peppy little Mercedes SL with the top down.
I drive a four-door sedan.
I was raised to believe that four-door sedans were a sign of character.
Solid, sensible, sturdy, practical, they performed their duties in a straightforward fashion, without striving for sex appeal or charisma.
My aunt has always been of a different opinion.
When not too long ago she went to pick up her new car -- a 1992 Mercury Capri, her seventh convertible -- the dealer handed her a dozen red roses and asked her to pose for a commemorative picture in front of it.
He evidently found it amusing that a woman on the far side of 70 would be buying a convertible.
My mother and I found it amusing that he found it amusing.
We would have been surprised if after all these years she'd suddenly opted for anything else.
We had, in fact, come to think of my aunt as the convertible type -- not frivolous but fun, invested in the moment.


Treasurer Who Kept Track of AIDS Funds
"AIDS Group Splits on Gala After Founder Takes a Salary"  [ June 12 ]  was wrought with inaccuracies and misinformation.
As treasurer of the Sunday by the Bay event for the past seven years I certainly think I am in a better position to discuss Stopping AIDS Together than your reporter, who, it appears, has based her entire column on the opinions of a few disgruntled members.
She states that the organization has "split." Split?
Four members out of a membership of close to 50 resigned.
That's hardly a split, and to my knowledge these four members, although spending a good deal of time criticizing our hard work, are doing nothing themselves in the fight against AIDS.


Wall Street; Ticker Tags From 'M' to 'ZEUS'
MAKING jokes about stock-ticker symbols, Ralph Wanger recalls, seemed the appropriate thing to do at the time -- perhaps even an oddball way of making a market call.
It was last April, and Mr.
Wanger, the manager of the $2 billion Acorn Fund, was faced with writing a report to shareholders.
Most such reports -- though seldom Mr.
Wanger's -- are bland reviews of recent stock market performance, often including excuses for why a fund failed to perform well, and sometimes venturing out on a limb to predict that whatever has been happening lately will continue for a while.
Important, maybe, but dull.
Early April, you may recall, was not a happy time in the stock market.
The Dow Jones industrial average and the S.&amp; P. 500 fell to their lowest levels of the year on April 4, and small-cap stocks, which had been holding up pretty well while the bigger issues crumbled, started to tumble as well.


The Fresh Air Children Head for Sun and Fun
Kasaif Muhammad, 8, tried impatiently to do one last push-up as he waited for his summer vacation to begin.
He fidgeted and kidded with his fellow travelers, who were destined for places like Pennsylvania, Vermont and Virginia with the Fresh Air Fund's Friendly Town program.
"This is my second time," he said.
"I can't wait to go to the beach and catch lightning bugs."


Paris Is Still a Moveable Feast
PARIS is famously romantic, and rightly so.
Its hold is instantaneous.
Thomas Jefferson knew it, when he walked down day after day to monitor the construction of the Palais de Salm, on the Left Bank of the Seine. (He looked at it so hard and so often that he cricked his neck.) Benjamin Franklin knew it when he lived in Passy and was the toast of the town.
Henry James knew it. (When the young man in "The Ambassadors" falls in love in Paris, it is as much with the city as with a beautiful and slightly older woman.) Ernest Hemingway knew it, when in "A Moveable Feast" he pictured his young self hard at work in a Parisian cafe, with white wine and oysters to keep up the energy level.
F.
Scott Fitzgerald knew it, even if in "Tender Is the Night" he was rather too heavy with the creme fraiche.
George Gershwin knew it, too.
When we hear his "American in Paris" in the concert hall, it brings out the aspirant Astaire in all of us.


Saudis in Second Round In First Time Around
The red sign on the front of the Saudi Arabia team bus said "V.I.P.'s," but Mohammed al-Jawad could only shrug and offer a gracious thank-you to the idea that he and his teammates were worthy of the description.
Jawad, a 14-year national team veteran, and its unofficial spokesman in the United States because of his perfect English, is accustomed to working for important people, not being one.
He is a supervisor for Saudi Airlines on royal and V.I.P. flights.


Using Gooseberries and Blackberries for Summer Desserts
WE are so used to getting raspberries and strawberries all year long now that when local ones appear in the summer, we hardly notice.
But other kinds of berries are coming into season.
Red currants, gooseberries and blackberries, hard to find at other times unless they are flown in from as far away as New Zealand, are now available at greengrocers and farmstands.
Gooseberries are not well known in the United States.
But in Europe, particularly in northern countries where they thrive because the sun is not too hot, they are a popular summer fruit.
In England they show up mainly in pies and are mixed with cream in a dish called Gooseberry Fool, which dates from the Middle Ages.
Their tart flavor also goes well in sauces for game, ham, pork, chicken and mackerel.
In Colonial America, gooseberries were frequently used for wine, pies and preserves, but by the 19th century they had all but disappeared.
For years, their cultivation was discouraged because they carry a fungus that causes white pine blister rust.


MICHAEL MILKEN
Your interview allowed many to see a side of Michael Milken only a few had known ("Michael Milken Fights a Hostile Takeover," by Tom Teicholz, June 5).
I worked closely with him on educational projects for disadvantaged New York City children, and know that Mike is dealing with cancer in the same way he wants "his kids" to deal with adversity -- by rising to the challenge.
MARIANO GUZMAN New York, N.Y.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Chevrolet Impala SS; Heavy Metal Act Gets an Encore With a 60's Hit
"IT'S a funny thing," a colleague once said to me in Detroit.
"You want to talk cars, you go to the Ford guys. They like cars. But if you want to buy a car, you go to G.M. The company is huge and gray and all that, but those guys turn out some really neat stuff."
True, even if it is a bit unfair to Ford and the rest, which have had their moments.


Political Notes; Asked to Find a Winner, A Judge Declares a Tie
After a divisive campaign, a confusing election, three recounts, four lead changes and a month of accusations and recriminations, the race for the Democratic nomination for county executive in New Jersey's second most populous county, Essex, is officially a tie.
Judge Burrell Ives Humphreys of State Superior Court last week certified the results of a court-ordered recount of the June 7 primary between Thomas Giblin, the chairman of the county's Democratic Party, and Cardell Cooper, the Mayor of East Orange, that showed each candidate with 22,907 votes.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Optioned Albie Lopez, pitcher, to Charlotte of the International League.


Homage to a Rebel
FOR a woman who wore men's clothes, George Sand had a great collection of jewelry: a garnet belt buckle, a large ring of emeralds and pearls, heavy gold pendants and bracelets.
The most lionized woman writer of the 19th century was, of course, also a famous femme fatale, as notorious for her affairs with Alfred de Musset, Frederic Chopin and many less accomplished men as for the dozens of freewheeling and intellectual novels, plays and essays she wrote.
There is no better way to glimpse just how fatale a femme she was than to visit the exquisitely frivolous and irresistibly named museum devoted to her jewels, furniture and family portraits: Le Musee de la Vie Romantique, the Museum of Romantic Life.
One of the newest museums in Paris -- just a dozen years old -- it is one of the city's most charming and eccentric secrets.
The modest, shuttered three-story house and separate painter's studio are set in a courtyard on the Rue Chaptal, a tiny side street on the fringe of Montmartre.
A five-minute walk will lead to one of the most garish parts of the city, where the Moulin Rouge stands guard over sex shops and seedy characters.
Another 10 minutes and you will be at Sacre-Coeur, which seems dangerously like a cathedral to tourism.
Le Musee de la Vie Romantique ignores all that; it calmly and deliberately lets the present slip away.
Unfashionably cluttered -- with patterned wallpaper and vitrines crammed with baubles -- it conveys the ornate texture of 19th-century artistic life, when everyone who had ever held a pen or paintbrush also knew how to hold a salon.


LAST PANEL SENDS ITS HEALTH PLAN TO PARTY LEADERS
The Senate Finance Committee today approved legislation that fell short of President Clinton's goal of universal health insurance but promises to expand coverage significantly without requiring employers to pay for it.
Its action finally concluded the difficult, six-month journey of health care legislation through a maze of major Congressional committees.
The vote clears the way for leaders to try to meld the various committee bills into packages that can attain majorities in the full House and Senate.


Well, That's a Fine How-Do-You-Do!
On the New York party circuit, there's one all-purpose greeting.
Whether you're being introduced to someone for the first time or reintroduced for the 20th, chances are you'll be met with a firm handshake and a hearty "Nice to see you!"
Nice to see you?
No one says, "Nice to meet you" anymore.
They dare not say "Good to see you again." The fear of making a fatal faux pas has made "nice to see you" the only way to greet all but your most intimate friends.
After all, if your life is an endless series of art openings, cocktail receptions, movie premieres and awards dinners, it's hard to remember every name and face that comes your way.
Unfortunately, the phrase, when heard over and over again, lacks credibility.
In effect, it makes people sound like politicians trying to win your favor, which, in a way, many of them are.
DAN SHAW


Copy Shop Stitches The Urban Crazy Quilt
IT'S 4:30 P.M.
Wednesday or 4 A.M.
Sunday.
At the Kinko's on Madison Avenue at 34th Street, the lights are always on: fluorescent fixtures overhead, enhanced by the cathode-blue glow of dozens of computer monitors.
And the noise level hovers around a dull roar.
Kinko's is a clearinghouse where ideas can be typed, designed and xeroxed, then transmitted by fax, computer disk and Federal Express.
Patrons are so relaxed about helping one another that the term "user-friendly" takes on new meaning.
While the carpeting and upholstery may be strictly gray, there's nothing uniform about the clientele.
Spotted over a week or so were these typical patrons:


Broadway Is No Chaste Virgin
To the Editor:
The recent Tony Award voting and telecast reveal prejudices within the voting membership and the Tony Committee itself.
The treatment of "Beauty and the Beast" by both parties and the press in general is reprehensible.
Corporate sponsorship of Broadway productions is nothing new; yet it has been some time since any corporate sponsor has received the scrutiny Disney has.
The corporate hand that so many in the theater world are willing to bite is precisely the hand that many productions reach out to when seeking financing.
Broadway is not some chaste virgin when it comes to seeking profit and merchandising.
EORGE SUHAYDA  Los Angeles


Early Signs Point to Strong Shore Season
IF the appearance of dolphins just beyond the breakers in Ocean City is an economic indicator of a good summer ahead, then Virginia Berwick's saltwater taffy and fudge shop on the boardwalk should do a booming business.
"The dolphins were out there just yesterday," Mrs.
Berwick said with a smile and an optimistic tone on a recent day.
Gazing out the window of her store, she added, "If the weather is good and the beaches stay clean, it will be a great summer."


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
B-2 Bomber: Vote on an amendment to a defense authorization bill that would remove $150 million intended to keep production lines ready for the possible production of additional B-2 bombers.
Rejected 55 to 45, July 1.
2.
Bosnia Arms Embargo: Vote on a measure saying the United States should continue to abide by the United Nations arms embargo against Bosnia.
Approved 52 to 48, July 1.
3.
Bosnia Arms Embargo: Vote on a measure that would have ordered President Clinton to abandon the United Nations arms embargo against Bosnia immediately.
Failed, with 50 in favor and 50 opposed (a majority is required for a measure to pass), July 1.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y  Lieberman (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y  Moynihan (D) . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
House
1.
Space Station: Vote on an amendment to a $90.5 billion appropriations bill that would cut financing for the further development of the space station from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration budget.
Rejected 278 to 155, June 29.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . N
3. DeLauro (D) . . . N
4. Shays (R) . . . Y
5. Franks (R) . . . N
6. Johnson (R) . . . N New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . . N
2. Hughes (D) . . . Y
3. Saxton (R) . . . N
4. Smith (R) . . . N
5. Roukema (R) . . . Y
6. Pallone (D) . . . Y
7. Franks (R) . . . Y
8. Klein (D) . . . Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
N  10.
Payne (D) . . .
Y  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
N  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Y  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Y New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . . N
2. Lazio (R) . . . Y
3. King (R) . . . Y
4. Levy (R) . . . N
5. Ackerman (D) . . . Y
6. Flake (D) . . . N
7. Manton (D) . . . N
8. Nadler (D) . . . Y
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .
N  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Y  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
N  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
A  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Y  17.
Engel (D) . . .
N  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y  19.
Fish (R) . . .
N  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
N  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
Y  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
N  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
Y  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
N  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
Y  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
N  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Allison Hertog, Seth Schachner
Allison Louise Hertog, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Hertog of Scarsdale, N.Y., is to be married today to Seth Andrew Schachner, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen H. Schachner of Potomac, Md.
Rabbi Malcolm Thompson is to officiate at the Rainbow Room in New York.
The bride, 27, graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in special education from Columbia University.
She is a student at Loyola Law School in Los Angeles.
Her father is the president of Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, an investment research and management concern in New York.
Her mother, Susan Hertog, is a writer.


The World; Haiti Longs for Help From the Land It Fears
FOR months, as an impassioned debate over Haiti has built in the United States, Haitians, from political leaders to the man in the street, have been locked in a Strangelovian dispute with themselves over whether foreign force should be used to restore the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The debate, whether expressed in the quick gesticulations of the Creole-speaking slum dweller or the suave French locutions of the wealthy merchants outside Port-au-Prince, lays bare a signal feature of this country's dysfunctional political culture: a visceral ambivalence toward the giant neighbor Haitians alternately lionize and demonize.


Miss Curvin, Mr. Springstead
Catherine Taylor Curvin, the daughter of Nancy W. Curvin of Geneva, N.Y., and Richard T. Curvin of Moravia, N.Y., is to be married today to William White Springstead, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph E. Springstead of Geneva.
The Rev.
Richard H. Frye is to perform the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Geneva.
The bride, who is known as Carrie, will retain her name.
She is a financial editor in Boston for Tucker Anthony, the financial services company.
She graduated from Williams College.
Her father retired as a managing director of the First Boston Corporation in New York.


Corrections
The Streetscapes column last Sunday about 718 St.
Nicholas Avenue in Manhattan misstated the estimated cost of stabilizing the building's facade.
It is $99,000, not $991,000.


In America; Bears Who Swim Too Much
Stressed out?
City life got you down?
Some folks reach for a drink.
Others jog.
Gus swims.
Gus is the 700-pound polar bear who lives with his two wives, Ida and Lily, in a sparsely furnished four-bedroom suite at the Central Park Zoo.
He's been in the news lately.
There is some question about his mental state.
It is believed that life in the unnatural habitat called Manhattan is making Gus a little crazy.


Olivia Friedman, Ravi Gooneratne
Sian Olivia Friedman, a daughter of Rowena Howells and Herman Friedman, both of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to Ravi Mohan Gooneratne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Gooneratne of Kottawa, Sri Lanka.
The Rev.
G.
Hall Todd, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Radnor Hotel in St.
Davids, Pa.
The bride is known as Olivia.
She and the bridegroom are 24 and graduates of Lafayette College.
She is an administrative assistant in the Philadelphia office of LS Transit Systems, a French consulting company.
Her father retired as the president of Friedman Rosner Advertising in New York.
Her mother is the managing editor of the Guilford Press, a New York publishing house.


For Collectors of Carousel Animals, the Thrill of Discovery
JUST after Neale Godfrey reached a career pinnacle when she became president of the First Women's Bank in New York City in 1985, she made a list of other things she would like in life.
"I've always wanted a carousel animal," she said.
Ms.
Godfrey got her wish and then some.
In Ms.
Godfrey's living room alone in her Mountain Lakes home are eight carousel animals: two horses, a giraffe, a zebra, a swan, a rabbit, a rooster and a camel.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


The World/Profiles in Bombast; A Japanese Machiavelli Creates A Boom in Political Prescriptions
IDEOLOGY has never meant all that much in Japanese politics.
From feudal days, power alliances meant far more than ideas.
Under the 38-year rule of the Liberal Democrats, which ended with a scandal-plagued bang last summer and resurfaced with a cynical power grab last week, there was rarely serious, sustained debate about Japan's future direction.
The vision thing was the bureaucracy's thing.
For everyone else in positions of power, there was too much money to be made to engage in such nonsense.
So the most remarkable aspect of the chaos here for the past year -- four prime ministers in 11 months -- is the hint of an intellectual awakening in political circles.


Hilary Schoff, William Douwes
Hilary Adams Schoff, the daughter of Abigail Adams Schoff of Greenwich, Conn., and Peter Merritt Schoff of London, is to be married today in Stowe, Vt., to William Frederick Douwes, the son of Catherine Douwes of Whiting, N.J., and the late Hendrik Douwes.
The Rev.
Bruce Comiskey, a Presbyterian minister, is to perform the ceremony at Stowe Community Church.
The bride was until recently a producer for KCNC-TV news in Denver.
She graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in broadcast journalism from Emerson College.


Men's Final a Clash of Confident Players
For the last three weeks, Pete Sampras has quietly commuted between an apartment in a London hotel, where he has been just as sequestered as the occupants of nearby Buckingham Palace, and the grass courts at Wimbledon, where he will attempt to defend his title Sunday against the searing serve of Goran Ivanisevic.
Sampras has admitted no distractions, done no sightseeing, read none of the tabloid laments about his unprovocative life style.


No Headline
"This is a new beginning for me, and I'm looking forward to my life after tennis; I'm not going to disappear off the face of the earth. It would have been better if I'd won, but I've got nothing to hang my head about. I've got no  regrets." MARTINA NAVRATILOVA  [ SportsSunday, page 4. ]


June 26-July 2: Networks of Networks; Another Round Of Merger Mania Hits The Information Industry
As with any kind of lust, the urge to merge is a volatile passion that can abruptly shift from hot to cold and back.
That has been particularly true in media and telecommunications, where companies have been both enthralled and terrified by new technology.
Last week, the fever ran hot once again.
CBS Inc. reached a tentative pact to merge with QVC Network Inc., the huge home-shopping network run by Barry S. Diller.
Mr.
Diller will be master of ceremonies, bringing his appreciation for interactive television and novel forms of media to a company that never strayed far from bread-and-butter television.


De Klerk Bides His Time and Carves Out Power
The penthouse where F. W. de Klerk works when the Government is in Cape Town reflects the ambivalent place he is inventing for himself in the new South Africa.
From his office, with its incomparable vista of the city and waterfront, it is 18 floors by private elevator and about 200 paces through an underground passage to President Nelson Mandela's suite in the colonial guest house called Tuynhuis.


SUNDAY, July 3, 1994; Capone Billboard Takes a Fall
When billboards with Al Capone hawking Old Style beer started appearing recently in Chicago, local Italian-Americans cried foul.
Mayor Richard M. Daley then suggested that G. Heileman Brewing Company take Al down and try again.
The company had planned anyway to run a series of ads with famous Chicago citizens who might have "crossed paths" with Old Style in the old days and quickly replaced Al with another Chicago Italian-American, Enrico Fermi, the physicist who created the first man-made nuclear reactor.
In explaining the change, Randy Smith, a company spokesman, said it had received "some unanticipated input," a new term for hard-nosed politics -- Old Style.


A Landmark Returns to Its Opulent Past
THE Garde Theater in New London was built in 1926 during the era of the great movie palaces.
Its tapestries, frescos and ornate lobby drew in people from workaday lives to a world of romance, adventure and exotic places.
That glamour, faded over the years, is about to be restored.
The theater, now called Garde Arts Center, and its adjacent buildings are about to undergo a $16 million renovation and expansion that includes restoring the 1,500-seat auditorium to the brilliance of its movie palace past.
The project, it is hoped, will act as a catalyst for the growth of new business and cultural activity in downtown New London.


Streetscapes/Amalgamated Dwellings; Built in 1931 by Idealism, Threatened Now by Reality
FOR 63 summers a steady, natural draft has flowed through the parabolic arched entry to cool the courtyard of the Art Deco-style Amalgamated Dwellings, built in 1931 in the heart of the sweltering Lower East Side at Grand and Columbia Streets.
People still gather there to cool off as they did long before air-conditioning was common, , but the costs of maintenance threaten to bring the idealistic co-op suddenly down to earth.
After World War I, tenant unrest because of mounting evictions and housing shortages made housing an issue of public concern and in 1926 New York State passed a housing law that encouraged the construction of limited-profit co-ops.


Corrections
An article in some editions on June 19 about plans for a statewide electronic real estate data network in New Jersey referred incorrectly to the Homeview Company of Needham, Mass.
The company has not failed; it has closed its three retail sales offices and plans to license its technology to others.


June 26-July 2: Whitewater I; No Criminal Activity Found In Prosecutor's First Report
After five months of study, the independent prosecutor investigating the Whitewater affair reached the same conclusion last week that had already been apparent to just about all but the most diehard of conspiracy theorists.
In his report, Robert B. Fiske Jr. said Vincent W. Foster Jr., the White House Deputy Counsel, had committed suicide last July.


Monkey Skulls and Floating Rats
ARISE AND WALK By Barry Gifford. 156 pp. New York: Hyperion. $19.95.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
ALMOST PERFECT By Alice Adams.
Fawcett Gold Medal, $5.99.
Stella Blake, a journalist, begins a passionate affair with a commercial artist, only to discover that his emotional ups and downs signify something far more chilling than a volatile creative temperament.
Ms.
Adams approaches "the novelist's equivalent of perfect pitch," Lawrence Thornton said here last year.
DAYS OF GRACE By Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad.
Ballantine, $5.99.
Written in the last months of his life, this memoir reflects the forces that shaped Arthur Ashe as a tennis player, political activist, husband and father.
Chief among these, he reveals, was his upbringing in Virginia, where racial segregation both deeply wounded his youthful pride and helped inspire his distinctive quiet determination.
Filled with his thoughts on spirituality and his battle with AIDS, the book concludes with a letter to his young daughter, Camera.
Last year our reviewer, Margo Jefferson, said, "It's gripping, it's moving, it's admirable; and what makes it so is Ashe's capacity for evaluating himself and the world with intelligence and honor."


Checking Up on Manny at Midseason
Out on the ball fields of Washington Heights, the buzz is still about Manny (Ramirez, that is, the Cleveland Indians' rookie right fielder and the pride of Washington Heights).
Still, it isn't difficult these days to find those who seem to have lost a bit of their awe of the talented 21-year-old.
"You know, there was baseball in this neighborhood before Manny Ramirez," said Victor Santos, 25, who played catcher and left field for a neighborhood team last year.
"I'm not saying he's not good, but he wasn't the first good Dominican ever to play the game."


An S.R.O.'s Road to Ruin, And, Perhaps, to Recovery
Every evening, a group of Chelsea residents, backed up by several Guardian Angels, marches up and down 17th Street between Seventh Avenue and Avenue of the Americas.
The target of this citizens' patrol is a shabby four-story single-room-occupancy residence at No. 105, which its neighbors say has served as a haven for drugs, crime and prostitution for nearly four years.


Fatal Accident At Science Hall Still a Mystery
Three weeks after a high school girl was killed by a falling pipe coupling during her senior prom at the New York Hall of Science in Queens, the cause of the accident remains a mystery.
Investigators have found that the girl, Micha Chatmon of Hollis, was killed by a 10-pound metal piece that fell 80 feet from the top of the museum's Great Hall on June 9.
But they still do not know why the piece, used to connect lengths of electrical conduit, was there or why it fell.


Manager's Profile
James K. Schmidt
Fund: John Hancock Freedom Regional Bank, $540 million in assets; 4% deferred load class B shares.
Manager since 1985 inception. (Sponsor: John Hancock Mutual Funds, Boston.)  Born: Aug. 12, 1950; Milwaukee.
Education: Sc.B. applied mathematics, Brown University; S.M., finance, M.I.T.
Last Vacation: A one-week ski trip with family in March to Franconia, N.H.
Fund Performance: One year, through June (class B shares): +16.8 (all financial services funds: +8.6); 5 years, annualized: +21% (+17%).*
Stock Market View: *** (self-rating; ***** = most bullish).
Stock Pick: Centura Banks, Rocky Mount, N.C., formed from the merger of two Rocky Mount banks.
"There are still efficiencies to be realized from that, and the state's economy is booming."  Current Strategy: "We invest in small- and medium-size banks and S.&amp; L.'s we think offer good value and predictable earnings."*Source: Morningstar Inc.


Holiday Tomorrow
Tomorrow is Independence Day. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
FIREWORKS Fireworks show from 9:20 to 9:50 P.M. along the East River from 23d Street to 42d Street.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt Drive closed from Houston Street to 96th Street from 3 P.M. to 3 A.M.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and city government offices closed.
POST OFFICES No regular mail delivery.
Express Mail and special delivery only.
The main post office at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue will be open.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules.
SANITATION No street cleaning, pickups or recycling.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION New York City buses and subways, Metro-North Commuter Railroad and Long Island Rail Road on holiday schedules.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and city government offices closed.
POST OFFICES No regular mail delivery. Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION New Jersey Transit on a Sunday schedule. CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and city government offices closed.
POST OFFICES No regular mail delivery. Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on a holiday schedule.


What Dogs Think
There's an old circus trick in which a skimpily clad young woman is strapped to a bed.
A bear enters the ring, looms over her and shoves his muzzle into her face.
The audience gasps in horror, then in relief, as the shaggy brute looks up and ambles off.
The trick lies in evoking the audience's expectations of bestiality and projecting them onto the bear.
The bear, of course, intends no violence.
It just knows that there is a succulent carrot to be retrieved from the girl's mouth.
The audience has read its own mind, not the bear's.


'A National Treasure'
To the Editor:
I hate Washington, too.
I live in it (I am English).
But Washington, whatever one's attitude to it, is wholly irrelevant to the question.
Disney's America would be dumped in the middle of a part of the Virginia countryside that unspoiled as it now is, should be regarded as a national treasure.
The area's ravishing natural beauty and astounding -- genuine -- historial richness must be preserved from the hideous destruction that would be caused without any doubt if Disney's America should be imposed on it.
JANE JOHNSON  Washington


Corrections
The "If You're Thinking of Living in . . . " column last Sunday, about Sunnyside, Queens, referred incorrectly to the city's designation of the Sunnyside Gardens section.
The section has been named by the Department of City Planning as a Special Planned Community Preservation District.
The Landmarks Preservation Commission has not named Sunnyside Gardens a historic district.


'Who Stole Feminism?'
To the Editor:
It is appalling that you allowed Nina Auerbach to review a book that would predictably be anathema to her.
The New York Times has become so intent on being politically correct that it has begun to forsake logic and common sense, to say nothing of old-fashioned impartiality, in selecting reviewers of books.
You should be ashamed of doing such a disservice both to Ms.
Sommers and to the Book Review's own reputation for fairness and excellence.
BELLA JARRETT  New York


Touring the Little Ireland That Was
BACK in the 1830's, there emerged on the Lower East Side an enclave of Irish immigrants known as Little Ireland.
It stretched from Chatham Square, at the intersection of Bowery, Park Row and Worth Streets, to Houston Street and was bordered by Broadway on the west and the Bowery on the east.
Next Sunday, Ed O'Donnell, a Ph.D. candidate in American urban ethnic history at Columbia University, will lead a two-mile walking tour of the area.
"Only subtle hints of Little Ireland remain today," Mr.
O'Donnell said.
Among the sites he plans to visit are St.
Andrew's Church, with its bust of Patrick Cardinal Hayes (pictured at right), in the center of Little Ireland; Old St.
Patrick's Cathedral on Prince and Mott Streets, the original St.
Patrick's Cathedral, before the diocesan headquarters moved uptown to Fifth Avenue in 1879; to Fifth Avenue and 50th Street; and the French baroque building on Centre and Broome Streets that was once police headquarters is also on the tour.
"By 1910, half of the police force in New York City was Irish, but only 15 percent of the population was Irish," Mr.
O'Donnell said.


Taking Steps to Counter Domestic Violence


St. Petersburg
To the Editor: I go to St.
Petersburg often on business and have a suggestion to make regarding hotels.
Until recently the visitor could choose among a series of vast, crumbling Soviet-era hotels with modest amenities and indifferent service and two Western style hotels -- the Europa and the Astoria -- with a great deal of good service and astronomical prices.


Ramos of U.S. Wants to Be Seen, Not Just Heard
For stretches lasting 30 minutes during America's World Cup games, midfielder Tab Ramos is not touching the ball.
It's as if these are the Chicago Bulls, and he is Bill Cartwright.
"It's frustrating," Ramos said in an interview. "I'd like to do more."


Wheelchair Vans Rented at Airports
The Avis car-rental company and Wheelers Accessible Van Rentals in Glendale, Ariz., have joined forces to provide minivans adapted for wheelchair users at Avis airport locations.
Last month, one or two vans were available at each of 25 locations; this month the total will rise to 47.
Airports at Fort Lauderdale, Jacksonville, Miami, Orlando, Tampa, Palm Beach and Fort Myers in Florida are on the current list, as are Boston, Baltimore, Washington National, Kennedy International and La Guardia in New York, and Newark.
Wheelers adapts Chrysler vans with lowered floors, ramps to the side door, hand controls, tie-downs for wheelchairs and swivel seats.
Three wheelchairs and three other passengers can be accommodated.


Cashing In on an All-You-Can-Eat Pasta Night
UNFORTUNATELY bargain-price all-you-can-eat pasta nights often mean unlimited servings of mushy noodles and watery tasteless tomato sauces.
Rarely does the quality equal or exceed their quantity.
La Viola in Cedarhurst is an exception.
Every Friday night the classy family-style Italian restaurant at 499 Chestnut Street (569-6020) uses its bright, carpeted private-party room upstairs to entice penny-wise diners to sample the same hearty, sometimes elaborate, pastas that are on the downstairs menu.


BATTLE OF THE CLIPPER CHIP
For all their political pretensions, the bearded apostles of corporate cyberspace are as much a menace to freedom and dignity as are their paranoid adversaries in the Government intelligence agencies.
Control is their common obsession, whether in the name of secrecy or security.
DAVID F. NOBLE Toronto


St. Petersburg
To the Editor: I was delighted to read "What's Doing in St. Petersburg" (May 29), but rather dismayed that no mention was made of the Fortress of Peter and Paul, one of the most interesting sites in the city.
When I was there in January, however, there were roving groups of boys, ages 9 to 15, who would surround tourists, trying to sell them souvenirs and attempting to steal wallets and cameras.
This was closer to assault than an effort to pick pockets, and the Fortress was frightening in that respect.


Three Colors in a Close Harmony
PICNICS, barbecues, swimming parties, beach days, fireworks, bike hikes and just general loafing are the regimen for this, the Independence Day weekend.
What could be more obvious than to consider red, white and blue floral combinations to move the celebrations along?
Of course, the most obvious combination is a border of red, white and blue.


Corrections
The Mutual Funds column on June 12, about changes in investment strategies among firms that specialize in "socially responsible" funds, referred incompletely to the bank that was dismissed as manager of the Calvert Social Investment Fund Equity Portfolio.
It is the United States Trust Company of Boston, not connected with the U.S.
Trust Corporation of New York.
The New York-based company operates commercial banks under the name U.S.
Trust Company in seven states.


Kathryn A. Allan and Mark J. Munoz
Kathryn Ann Allan, the daughter of Mary and Robert Allan of La Jolla, Calif., is to be married today to Mark Joseph Munoz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Guillermo Julian Munoz of Tiffin, Ohio.
The Rev.
John Collister is to perform the Presbyterian ceremony at Kunde Ruin, a former winery in Sonoma, Calif.
Ms.
Allan, 32, was until recently a marketing and publicity supervisor at Cantor Fitzgerald, a securities brokerage in New York.
She graduated from the University of Southern California.
Her father is the president of the Standard Pacific Corporation, a home builder in San Diego.


Stephen M. Bloch, Jennifer K. Gabler
Jennifer Kathryn Gabler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Gabler of New York, is to be married today to Dr.
Stephen Michael Bloch, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Bloch of Rochester.
Rabbi Daniel Siegel is to officiate at Rollins Chapel on the campus of Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H.
The bride is a certified public accountant and manager in the Boston office of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting and consulting firm.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Dartmouth, he magna cum laude.
The bride received her M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is a partner at Gabler &amp; Walsh, a law firm in Ridgewood, Queens.
Her mother, known professionally as Dr.
Kathryn Ehlers, is a professor and vice chairman of pediatrics at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


Fixing the Popping Windows
What do you do with 58,416 newly installed windows after 2,000 of them implode and shatter?
That's the issue in the latest battle over the implosion problem, an unusual mystery that has plagued Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village apartments since late last year.


A Snapshot From One of the Gateways to America


Anti-Abortion Groups Plan Protests in Arkansas Capital
In the wake of a new Federal law intended to limit violent protests at abortion clinics, three national anti-abortion groups known for their disruptive tactics plan demonstrations at clinics here this week.
The demonstrations, scheduled to begin on Thursday and last three days, will be the first time that the three groups, Operation Rescue, Rescue America and the Pro-Life Action Network, will protest together.
Because of this union, abortion-rights advocates have also gathered here in an effort to keep the clinics open and insure that the demonstrators abide by the new Federal law.
The law, signed in May, makes it a Federal crime to obstruct patients' access to family-planning clinics.


New Beaches For Fire Island


The Stereotypes Don't Apply to Most Gay Men
To the Editor:
It was gratifying to see "After Stonewall: Pride and Prejudice" (editorial, June 26), supporting gay rights, on the morning of the Stonewall 25 march.
But you strike an offensive note in chiding "gay moderates and conservatives" for seeking "to assure the country that the vast majority of gay people are 'regular' people just like the folks next door."


METRO DIGEST
STATE LEGISLATURE ENDS SESSION
The New York State Legislature ended its 1994 session in a swirl of broken agreements, failing to enact many of its major initiatives.
The unfinished election-year business included measures on casino gambling, radioactive waste disposal, union pensions and crime.
Page 1.
HOSPITALS COMPETE FOR PATIENTS
Under intense new pressure to compete for patients, hospitals in the New York City area have jumped into the business of wooing patients.
In the last year to 18 months, hospital administrators say, most local institutions have begun advertising either for the first time or more aggressively than ever before.
Many have hired consultants, and some are considering celebrity spokesmen and women.
Page 1.


U.S. Troops in Japan Benefit Both Nations
To the Editor:
"Japan Should Pay for Its Own Defense" by Ernest J. Oppenheimer (letter, June 25) gives a stereotyped, misleading impression that only Japan has benefited from the United States military presence there.


African Heritage Celebrated In Brooklyn


Cambodia Says It Foiled An Attempted Coup
The Government of Cambodia said today in Phnom Penh, the capital, that it had foiled a coup attempt.
One of the two men identified as the leaders, Prince Norodom Chakrapong, an estranged son of King Norodom Sihanouk, was sent into exile.
The other, Gen.
Sin Song, was arrested.


Stride Rite Corp.(SRR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 3


Clinton's Agenda
President Clinton is heading to Europe hoping to restore some shine to his foreign policy credentials.
He has said that as the first American President to visit Germany since the collapse of the Berlin wall, "My message will be that we've torn down the walls, but now we have to build the bridges."
Article, page 5.


Argentina Sent Packing By Persistent Romania
Victory assured, four Romanian players crumpled to the Rose Bowl turf, not in celebration but from sheer exhaustion.
For 90 minutes, they had played soccer the way the Lakers once played basketball, racing end to end, delivering show-time passes and show-stopping goals, one counterattack following another in dragstrip fashion, until finally Romania had outlasted Argentina, 3-2, in the most enthralling game of this World Cup.


Road Back to Trust Is a Long One
It was supposed to be an up day in what was supposed to be an up year for the New York Mets.
The Mets were doing something they had been exceedingly bad at for most of the decade: having a worthwhile and positive meeting with the paying public.
Mets players were to meet en masse with children in the Mets' new theme park within a park at Shea Stadium.


Racing to Celebrate the Fourth of July


Corrections
A subheading in some copies yesterday in a profile of Deputy Mayor John S. Dyson misstated his party affiliation.
He is a Democrat.


The Magic of Inanimate Objects in Motion
There was once a vogue for dances that could be seen from more than one angle.
The concept was usually a good deal more interesting than the execution.
But Nayo Takasaki's new "Urban Planning I," presented on Saturday night by Nayo and Friends at the Merce Cunningham Studio, was the real thing.
For a little more than the first half of this hourlong piece, Miss Takasaki offered viewers on two sides of the large studio stage a continuously changing -- and fascinating -- exploration of shapes and the space around them.
Even a single body at ease in an empty space can suggest much.
The surprise of "Urban Planning I" was how suggestive five large, inherently inanimate objects could be.
Moved about the floor by five quick-stepping dancers, five plain gray foam rectangles, standing on end at first, then lengthwise, created a changing landscape of buildings, city plazas, small bustling streets and homes.
The dancers were not always visible, but that made the illusion even richer.
And their interaction with the rectangles seldom overtly suggested dramatic situations.


Sweden Advances But Not Easily
Sweden brought Saudi Arabia's remarkable appearance in the World Cup to an end this afternoon by doing the simple things well in the sweltering heat and humidity of the Cotton Bowl.
In temperatures that reached 90 degrees, the Saudis' flair, grace and short passes in midfield were more conducive to the aesthetics.
But the Swedes concentrated on bringing the ball into their attack much quicker with less maneuver.


Maradona Can't Play, But He Can Still Talk
Diego Maradona attended today's game between Argentina and Romania, but he could only watch from the press box, merely creating a distraction for the fans, not the opponent.
Argentina played assertively without him and striker Claudio Caniggia, who was out with an injured toe, but it could not overcome Romania's counterrattack in losing by 3-2 in the second round of the World Cup.


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ FESTIVAL
Two Latin Jazz Titans, Volatile and Flamboyant  Carnegie Hall
Latin jazz wants the momentum of salsa and the improvisatory freedom of jazz.
Two versions of the mixture filled Carnegie Hall with polyrhythm on Saturday night, in a JVC Jazz Festival double bill of bands led by two Latin-jazz titans: the pianist Eddie Palmieri and the percussionist Tito Puente.


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ FESTIVAL
JAZZ FESTIVAL  So Different, but Provoking The Same Response: Ovations  Bryant Park
Friday's concert at Bryant Park, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, incited two standing ovations, and the groups that provoked them could hardly have been more different.
The saxophonist Thomas Chapin set up dancelike ostinatos to improvise over.
And Julius Hemphill, a founder of the World Saxophone Quartet (and its most imaginative member), brought his six-saxophone group to the stage for a set of ruminative, lush pieces featuring his distinctive harmonies.


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ FESTIVAL
CLASSICAL MUSIC  Reinventing Bach Inventions: Half Harpsichord, Half Guitar  Alice Tully Hall
Transcriptions present music on the performer's terms, not the composer's.
They should offer something in return: a special beauty of transformation or flair of execution; at the very least, a crack performance.


Toll Rises to 37 In Crash of Jet In Heavy Storm
The death toll in the crash of a USAir jet on Saturday rose to 37 today as the authorities began investigating what caused the DC-9 to hit the ground and break apart as it was trying to abort a landing in a heavy thunderstorm.
A 16-member team with the National Transportation Safety Board recovered the flight-data recorder and the cockpit voice recorder today from the wreckage of the first big commercial air crash since a USAir plane crashed at La Guardia Airport in March 1992, killing 27 people.


Utuado Journal; Sign From God or the Whim of Mother Nature?
The church bell tower incongruously sticks out 10 feet above water in the middle of Lake Caonillas as a reminder of the neighborhood that once was.
Still submerged are a school, a clinic and the Roman Catholic church itself, all sacrificed nearly 50 years ago to build a reservoir that now feeds two hydroelectric plants near this central mountain town.
The tower slowly emerged in recent months as a severe drought settled in on Puerto Rico.
It makes for a surreal, almost eerie sight in the placid green lake, and it has become the talk of the island.
For the first time, thousands of visitors have come to the rural barrio of Caonillas to witness what many see as a miracle or a message from God, the structure's history not withstanding.


Fire in the Sky
The human species has long been attracted to fire.
Burning buildings, erupting volcanoes, conflagrations of any sort tend to mesmerize, to evoke oooohs and aaaahs and superlatives like "spectacular." Nowhere is this fascination more evident than in our annual fixation with fireworks -- fire given color and shape by man.
Across the nation today, millions of faces will turn skyward toward explosions of color and light.
This activity dates back more than 1,000 years to the Chinese and the invention of black powder, which was used in rockets and firecrackers, though not yet in guns.
The Chinese fireworks were used primarily for religious purposes.
During the Middle Ages, black powder (brought perhaps by Marco Polo) spread through Europe, where fireworks became associated with festive celebrations.


Dean Foods (DF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


World Stocks Suffered In the Second Quarter
The overseas stock markets that so dazzled investors in 1993 have continued to fizzle in the second quarter of 1994.
And last year's also-rans are turning into this year's top performers -- though that is not saying very much.
In short, stock exchanges across the world are having a tough year.
Uncertainty about interest rates, the value of the dollar, politics, and that old bugaboo, inflation, once again took their toll on bourses in Europe, Asia and Latin America during the second quarter.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: WEDNESDAY  Carolina Frght Corp Latin Amer Dlr Inc Fd Rockwell Intl Corp Southwestern Energy THURSDAY  American Wtr Wks Conagra Inc Excelsior Income Shs W R. Grace &amp; Co Hillenbrand Inds Inc Rite Aid Corp Sun Inc Unifirst Corp Mass FRIDAY  AAR Corp New York St Elec&amp;Gas Pittston Co U S West Inc Unum Corp


World Economies


Sampras Is on a Roll, Right Into the History Books
Another superhuman effort, another Grand Slam title for Pete Sampras, the player who has lately made invincibility look easy.
On a steamy afternoon when the brevity of point-making made plenty of survival sense, Sampras blasted past Goran Ivanisevic in straight sets, 7-6 (7-2), 7-6 (7-5), 6-0, to become the first man since Boris Becker in 1986 to successfully defend his Wimbledon title.
His immediate reaction to the victory was to douse himself with ice water, hurl his racquet into the stands, rip off his shirt and send it skyward as a souvenir.
Then, with a fresh shirt in place atop his baggy shorts, he ambled over to shake the pair of royal hands that hand over the trophy he covets most.


Rochester Community Savings Bank (RCSB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Not Much to Show
The 1994 legislative session left Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo with few political trophies other than a modest package of tax cuts and reinforcement for his longstanding lament that it is tough to govern with a divided Legislature.
Building on groundwork laid over several years, Mr.
Cuomo began running against the Legislature even before the Republican-controlled State Senate recessed at 11:20 A.M.
He seemed to be responding today to the Republican chants of "It's Mario's fault," which began at the party's state convention, by saying, in effect, "No, it's the Senate's."


Shopko Stores Inc.(SKO,N) reports earnings for 16wks to Jun 18


Five California Republicans Stalling Bill to Preserve Desert
The biggest land conservation act in more than a decade has stalled in the House, as five California Republicans whose districts include parts of the eight million acres that would be designated as wilderness fight a rear-guard action.
The five concede that the bill will eventually be passed, but they have promised to prolong a debate marked both by deep philosophical differences and unusually vituperative exchanges on the House floor.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes; The Daily News moves up the pricing ladder, but is The Post ready to come down?
YOUR move, Mr. Murdoch.
That, anyway, is the feeling in newspaper circles after The Daily Newsincreased its daily cover price by 10 cents, to 50 cents, last week.
The action appeared to be something of a "put up or shut up" dare to Mr.
Murdoch's New York Post to cut its price from 50 cents, as that newspaper has been quietly threatening for months.


Defending New York's Publishing Dominance
Book publishers based outside New York often grouse that Manhattan companies get nearly all the attention from reviewers, bookstores and the national press.
But a Government-financed study released last week by the Manhattan Borough President's office says there is a compelling reason for all that attention: despite the convulsions of the last 20 years, New York is still by far the largest book publishing center in the country.
New York's position is faltering in some ways, the report says.
The study provides figures that bolster the impressions of New Yorkers in the industry, who have watched big publishers acquire smaller publishers or merge with other companies, and who have lived through round after round of dismissals and cutbacks at some of the city's largest companies.
In fact, the industry is growing at a much larger rate nationally than it is in the city, meaning that New York's share of the nation's publishing work force has fallen significantly in the last 15 years.


Holy Bull Running in Form, Out Of Rivals
The great gray colt Holy Bull was up before the sun yesterday morning at Monmouth Park on the Jersey Shore, walked the ramp into a horse van at 5 minutes past 6 o'clock, walked down the ramp at Belmont Park at 10 after 8, walked around the barn for half an hour and waited eight hours for the eighth race, the Dwyer Stakes.
He is the horse nobody wants to race and, one more time, he showed why.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about restaurants' effort to cope with requests from charitable groups misidentified a group that raises money through restaurant benefits.
It is Danspace Project at St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery, not Manhattan Dance Space.


The Summer's Top Crime Drama, Continued
On display in the opening days of the summer season's hit television crime mini-series, along with pictures of that 15-inch hunting knife, those splashes of blood on the walkway and O. J. Simpson's head of hair, is the nexus of money, celebrity and power that is driving both the conduct of his case and its treatment by television.
The orgy of coverage, already notable in the history of a medium that goes in for orgies, and with plenty more promised, exposes a collusion between television professionals and courtroom professionals that is flattering to neither.
Having gotten past a risibly tedious inventory of evidence (Q. "Item No. 1 contains two bindles of hair?" A. "It contains two swatches. But 1C contains a bindle"), the preliminary hearing makes a terrific show.


Some Cooler Weather Warming News for Irish
As part of the fallout from tropical storm Alberto, this city was overcast and rainy much of today, and more of the same is expected Monday.
To a couple of World Cup teams from temperate European climates, Ireland and the Netherlands, teams that have struggled to compete as temperatures here have soared above 100, this is being hailed as a major reprieve for a second-round match scheduled here at noon.


Hospitals Learning The Not-Subtle Art Of Self-Promotion
Lenox Hill Hospital sends newcomers to the neighborhood a "health kit" that offers would-be patients "free diet and nutritional counseling" and a "free cosmetic surgery screening," along with a "free gift" for those who fill out an enclosed card. (O.K., it's a refrigerator magnet.)
Last summer New York Downtown Hospital offered tourists coupons good for $25 off on a visit to its emergency room.
And Elmhurst Hospital Center has hosted tax seminars, classes in English as a second language, even a community dance to coax prospective customers.


INSIDE
Millions for Unwanted Plane
The Blackbird supersonic spy plane is a museum piece, a relic of the cold war.
Yet a Senate bill allocates $100 million for its resurrection.
Page 8.
Death on the Roads
Thirty-one people were killed in three collisions in Texas in one of the deadliest days ever on that state's highways.
At least 37 died in all.
Page 7.
French Fight Rwanda Rebels
French troops rescuing Rwandan orphans briefly fought rebels, as tension rose over a French proposal to create a safe haven.
Page 2.
Romania Defeats Argentina
Romania reached the World Cup quarterfinals by defeating Argentina, 3-2.
In Colombia, Andres Escobar, the slain player, was buried.
SportsMonday.
A Real Love Match
Pete Sampras repeated as Wimbledon champion by defeating Goran Ivanisevic, 7-6 (7-2), 7-6 (7-5), 6-0, yesterday.
SportsMonday, page 27.


O'Neill Has Own Strategy For Victory
John Cummings was the starting pitcher for the Seattle Mariners at Yankee Stadium yesterday, and the selection of the left-hander for that assignment prompted the man who gave it to him to recall his days at Yankee Stadium.
"When I played here," Lou Piniella said, "teams liked to pitch left-handers against us in Yankee Stadium. Our left-handed hitting was power; our right-handed hitting was contact and average. But it worked to our favor. We faced some inferior left-handed pitchers. It would be the long-relief guy or kids brought up from the minor leagues. We'd beat the beans out of them. But everybody tried it."


Leslie Fay Officer Seeks To Buy Unit
A senior executive of the Leslie Fay Company has offered to buy the bankrupt apparel manufacturer's most profitable division.
At a Federal Bankruptcy Court hearing last week in Manhattan, Michael J. Babcock, Leslie Fay's president and chief operating officer, said Arthur S. Levine, chairman of the company's Sassco Fashion division, wants to buy the division, which makes the Kasper A.S.L. line of women's suits.


For CBS, a QVC Merger Unlocks Door to Cable
Wall Street gushed last week over the announcement that CBS and QVC were engaged to be merged, but it was not because anyone was convinced the two intendeds were necessarily a perfect match.
As John Reidy, a media analyst at Smith Barney, put it: "Forget all the QVC stuff. Barry Diller is the reason this is an awesome deal."


Southern Co.(SO,N) reports earnings for 12mos to May 31


A Mormon Church Leader Weighs Dissent and Growth
In a rare interview, the Mormon Church's second-highest official drew a broad line against active dissension within the church but also asserted that widely publicized excommunications last year should be weighed against a much higher number of conversions.
"Every individual in the church is free to think as he pleases," the official, Gordon B. Hinckley, said here today.
"But when an individual speaks openly and actively and takes measures to enlist others in opposition to the church and its programs and doctrines, then we feel there is cause for action."


Asylum Seekers Need Only a Reasonable Fear
To the Editor:
The concern about the fairness of the procedure and the confusion about the criteria in the screening of Haitian boat people aboard United States ships described in June 17 and 18 articles from Kingston, Jamaica, are symptomatic of a political and not a legal dilemma.
The law is well established.
The controlling standard was laid down by the Supreme Court in Immigration and Naturalization Service v.
Cardoza Fonseca.


Taking Advantage of Western Business Ways
When officials in this Baltic country wanted help in modernizing their antiquated telephone system, they did what they had always done under the old Soviet system and took the first appealing offer that came along.
That beguiling proposition came from the Swedish national telephone company Telia A.B., which promised to invest more than $100 million for some quick, but limited improvements.
The plan seemed not only generous, but also featured a connection through Stockholm that would free Latvia of the old Soviet controls that had channeled all international communications through Moscow.


George Nyandoro, 67, African Nationalist
George Nyandoro, an early African nationalist in what is now independent Zimbabwe, died on June 24 in Harare, the capital.
He was 67 and lived in Harare.
He died after collapsing at his home, The Associated Press reported.


Real N.A.A.C.P. Is in the Communities Working for Civil Rights
To the Editor:
Much media attention and criticism has focused on the controversial initiatives of the national leadership of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and especially the new association with Louis Farrakhan, leader of the Nation of Islam.
Many traditional N.A.A.C.P. supporters and even longtime members have expressed grave concern at this apparent departure from the interracial coalitions and principles that have been the foundation of the association for 85 years.


Patents
IN one of her classic mysteries, Agatha Christie has her villain commit murder by injecting an air bubble into a victim's vein.
That may be a clever plot twist for a book, but it can be a real problem for doctors and nurses who regularly hook patients to intravenous lines.
Dr.
Naomi Nakao, a Manhattan gastroenterologist, said she knew this firsthand.
A patient of hers died after air entered his vein through an intravenous line improperly prepared by someone else, inspiring Dr.
Nakao to invent a warning system for intravenous lines.
In fact, Dr.
Nakao has 24 inventions to her name; taken together, several have reformed the traditional intravenous set.


Markets Closed
The nation's financial markets will be closed today in observance of the Fourth of July.
Government offices, banks and many businesses will also be closed.


Schnitzer Steel Industries(SCHN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


CHRONICLE
BARBARA HENDRICKS , the soprano, is spending July 4 in Johannesburg, and if all goes according to plan she will be in Rwanda on Labor Day.
This week she is accompanying President Francois Mitterrand of France on his first official visit to South Africa, but the trip to Rwanda will be more typical of her travels.
Its purpose: to help refugees.
The opera diva, who lives in Geneva, goes to the world's most beleaguered places as a Goodwill Ambassador for the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, a position she has held for six years.
"I have been defining my own role, and I visit refugee camps to speak about refugee problems and hopefully some solutions," she said.
"That is the only way to speak, not from dispatches but from what I see and the way people touch me. My job is to get public opinion on the side of refugees so that the world's governments will be generous."


A Tricky Path to Market For a Simple Candy Toy
How do you build a better lollipop?
By putting a spin on it, literally.
That is what two Virginia couples did with their battery-powered Spin Pop, and they say that if sales remain strong -- 15 million were sold last year at about $4 each -- their revolving lollipop-toy could twirl them out of their day jobs with the United States Postal Service.


Graying of the Academy
To the Editor:
Comments by Harvard University faculty members about uncapping the retirement age for professors miss the point (Education page, June 15).
They whine that uncapping became law last Jan. 1, but they had 15 years of warning.
Derek Bok, the former Harvard president, campaigned unsuccessfully against age uncapping that long ago.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group (BQR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


The Mayor on His Image
In an interview about his relationship with reporters, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani showed a keen interest in the evolution of his image and uneasiness about what he said was the stereotype of him as tough.
Here are excerpts.
On his portrayal by the press:
"I think there is a tendency to play to stereotype. So that nobody thinks that I'm paranoid, it cuts in either direction: I think that, you know, if the prior Mayor played tennis, that was exaggerated and made a great deal of. If somebody thinks that I've gotten angry, that's going to be exaggerated." On what the press plays up:
"Even if I were to be angry, which, you know, happens: the President's gotten angry, Mayor Dinkins got angry sometimes. If I got angry, that would be a much bigger event and would be played up much more than if somebody else got angry."  On getting his message across:
"Sometimes you do deliberately plan to get your message out. Usually those are things you plan in advance and you work very hard to get your message out. . . . Now the press might regard that as manipulation; that's part of communicating. As much as you can, you want to frame the debate. In fact, the greatest success you can have, is not so much determining all the answers, but at least framing the debate: Get the questions asked in the right way."  On whether the press is fair:
"When they interpret it in the way in which I believe I communicated, I think they did it fairly. When they don't, I think they probably did it unfairly."


Federal Express Corp.(FDX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Two Lives Joined in Tragedy; A Study in Contrasts, and in the Randomness of Fate
They came from disparate lives and opposite shores of America: a married, middle-aged Con Edison worker from Long Island and a young, single college student from California.
They might have liked one another if they had met, for by all accounts they were both outgoing and witty men, caring yet adventurous.
But it was not to be.
Fate last week brought them within four blocks of each other on their last night, to shabby, jittery streets on the border of Bushwick, Brooklyn, and Ridgewood, Queens, where teen-agers cluster in the shadows on a summer evening, preening and flapping like birds of prey.


Independence Day
NEW YORK
FIREWORKS Fireworks show from 9:20 to 9:50 P.M. along the East River from 23d Street to 42d Street.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt Drive closed from Houston Street to 96th Street from 3 P.M. to 3 A.M.


U.S. Is Said To Cancel TRW Deal
In a highly unusual move, a Congressional agency has apparently canceled a secret multibillion-dollar contract awarded to TRW Inc. and has ruled that the losing bidders, the Lockheed Corporation and the Martin Marietta Corporation, be allowed to bid again.
TRW was awarded the contract last year by the National Reconnaissance Office, a large and secretive intelligence agency that, among other things, is responsible for buying satellites for the Pentagon and the Central Intelligence Agency.


Clinton Trip to Stress European Unity Hopes
President Clinton heads to Europe on Tuesday for the third time this year to begin a weeklong tour that advisers hope can restore some shine to his foreign-policy credentials.
The main occasion for the trip is the annual meeting of the Group of Seven economic powers, which will open on Friday in Naples, Italy.
But Mr.
Clinton has framed that stop with visits to Latvia, Poland and Germany to show he is a champion of efforts to forge a truly integrated Europe.


Undercutting the Public's Advocate
The Mayor of New York and the Speaker of the City Council do not like to see Public Advocate Mark Green treading on turf they claim.
So Mayor Rudolph Giuliani slashed Mr.
Green's budget and now Speaker Peter Vallone wants him removed as the Council's presiding officer.
The Mayor's action violates the intent of the City Charter.
Mr.
Vallone is just petty.
The Public Advocate is a creature of the revised City Charter, which changed the title of President of the City Council but preserved his function as an ombudsman and his position as next-in-line if the Mayor's office becomes vacant.
On a personal level, the job was created to accommodate the then-President, Andrew Stein, and give him an ongoing role.
Institutionally, it provided for a citywide office that might balance the powers vested in the Mayor and the Speaker by the new Charter.
As ombudsman, the Public Advocate can review operations of the city bureaucracy, recommend changes and respond to citizen complaints, but he has no power of enforcement.


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ FESTIVAL
From a Rhythm-and-Blues Base, A Saxophonist Reaches Out  Avery Fisher Hall
After Kenny G, David Sanborn is probably the most commercially successful saxophonist player in the world right now.
And on Saturday evening, leading his sextet in a JVC Jazz Festival concert, he put on a show that found an appealing mixture of soulfulness and flash.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
In a highly unusual move, a multibillion-dollar military contract awarded to TRW has apparently been canceled, with the General Accounting Office ruling that the losing rivals, Lockheed and Martin Marietta, be allowed to bid again.  [ Page 35. ]


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ FESTIVAL
Into Brazil And Out of It  Avery Fisher Hall
In the late 1960's, Gilberto Gil and Caetano Veloso were rebels who transformed Brazilian pop.
As the main songwriters in a movement called Tropicalia, they brought rock instruments and modernist lyrics to the domain of bossa nova.
Their songs found pleasure amid the contradictions in a Brazil where traditional and contemporary, rural and urban, local and international and holy and tacky impulses all meet.
Under Brazil's dictatorship, their radical ideas about culture led to imprisonment and exile, but they returned as leaders.


Jeremy Brooks, Writer, 67
Jeremy Brooks, a British novelist and playwright, died on June 27 at his home in Llanfrothen, Wales.
He was 67.
Mr.
Brooks was born in Southampton, England.
He studied at Oxford, served in the British Navy in World War II, and wrote the well-received novel "Jampot Smith" and other fiction in the 1960's.


Bridge
Many young players become expert in the game and then abandon it to concentrate on family and career.
If they come back to serious play relatively late in life, can they be as strong a force?
Will their bidding be out of date, or their play less sharp?
In general, the answer seems to be favorable: skill can be put in the deep freeze for a quarter-century without deterioration.
An example is Kenneth Barbour of Paradise Valley, Ariz., who was one of Britain's best players three decades ago.
He moved to the United States, played in major tournaments for a few years and then retired.
Now he is back at the card tables, and judging by this deal from a recent team game, which combines deception and high-level technique, he is playing as well as ever.


American Rice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Mayor Takes the People's Limo
Take away the bodyguards in the dark suits with the cold, watchful stare, the sweating, worried-looking transit officers, the press, the motorcade to the subway entrance and the tourist who posed beside him for a picture, and all you had was a father taking his son to Yankee Stadium on the subway.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, his son, Andrew, and their entourage rode the train from the stop at 86th Street and Lexington Avenue to the stadium to catch the Yankees' game with the Seattle Mariners yesterday.


Looking to New Heights for Holiday Festivities


Food Lion Inc.(FDLNB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 18


Reporter's Notebook; For Energy to Persevere, Republicans Rely on Sorbet
Round about 4 A.M. today, crumpled paper towels piled up in bathrooms, bleary aides slumped into exhaustion and otherwise tactful people began offering each other breath mints.
But the Republicans who control the Senate came up with a strategy for surviving the last long night of this legislative session: lemon sorbet.
"It was definitely for the Senators and their staff," said one lobbyist, describing the cups of fruity ice that appeared outside the Senate chamber at an hour when most palates were beyond cleansing.
"But if you had a connection, you could get it."


U.S. Is Said To Cancel TRW Deal
In a highly unusual move, a Congressional agency has apparently canceled a secret multibillion-dollar contract awarded to TRW Inc. and has ruled that the losing bidders, the Lockheed Corporation and the Martin Marietta Corporation, be allowed to bid again.
TRW was awarded the contract last year by the National Reconnaissance Office, a large and secretive intelligence agency that, among other things, is responsible for buying satellites for the Pentagon and the Central Intelligence Agency.


Carnival Corp.(CCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Mysteries of Insurance
To the Editor:
"I'm Insured -- I Think" by Ann Hood in your Second Opinions supplement (June 12) leaves the impression that her case was not resolved, but less than a month after Ms.
Hood wrote us, we collected payment for her from the insurance company.


Peerless Carpet reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Fire Islanders Claim Victory On the Beach, and Over It
Jack Gellatly held a fistful of sand as if it were gold dust and proudly showed off the vast expanse of beach that he and his neighbors created just a couple of months ago.
At this spot last summer during high tide, water would have been rushing around his ankles.
Now there was a 200-foot-wide beach in front of him and the waves rolled gently up the bottom of a 14-foot dune.


At Home Abroad; Down the Tabloid Slope
The Sun, Britain's largest-selling daily, denounced Prince Charles last week for his admission on television that he was not faithful to his wife after their marriage broke up.
"We are now knee deep in a constitutional crisis," the tabloid said in an editorial.
"Many people" found the story "too shocking to stomach."
On the page opposite that moral lecture was a large topless photo of a young woman, and next to it an illustrated feature on nude fishing.


Reporter's Notebook; At 60 M.P.H., Arafat's Progress in Gaza Is a Blur
If it is the task of presidents to roar along the highway in motorcades, to blow kisses at flower-bearing children, to dedicate factories and to move from one photo opportunity to another, then Yasir Arafat was unquestionably a president today in the country of Palestine that he hopes is aborning.
Anyone remotely aware of the rituals and excesses of American-style Presidential trips would have instantly recognized the patterns in Mr.
Arafat's journey across the Gaza Strip on his third day here.
Yet it was also a bit like looking at an image in a fun-house mirror.
Yes, it was familiar.
But somehow it was not quite right.


Sports of The Times; Out of the Hot, Into the Cool: A Tribute to Papa Bell
HOT sun. Sweltering Mississippi heat.
The thoughts reverberated in my head yesterday as 75 people sat on folding chairs in a driveway leading up to Smith-Wills Stadium.
I looked over at the nine dignified men, 56 to 86 years old, veterans of the Negro leagues.
They came by bus, by train, by car.
Now they sat proudly as a city council member, the publisher of Jackson's black newspaper and representatives of officials who were "here in spirit" read proclamations commemorating the moment: Henceforth and forever, the streets leading into and out of Smith Wills Stadium will be called James (Cool Papa) Bell Drive.


Despite U.N.'s Effort, Cambodia Is Chaotic
Less than a year after the largest and costliest United Nations effort to bring peace and a freely chosen government to a war-torn nation, Cambodia remains mired in warfare, chaotic administration, official corruption and the endemic poverty that breeds malnutrition, illness and ignorance.
The United Nations and the major powers that organized and paid for the $1.8 billion international effort called it a success because honest elections were held in May 1993.


The Kurdish Killing Fields
The earth is scorched and the jails are full following Turkey's massive spring offensive against Kurdish guerrillas in southeastern Turkey and northern Iraq.
The offensive involved 300,000 troops and militiamen.
According to Amnesty International U.S.A., 600 Kurdish villages have now been evacuated, with four settlements bombed on a single March day.
Other human rights groups detail unpunished killings of journalists, the criminalizing of parliamentary speech and the jailing of Turkish Kurds for espousing "separatist propaganda."
To all protests, Turkey offers a reflexive reply.
The Kurdish rebels are "terrorists." True, leftist guerrillas known as P.K.K. are responsible for hundreds of killings, including (in the words of Amnesty International) "children, teachers, local politicians and other civilians." But whatever its offenses, the P.K.K., or Kurdish Workers' Party, is not armed by the U.S.
Turkey is.
Economic assistance for the current fiscal year is $100 million, military loans total $453 million and direct training is $1 million.
Add to that direct arms sales of $1.3 billion for 40 single-engine F-16's.


Simpson Case Galvanizes U.S. About Domestic Violence
Never before has the domestic violence hot line in Pacheco, Calif., been so inundated with calls for help, said Majorie Cusick, the clinical director for Battered Women's Alternatives there, and women who used to be shy and ambivalent are now "gushing" with details about their beatings and fear for their lives.
No longer are police officers falling asleep or reading newspapers at domestic-violence training sessions in San Francisco, said Ken Theisen, a paralegal at the Neighborhood Legal Assistance Foundation, who teaches classes on how to serve emergency protection orders.


W. J. Colihan, 79, Ad Executive, Dies
William J. Colihan Jr., a former executive vice president of the Young &amp; Rubicam advertising agency, died on Friday at Essex Meadows, a retirement community in Essex, Conn.
He was 79.
The cause was pneumonia, said his son, William J. 3d.


Marion Williams Is Dead at 66; Influential Pioneer of Gospel
Marion Williams, a pioneering gospel singer, died on Saturday at the Albert Einstein Medical Institute in Philadelphia.
She was 66 and lived in Philadelphia.
The cause was vascular disease, said her record producer, Anthony Heilbut.


A Valedictory Dance From Cage and Cunningham
When the composer John Cage died in 1992, one major project remained undone from his half-century of collaboration with the choreographer Merce Cunningham.
Now that final stone in the arch of their work has been set in place, and it is beautiful to behold.
Too bad their American admirers will have to travel far afield to see and hear it.
The piece is called "Ocean," and it received its first performances in Brussels in May.
Now it's at the Music Theater, or opera house, in Amsterdam for four performances as part of the Holland Festival.
Then it's on to Sao Paolo, Brazil, in August, with other performances under negotiation hither and yon.
Unfortunately, neither hither nor yon includes New York City, where the two men based their creative lives together.


Maazel to Leave Pittsburgh Symphony in '96
Lorin Maazel, the music director of the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra since 1988, has announced that he will leave his post in 1996.
In a statement released by the orchestra, Mr.
Maazel said, "After long consideration of the request of the Pittsburgh Symphony Board and Orchestra to stay on past the completion of my second four-year term on Aug. 31, 1996, I feel that the ever-increasing demands my composing tasks make on my time will not allow me to dedicate the required attention to the administrative responsibilities of music director."
The announcement came as something of a surpise, not only because Mr.
Maazel was viewed as a successful orchestra builder in Pittsburgh but also because few had knowledge of his ambitions as a composer.
In a telephone interview from Munich, Germany, where he also serves as music director of the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra, Mr.
Maazel said: "I have been working on a major piece for a decade but have not been able to finish it. The problem is not so much the conducting as administration. The rule of thumb is, for every hour you rehearse, you are devoting four hours to administration, if you take the job seriously." But he added that he was proud of his achievements as one of the few American conductors in charge of an American orchestra.


Breakaway Bosnian Fief Makes Deals, Not War
War is hell, of course, but it is also opportunity.
Just ask Fikret Abdic, a Muslim businessman now putting the final restorative touches to a castle here in western Bosnia that is at once his home, his business headquarters and the seat of his breakaway government.
He calls himself President Abdic, and he certainly spares himself none of the perquisites of power.
Next to his castle on a hill, gardeners plant begonias, making floral arrangements that are incongruous with Bosnia's killing fields just down the road.
Inside, oak beams, stone walls, Oriental rugs and discreet spotlights produce images that would not be out of place in Town and Country.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about 137 Cuban refugees landing in Florida misstated the number of Haitians who were halted by the Coast Guard in June.
It was 5,603, not 1,667.


Sports of The Times; Yank Recalls Old Victory Over Brazil
THE worst moment was when Fernando Clavijo was down on his hands and knees cleaning the carpets, and he saw the men in the suits and the plain dark shoes.
Immigration.
The Feds.
They were asking all the busboys for their papers.
"I don't move, I am so scared," recalled the starting defender for the United States in the World Cup, one passport and 14 years later.
"I was on the floor. I sat down at a table. The waiter said, 'Start drinking.' They say I am their best customer. I went through hell."


A Vote to Help Winter Racing
The Legislature voted yesterday to reduce parimutuel taxes at race tracks in New York State to revive the racing industry and to keep winter racing alive.
But in an escalation of the feuding between Albany and the New York Racing Association, the Legislature ordered the association to declare by July 15 whether it intended to operate at Aqueduct this winter.
If not, it threatened to designate a substitute franchise to do the job.
The bill offers several inducements to N.Y.R.A. to continue winter racing even though it lost 15 days because of last winter's severe weather.
The state parimutuel tax would be lowered to 4 percent from 5 percent on bets, and the association could take a loan of $8.5 million from racing's capital improvement fund.


The City And Arts Team Up On Funds
The approval of New York City's new budget has kicked into motion an agreement between the city government and its cultural institutions that is intended to increase overall financing for the arts and encourage arts groups to raise more private money.
Under the agreement, announced in February by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, leaders in the city's art world offered to raise $10 million in private contributions if the Mayor restored the $4.2 million he wanted to cut from the arts budget.
In addition, the city and state would have to match the pledge of private money with $5 million each.
The city and state allocated the money in their new budgets, which were approved last month.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  ECONOMY IMPROVES IN EUROPE  Europe nations are emerging from a recession, and leaders hope that will turn attention once again to achieving European unity, but they acknowledge that it won't solve all of the region's problems.  1


In World Cup, Business Just Sees Net
More than halfway through the World Cup, here is the inescapable fact: you can't escape the World Cup.
Television ratings are perhaps double what ABC and ESPN expected, and greater than what tennis from Wimbledon or the United States Open Golf Championship has drawn.
And who would have thought that the biggest sports event of the summer so far would be today's match between the United States and Brazil at 3:30 P.M.?


Europe's Economy Looking Up, But Long-Term Worries Linger
Led by Germany, Western Europe is at last emerging from its first post-cold-war recession, but with its economic aspirations tempered and its policy makers still grappling with the momentous changes that have swept the Continent.
So far the comeback has been driven primarily by increased exports to the United States, where the economy began picking up two years ago, and by the rapidly growing economies of Asia.
European companies in crucial industries like automobiles are beginning to report higher sales.
Inflation is largely under control.


Taipei Journal; A Feminist's Work Is Never Done
With her crisp mango-colored jacket, pleated black skirt, costume pearls and black leather briefcase, Hsiu-lien Annette Lu looks less like a convicted criminal and political rabble-rouser than a corporate executive.
But the sweltering cells of Taiwan's prisons and the battlefields of the country's rambunctious politics have been Ms.
Lu's workplace, and her career tells as much about Taiwan as it does about her.
Ms.
Lu, a cheerful woman whose schedule would seem to demand 40-hour days, is responsible for three of this island's most bitterly fought campaigns: a fledgling feminist movement, a campaign to end the widespread practice of buying votes, and -- perhaps most explosive -- a crusade to gain Taiwan's readmission to the United Nations.


United Stationers Inc.(USTR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Comptroller Audit Faults City Foster-Care Program
The tracking system in the city's foster-care program is so disorganized that about one in five children are listed at inaccurate addresses, a report by the City Comptroller's office indicates.
The preliminary audit of the city's Child Welfare Administration, a division of the Human Resources Administration, was conducted by the office of Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi.
The report, which has not yet been made public, states that the agency may have inaccurate information for more than 10,000 of the 50,000 children who are in foster care.


LAWMAKERS FINISH SESSION IN ALBANY AT ODDS ON ISSUES
The State Legislature ended its session this morning in a swirl of broken agreements, failing to enact many of its major initiatives.
The unfinished election-year business included measures on casino gambling, radioactive waste disposal, union pensions and, most prominently, crime.
In a turnabout that was emblematic of the 11th-hour chaos, the Republican-controlled State Senate failed to vote on legislation requiring doctors to counsel pregnant women and new mothers about H.I.V. testing, even though the bill's sponsor said it was supported by the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino.


Witt Overpowers Red Sox With 3d Straight Shutout
Athletics 10, Red Sox 0
Bobby Witt threw his third straight shutout, holding the Red Sox to six hits as the Oakland A's defeated Boston, 10-0, yesterday at Fenway Park.
Witt (7-7) extended his scoreless innings streak to 27.
His previous outings were a one-hitter against Kansas City on June 23 and a two-hitter against California on June 28.


At 702 on the AM Dial, a Duel by Arafat's Friends and Foes
When Palestinians here and in the Gaza Strip tuned in today to the Palestine Liberation Organization's new radio station, they were stunned to hear Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, described as a clown, an insolent manipulator, a hijacker and a traitor.
Just two days after the station was born, its frequency was taken over by a Palestinian group fiercely opposed to the P.L.O.'s peace accord with Israel.
So instead of "Good morning from the Voice of Palestine," listeners heard a virulent broadside from "Jerusalem Broadcasting: the Arab-Palestinian Broadcast, on the way to liberate the land."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Auto Sales . . .
June  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment . . .
June  Consumer Borrowing . . .
May


Serbian Fighters, Too, Travel on Their Stomachs


Fix Minority Contracting
The Dinkins administration vastly overstated the success of its minority contracting program, a recent series of articles in The Times has revealed.
Some companies that won contracts by claiming female or minority ownership may actually be owned by men or whites -- facts that city officials could have ascertained if they had not been so cavalier in their investigations.
Misleading bookkeeping also let the administration make exaggerated claims about the number of contracts going to women and minorities -- claims Mr.
Dinkins used in his mayoral campaign.
Such flim-flam is hard to avoid in municipal contracting, especially in affirmative-action programs.
The reason is basic: money and politics are involved.
But the difficulties of creating effective affirmative-action programs is no excuse to give up, as Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has, in effect, done.


CHRONICLE
On neutral ground, away from the home district of either the bride or the groom, two members of New York's Congressional delegation were married yesterday.
Representative SUSAN MOLINARI , 36, of Staten Island, and Representative BILL PAXON , 40, of Amherst, exchanged vows at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Church in Doylestown, Pa., where she vacationed as a child.
The Associated Press said that 138 people attended.
The marriage between the two Republicans is only the second by sitting members of Congress.


Giuliani and Reporters: Disparate Views of Mayor's Image
Out of public view, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and much of the New York City press corps are engaged in a struggle over how the Mayor and his young administration will be covered and portrayed by the news media.
Even in the age of talk-show politics, any Mayor's relationship with broadcast and print journalists can be important because their portrait helps shape public perception.
And in the first six months of his term, articles and broadcast reports about the administration have generally portrayed him as a hands-on administrator with a strong grasp of city government details.


Ugly Crash Eliminates 2 Sprinters In Tour
Six uneventful hours in the Tour de France ended in chaos in the last 20 seconds of today's first stage, when a police officer standing on the course caused a crash that left four riders sprawled and bloody on the ground.
Three were hospitalized and two were so badly injured that they are out of the race.
The officer, who was not immediately identified, was also hospitalized but was not said to have been seriously injured.


Bassett Furniture Industries(BSET,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Taiwan Merits U.N. Seat and Recognition
To the Editor:
You report that Taiwan's aggressive diplomatic campaign to re-establish itself as a legitimate member of the global community has enraged China (news article, June 26).


Morrison Restaurants Inc.(RI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 4


The Fine Print: A periodic look behind the law.; Spy Plane That Came in From Cold Just Will Not Go Away in the Senate
The sleek black supersonic spy plane called the SR-71 Blackbird is a museum piece, a mighty relic of the cold war gathering dust.
So what is $100 million to resurrect the plane doing in the Senate's bill authorizing $263.3 billion in military spending for the coming year?
The bill contains hundreds of millions of dollars for other weapons and programs the Pentagon says it does not want, like money to keep building the $2.2 billion-a-copy B-2 bomber.
The money keeps flowing for many reasons: keeping a military contractor solvent or defense workers on the job in a powerful politician's home district, for example.


Hartmarx Corp.(HMX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


4-Year-Old Son Of 2 Detectives Shoots Himself In an Accident
The 4-year-old son of two New York City detectives was critically wounded early yesterday when he shot himself in the head with his mother's revolver only moments after she left him to step into the bathroom in their house in Queens, the police said.
It is unclear how the boy, Edward Watkins, got his hands on the gun, a .38-caliber revolver with a two-inch barrel that officers often carry off-duty because it is easily concealed.


Music and Spirit in the Great Outdoors


Advanced Micro Devices (AMD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 26


A Magazine Celebrates the Strange
Bigfoot has yet to grant an interview, but The Fortean Times, a British journal of eccentric phenomena, has been tracking his movements for more than 20 years.
It has also been keeping tabs on the Abominable Snowman, two-headed cows and flying cats.
But the magazine, published every two months, does not see itself as a supermarket tabloid, even if it is the only publication to offer its readers a free "alien defense kit," guaranteed to flash red at the approach of extraterrestrial beings.


Cyberspace's Most Wanted: Hacker Eludes F.B.I. Pursuit
Combining technical wizardry with the ages-old guile of a grifter, Kevin Mitnick is a computer programmer run amok.
And law-enforcement officials cannot seem to catch up with him.
Thirty years old, Mr.
Mitnick has already served time in jail for one computer crime and pleaded guilty to another.
One of his lawyers told a court that he had an addiction to computers, and during his time in a treatment program he was prohibited from touching a computer or modem.


Investors Find 2d Quarter Better Than 1st, but Full of Traps for the Unwary
Most everyone felt like a loser in the first quarter.
Stock traders spent the last two months of the quarter in shock at what the Federal Reserve Board had wrought, raising interest rates for the first time in five years in February and then again in March.
After a spectacular rise in January, stocks plummeted.
Issues in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index lost value in the first quarter at an annual rate of more than 16 percent.


Haiti Invasion Not Imminent, Envoy Says
Amid mounting speculation that the United States is moving closer to an invasion of Haiti to oust its military rulers, William H. Gray 3d, the Clinton Administration's special envoy on Haiti, said today that an invasion was not imminent, but that the United States was prepared to take action to protect the thousands of Americans there.
In an interview on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," Mr.
Gray said that the fate of Haiti was of "vital interest to the United States, but added, "The United States is not contemplating an imminent invasion of Haiti."


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Inc.(SNTV,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


In Nassau, Democrats Vs. Blacks
A prolonged bipartisan battle over drawing district lines for a new Nassau County government has severely strained the traditionally close relationship here between the Democratic Party and the county's black residents.
It was a group of black and Hispanic residents who in October 1991 sued the county, demanding that its government be as representative of all racial and ethnic minorities as possible.
While they won in court, the plaintiffs have been frustrated by Democratic opposition to a plan that among other things would assure two minority districts.


Europe's Economy Looking Up, But Long-Term Worries Linger
Led by Germany, Western Europe is at last emerging from its first post-cold-war recession, but with its economic aspirations tempered and its policy makers still grappling with the momentous changes that have swept the Continent.
So far the comeback has been driven primarily by increased exports to the United States, where the economy began picking up two years ago, and by the rapidly growing economies of Asia.
European companies in crucial industries like automobiles are beginning to report higher sales.
Inflation is largely under control.


Reaching the Heights Not a Matter of Height
Sixteen thunderous aces in the first set, and Goran Ivanisevic didn't win it.
That told you something about the nightmare of giants serving 150 mile-an-hour blurs that supposedly is the future of men's tennis and of Wimbledon, in particular.
It told you that it is an exaggeration more than it is a legitimate fear.
As wise and worldly a thinker as Boris Becker bought into the apocalypse rumor last week, though he had the legitimate excuse of having just been aced out of his beloved Wimbledon by the same Ivanisevic who was excused in 1 hour 55 minutes from the final yesterday by Pete Sampras, 7-6 (7-2), 7-6 (7-5), 6-0.


Collies Work Hard and Then Chat
Nop's Hope  By Donald McCaig  230 pages. Crown. $20.
In his previous books about border collies -- "Nop's Trials," a novel, and "Eminent Dogs, Dangerous Men," a nonfiction work -- Donald McCaig has stressed that these dogs are bred for work and not for human companionship.


No Headline
"I don't know why I'm here. When I got up, there was nobody. Everyone was either buried or not there. -- ROBERT THOMAS, a survivor of Saturday's plane crash in Charlotte, N.C.  [ 1:5. ]


Rabin Takes On Right Wing And Critics of P.L.O. Accord
Stung by anti-Government demonstrations set off by Yasir Arafat's visit to Gaza, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin lashed out at his Israeli rightist opponents today, accusing them of exploiting the victims of terrorist attacks in a campaign to undermine Israel's accord with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
"The extreme right in Israel celebrates the bloodshed by the terrorist murderers of extremist Islam, trying to use the Israeli victims as a lever against the agreement," Mr.
Rabin said at a Labor Party gathering.
"The extremist murderers of Islamic Holy War and Hamas are the tool of the extreme right in Israel."


It's 1 in 100, but It's Also the Fourth
The Americans are optimistic about their chances against Brazil on the Fourth of July.
More important, they are realistic.
"We have to play the best game of our lives, and we need to get Brazil on an average day," said forward Roy Wegerle.
"Man for man, they're a better team. We need a little luck."


Musicians Give Thanks to a Spiritual Shepherd
Tribute concerts at the JVC Jazz Festival have some internal, mysterious life of their own.
Some seem sullen and fitful, and others, like the tribute to the Rev.
John Garcia Gensel on Friday night at Carnegie Hall, take on a sense of euphoria.
Mr.
Gensel, who retired this year after decades of work as "the pastor to the jazz community," as the program described him, has presided over births and deaths, offered advice and helped with whatever afflictions his parishioners have brought him.
He was in the audience, and the trumpeter Jimmy Owens, capturing the mood of the celebration, put it well: "Usually the person in a tribute is dead. We're glad you're here to smell the flowers."
It also helped that the show, produced by the critic Ira Gitler, was put together so well.
Instrumental combinations changed onstage with no loss of momentum or inspiration, and the musicians, barely amplified, made the music sound fine, a rare thing in Carnegie Hall.
By the time the show was over, with Bill Cosby, the master of ceremonies, intoning over the loudspeaker system as if he were God, the audience had heard a trombone duet, three trumpets, bop musicians playing with swing musicians, a three-saxophone face-off, lots of jokes about death, and some gentle and lovely music.


French Force In Skirmish In Rwanda
French troops engaged in a brief firefight with Rwandan rebels today during a rescue of some 600 orphans and 100 religious workers from this southern Rwandan city.
It was the first combat for the French force, which arrived 10 days ago with the stated mission of protecting civilians in the brutal civil war.
Tensions are rising between the rebels and the French, who have proposed that the United Nations authorize the creation of a safe haven in southwestern Rwanda from which all military forces would be excluded.
The rebels, who control the eastern two-thirds of the country, oppose the plan.
They say that it would protect those responsible for the killing of thousands of members of the Tutsi minority and that it would almost certainly lead to clashes between rebel and French forces.


Benes Pitches a 1-Hitter As He Proves His Point
Andy Benes was sitting in the players' lounge at Jack Murphy Stadium Saturday, reading a paper, when he came across a comment that made him absolutely livid.
Randy Smith, the Padres' general manager, had told the national publication Baseball America that Benes, the Padres' ace, might be classified as the Padres' third starter now that Joey Hamilton and Andy Ashby are pitching so well.


Patterns
Wooing the Europeans
With so much of today's fashion direction coming from European men's magazines with an edge, Calvin Klein and Donna Karan have decided to split the cost of bringing editors from some of the most important to New York to see their men's wear collections.
Editors from The Face, Arena, L'Uomo Vogue and Vogue Hommes have been invited to Mr.
Klein's show on July 25, and Ms.
Karan's on July 26.


By Design; (Wo)men's Pajamas
Sometimes, fashion is where you find it.
And lots of young women have found it in the men's department this summer.
Their discovery: cotton pajamas, which they're wearing for informal evenings.
K.
D.
Lang has sported pajamas on stage and off.
For the fashion crowd, that lends credence to the notion.
Sometimes just the top is worn as an oversize shirt with shorts or classic trousers.
Other times, the drawstring bottoms are worn with an undershirt for a cool look on a casual occasion.


One Style, Two Bands And Much Difference
Two bands could hardly have more different approaches to rhythm-and-blues-based music than Booker T. &amp; the MG's and the Fugees (Tranzlator Crew), both of which performed on Saturday afternoon at the Central Park Summerstage.
Booker T. &amp; the MG's, the Stax Records house band that performed behind Otis Redding, Wilson Pickett and other soul greats while recording distinctive instrumental songs of their own, make music built on disciplined, understated playing and thrifty, gentle grooves.
The Fugees, a hip-hop band featuring two Haitian men and one American woman, structure their sound from festive, shambling raps and loose, rambunctious grooves.
Both bands, however, concoct inventive and immediate music that is neither too strict nor too indulgent.
Booker T. &amp; the MG's set list was as orderly as their performing style.
Throughout the hour-plus show, they alternated a song from their new album, "That's the Way It Should Be" (Columbia), the band's first record in 17 years, with an older song.
They opened the set with their recent, languid reworking of Bob Dylan's "Gotta Serve Somebody" -- perhaps the only low point on the band's wonderfully spartan new album besides their cover of U2's "I Still Haven't Found What I'm Looking For" -- before moving on to the older, stronger "Melting Pot."


Mutual Funds Quarterly Review; Vanguard's Ace Stock Picker Is Back on Top
JOHN B. NEFF, the man behind Vanguard's giant Windsor fund, has been vindicated this year after a highly publicized slump.
"He has had a good turnaround, not only on an absolute basis but when compared with his peers," said Ken Gregory, editor of the No-Load Fund Analyst, an industry newsletter based in San Francisco.


U.S. Opens Bosnia Embassy With Pledge of Support
There were grilled hot dogs and hamburgers and "The Star-Spangled Banner" and the words "democracy" and "freedom" floated through the sticky midsummer air.
Fireworks were absent, but much of the picnic talk at the Fourth of July opening of the United States Embassy in Sarajevo focused not on that but on whether the support of the United States, this country's staunchest diplomatic backer, would somehow make a difference in silencing the guns of war.


Church Bells And Art Along With The Usual
The Summergarden festival, presented each year in the Museum of Modern Art's sculpture garden, is unleashing another magnificent barrage of 20th-century programming.
In a series of free weekend concerts throughout July and August, Joel Sachs, the festival's artistic director, will focus on music from the first 30 years of the century; an all-American opening concert on Friday night presented works of Ruggles, Cowell, Copland and Ives.
Mr.
Sachs, who is also a co-director of the Continuum ensemble and mastermind of Juilliard's "Focus" festivals, has tended to choose innovators rather than conservative voices; in the listings one sees Leo Ornstein, Alexander Mossolov and George Antheil alongside the expected Schoenberg, Stravinsky and Bartok.
It looks to be a fascinating tour, and anyone wishing for a free education in some of the century's most gloriously inventive music should not miss the opportunity.


Domestic Violence Is Campaign's Focus
The first national public service campaign intended to promote the prevention of domestic violence will use the theme, "There's no excuse for domestic violence."
The campaign, which began last week and includes television and radio commercials, print advertisements and community action materials, was created by Altschiller Reitzfeld in New York for the Advertising Council on behalf of the Family Violence Prevention Fund.
Though the campaign has been in development for more than a year, its introduction is timely amid the publicity concerning the slaying of Nicole Brown Simpson.


Team Handball Searches for Stars and Olympic Gold
Seven years ago this month, Leora (Sam) Jones was the defining point in the United States for team handball -- a fast-moving court sport that combines elements of basketball, soccer and hockey.
Jones was a high-jumping scorer who used her incredible vertical leaping ability to throw the leather ball past a bewildered goaltender.
But as her goals mounted and her notoriety grew in the sport that sells out arenas in Europe, the women's team drifted further and further from the ultimate goal of winning the Olympic gold.


Point Proved, Hearts Heavy, It's Time to Go Home
They accomplished more than anyone expected, perhaps more than they expected from themselves.
They gained international respect and awakened a slumbering public.
For two weeks, soccer emerged from a sporting backwater and swam gloriously in the mainstream.
In the end, all the Americans could not do was defeat the team that is historically and artistically the best in the world.
For 73 minutes today, the United States kept Brazil handcuffed and scoreless.
Under relentless pressure to produce another World Cup title after 24 fallow years, and playing a man short from the 44th minute on, Brazil appeared as if it might unravel.


Gumbel Replaces Lampley as N.F.L. Host
GREG GUMBEL has replaced JIM LAMPLEY as the host of NBC's "The N.F.L. Live" studio show, NBC said yesterday.
The move was expected when Gumbel was hired from CBS, where he had been the host for "The N.F.L. Today" for four years.
Gumbel will also be host to NBC's major league baseball coverage.


Acorns Sprout Among the Oaks Of the Telecommunications Field
Eighteen months ago, Shant S. Hovnanian was a home builder in New Jersey.
Now he is the chief executive of a small telecommunications company in Manhattan, pushing a technology that did not exist a decade ago and preparing to do battle with some of the biggest names in corporate America.
"This is the mecca of technology being born," he said of greater New York.
"Everybody's got a new idea."


Rate Rise Is Called Unlikely
Federal Reserve policy makers, who begin an eagerly awaited meeting Tuesday afternoon, will probably decide after long and spirited debate that the economy is slowing enough that they need not immediately raise short-term interest rates again.
This is the view -- not a consensus so much as a blend of opinion that masks sharp disagreement -- that emerged late last week from the comments of analysts on Wall Street and elsewhere in the private sector.


METRO DIGEST
TELECOMMUNICATIONS BREEDING GROUND
Technology and loosened regulation are making the New York metropolitan area a national incubator for entrepreneurial ventures in telecommunications.
Throughout the region, new companies are popping up, ranging from low-overhead mom-and-pops to ventures involving investments of hundreds of millions of dollars.
A1.


Man Says He May Have Shot Golfer
A man told the police in Niles, Ohio, that he might have accidentally shot the L.P.G.A. player KIM WILLIAMS in the neck as he was target shooting.
A Howland, Ohio, man, whose name is being withheld, called authorities Sunday night and said he might have shot Williams as he and a friend were shooting old cars in a wooded area about a mile west from where the golfer was shot, Niles Police Capt.
BRUCE SIMEONE said.
Williams, 31, of Boca Raton, Fla., was shot in the parking lot of the Phar-Mor discount store at the Great East Plaza about 9 P.M.
Saturday.
She was in the Niles area competing in the L.P.G.A.
Youngstown-Warren Classic at nearby Avalon Lakes Golf Course.


Ann Buchwald, 74, Writer and Ex-Agent
Ann McGarry Buchwald, wife of the columnist Art Buchwald and an author and former literary agent, died on Sunday at her home in Washington.
She was 74.
She died of lung cancer, her family said.


Group Mentality Pervades in Games Played in Northeast
The East Coast portion of the World Cup's round of 16 takes center stage today, and by the quirks of first-round competition, both games feature a team from Group E against a team from Group D.
At Giants Stadium, Mexico, the winner of the so-called "Group of Death," will play Bulgaria, the second-place team in Group D. Bulgaria pushed Argentina down a rung to third place by beating the Maradona-less Argentines, 2-0, on the final day of the opening round.


Personalized Path to a New Way of Life
There was no ceremony on Rikers Island, no speeches, no cap or gown.
Just a young man in a prison uniform, and a teacher bearing a gift.
Henry Matamoros, 21, fresh from kitchen duty, stood patiently last Thursday as the attendance coordinator from Franklin K. Lane High School in Brooklyn handed him his high school diploma.
There was no party, but the spirit of celebration was present: in the way Mr.
Matamoros smiled ear to ear when a stranger asked how he felt, in the way he clutched the diploma that had eluded him for so long.


U.S. Sets New Tax Rules on Pricing
Grappling with a source of high-stakes international friction, the Treasury has adopted new tax rules under which corporations gain much greater flexibility in allocating prices among parent companies and their foreign subsidiaries.
Specialists said the detailed effect of the final regulations on transfer pricing, one of the most contentious and arcane sections of tax law, was not immediately clear, partly because they had not yet fully digested the fine print in a 262-page document that began circulating only late Friday.
But they agreed with the Treasury's contention that new rules, the result of an eight-year process, build on the doctrine of maximum flexibility.


Crop Subsidies: Help and Headaches
David Rothermel could have hardly asked for more from employees of the Federal Department of Agriculture when he dropped by the agency's county office on a nondescript cul-de-sac at the outskirts of this town last week.
Promptly, pleasantly, even sympathetically, they helped him through a stack of documents that would allow him to receive tens of thousands of dollars for growing corn this year.


The Man Clinton Turns to in Times of Turmoil and Moments of Doubt
In March 1992, a few days after the first news account appeared on Bill and Hillary Clinton's Ozark real estate investment, James B. Blair set out to bury Whitewater as a campaign issue.
When he was done, James B. McDougal, Mr.
Clinton's voluble partner in the venture, had dropped from sight and stopped giving interviews or documents to reporters.
The Clintons' remaining debt in Whitewater was paid off, and the affair was relegated to obscurity for the balance of the 1992 campaign.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Bruce N. Ames; Strong Views on Origins of Cancer
WHEN it comes to controversy, Dr.
Bruce N. Ames, though not physically intimidating at 5 feet 9 inches tall, is no shrinking violet.
The man who invented the leading laboratory test to screen chemicals for their ability to damage genes has years of solid science and the accolades of countless colleagues behind him when he makes such provocative and socially unpopular statements as these:
"I think pesticides lower the cancer rate."


Was Evidence Obtained Properly?
Before testimony resumes in a hearing to decide whether O. J. Simpson must stand trial on murder charges, his lawyers plan to argue on Tuesday that a search that turned up bloodstains and other evidence at his Brentwood home was illegal.
If they succeed -- a big if, legal experts say -- prosecutors could suffer a serious setback, because the 34 pieces of evidence are considered to be vital to the case against Mr.
Simpson.
He has been charged in the stabbing deaths of his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and a restaurant waiter who was her friend, Ronald L. Goldman.
Their bodies were found at her town house the night of June 12.


Dutch Too Fast, Too Sure For Irish
The Netherlands proved faster, quicker and more inventive than Ireland here this afternoon.
And strange as it may sound, the Dutch were superior in the air battles, typically Ireland's bread and butter.
Add a couple of defensive mistakes by the Irish, including a gaffe by their usually reliable goalkeeper, Packie Bonner, and you have a 2-0 triumph for the Dutch.


Military Making Less Into More, But Some Say Readiness Suffers
At this sprawling Marine Corps base, which would send thousands of marines to the Korean peninsula if war erupted there, Col.
Jeff Scheferman is busy training troops on a no-frills budget.
Marines practice shooting at home-made papier-mache dummies instead of costly cardboard targets.
Officers run command-post drills outside their office windows and pretend to be in the field to avoid using expensive batteries.
Marines trek 17 miles to their training ranges to save on fuel, truck tires and maintenance.


Mistakes Also Cost Referees
The Swiss referee Kurt Roethlisberger said yesterday in Dallas that he should have awarded Belgium a penalty during its 3-2 defeat by Germany, and FIFA decided that both he and the referee of the Argentina-Romania match would play no further part in the World Cup.
"He admitted that he made a mistake," FIFA General Secretary Sepp Blatter said of Roethlisberger.
"He knows that's it for him."


The Mole's Manual
Aldrich Ames, the former high-ranking C.I.A. officer who sold secrets to the Russians for nine years, will receive a visit in jail this summer from Senator Dennis DeConcini, chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.
Mr.
DeConcini has negotiated with the Justice Department for months to talk with Mr.
Ames, who, as a result of his plea agreement with prosecutors, has been telling the C.I.A. and F.B.I. how he escaped their notice for so long.
The Senator wants to hear first-hand "how Ames beat the security system," an aide said.


Mutual Funds Quarterly Review; Varied Strategies for Overseas Investors
After a strikingly good 1993, the international investing scene has proved disappointing so far this year.
With the notable exception of Japan and Italy, returns have been weak.
For an idea of what to expect for the rest of 1994 and beyond, three portfolio managers with strong records recently explained their performances and described what they were doing.


Senate Agrees to Turn Over Carrier for Use as a Heliport
The United States Senate has agreed to turn over a surplus helicopter carrier to a New York City museum, which intends to use it as a heliport, significantly expanding the space available for helicopter landings in and around Manhattan.
The Senate agreed on Friday to transfer the carrier, the Guadalcanal, to the foundation that runs the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum.
It plans to use the carrier as a museum and a heliport big enough for several helicopters to land at once.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Nigerian Tops Christie in '94 World Best  Davidson Ezinwa of Nigeria ran a 1994 world best of 9.94 seconds in the 100 meters in Linz, Austria, yesterday and handed Linford Christie of Britain his first defeat of the season.
Christie, who finished in 10.03, was third behind Ezinwa and Dennis Mitchell, who was clocked in 9.97.
Ezinwa's time bettered the previous world best this year, 9.95, by his countryman Olapade Adeniken and set an African record.
There were two other 1994 world bests as Gwen Torrence won the women's 100 in 10.89 and Mark McKoy, running for Austria for the first time instead of Canada, took the men's 110 hurdles in 13.15. (AP)


Casting Stones
It seems the self-proclaimed Christian right can dish it out, but they can't take it.
They have called President Clinton every name in the book.
The Rev.
Jerry Falwell is selling videotapes that -- without a shred of evidence -- accuse the President of murdering political opponents back in Arkansas.
The Christian Coalition has said Mr.
Clinton's inauguration was "a repudiation of our forefathers' covenant with God." They have strayed far from traditional religious issues to proclaim the "Christian" position on matters like health care reform and the gasoline tax.


Market Place; Investors in a limited partnership are facing some tough choices.
DOES everyone have a ballot?
All right, let's get started: Vote either yes or no.
A "yes" vote means either salvaging a few thousand dollars out of a bad investment -- or, instead, taking on a huge tax liability.
A "no" vote means either walking away from potential profits -- or, instead, sidestepping more financial trouble.
No one will answer questions.
But a decision is required right now!
Sounds like some paranoid investor's nightmare.
But the situation is real for investors in a limited partnership known as Franklin Chandler Associates, as they decide whether to sell the partnership's assets.
And the decision has importance beyond those investors because, unknown to them, their vote could affect a new public offering and millions of dollars of other people's money.


60 Schools Will Be Exempt From Range of Regulations
Sixty schools throughout New York State will be freed from a broad range of state regulations under a plan proposed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to encourage innovation that was approved by the Legislature over the weekend.
Mr.
Cuomo described the plan yesterday as "a bold new effort" that will allow the selected schools to decide everything from how many minutes a student must spend in English or math to the days of the week that schools must be open.


Yemen: Risky War, Cautious Response
The civil war tearing Yemen apart threatens wider trouble.
Other Arab countries have become involved, including, by some accounts, Saudi Arabia, Iraq and the Sudan.
Both Yemeni sides are oil producers.
And a military attack against the southern port of Aden could produce a humanitarian disaster, imperiling more than 400,000 inhabitants.
Conservative Arab regimes, led by Saudi Arabia, sought a U.N. peacekeeping force to halt the north's offensive.
So far, U.N. efforts have been limited to unsuccessful mediation attempts and useless cease-fire agreements that break down almost instantly.
The Saudis and their allies are also poised to recognize the south, which would re-create the two independent Yemens that merged in 1990.
The United States, however, opposes recognition.
And it has persuaded the Security Council to authorize merely a regional monitoring force, which would be deployed only after a lasting cease-fire takes hold.


World Cup Pilgrims in Search of the Perfect Hotel
THIS is very, very . . . not special." Gasparo Sanchez, World Cup fan by way of Mexico City, was groping, and it wasn't a language problem that was tying his tongue. It was good manners.
He was on Route 1&amp;9, scouting a room along a strip of motels usually left to dead-tired truckers and one-hour stands.
After hearing of the "inexpensive accommodations" from fellow soccer fans, he was looking for something his wife might like.


Hoboken: Having It All, Then Leaving It
At times like this, when her son is twirling around monkey bars with his friends and she is standing on playground rubber chatting with hers, Annette Vidal Lisa would rather live here than anywhere else.
But her boy is almost 3 years old, so she figures it is time to leave.
"It's a shame," she said.
"But when my son reaches full-time school age, we want to be ready."


Weather Remains Focus in Crash Inquiry
Searching for clues to the plane crash that killed 37 people here on Saturday, investigators today began removing the three main pieces of wreckage and the hundreds of pieces of debris from the area west of Charlotte-Douglas International Airport where the DC-9 went down.
Much of the inquiry into the crash of USAir Flight 1016 continued to focus on the weather and the possibility of wind shear, the abrupt and potentially disastrous shift of wind currents that can remove the lift from an aircraft's wings and send a plane plummeting.


The Tour Gets Rough In Early Stages
Fabiano Fontanelli is one tough guy, but then everybody knows that.
He is, after all, just a lesser light among the Tour de France sprinters, and they revel in their reputation as tough guys.
Nothing scares them, they say, or they would be former sprinters.
How tough exactly is Fontanelli?
Enough so that, a day after a horrific crash near the finish line put three sprinters out of the race and left Fontanelli bruised and aching on the ground, he was back today to contest, yes, another sprint.


Man Killed Setting Off Fireworks
A Long Island man was killed yesterday when a fireworks launcher he had lighted went off in his face, in the most serious of many incidents as the region dealt with the annual carnage of Independence Day.
Robert Saueressig, 26, of Plainview, died at 9:30 P.M., moments after loading and lighting a mortar in a park at Princeton Drive and Cornell Drive in Plainview, said Officer Bruce Benson, a spokesman for the Nassau County police.


Duke Assistant Is Happy to Stay Put
MIKE BREY, the 35-year-old assistant basketball coach at Duke whose name has been prominently mentioned as a candidate for the Seton Hall opening, said Sunday evening that the school had not contacted him and that he would not pursue the job.
"I have not talked to them and I don't expect to," Brey said in a telephone interview from Durham, N.C.
"They're going for a head coach from what I've heard. I'm happy where I am. With Vanderbilt last year, that was one where I really tried. Seton Hall, I don't think I'll chase that one. It's a tough act to follow P. J."


Accounts
*
Royal Cruise Line, San Francisco, to Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners, San Francisco, to handle the luxury cruise line's account, previously handled in-house.
Goodby, Silverstein already handles advertising and design for Royal's sibling company, Norwegian Cruise Line.
Billings were estimated at $4 million.


Red, White and, Oh, So Blue


More on the Menu Than Merely Weight
Otto Woodnick, the chief neurotic in Nicky Silver's outlandish new play, "The Food Chain," is fat.
How fat?


Lindeman Does Just What Mets Wanted
The Mets salvaged Jim Lindeman from the scrapheap this season for one reason, and one reason only.
Lindeman can hit the ball, he can hit it with power, and he can hit it consistently.
The Mets knew Lindeman had a bad back, they knew he had a spotty record as an outfielder, and they knew he was not some sort of solution to any of their long-term problems.
They hoped, though, that Lindeman might be good for a big hit here or there, when the Mets were in a jam.


People
*
William B. Perkins was named managing director at Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, New York, succeeding Andy Bielanski, who joined the agency's Los Angeles office last month as managing director after the departure of Leonard Pearlstein, president and chief operating officer in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Perkins was previously a principal and executive vice president of sales and marketing at the Food Court Entertainment Network, New York. *
Kathie McKirdy, senior vice president and director of administration at DDB Needham Chicago, was promoted to executive vice president and director of client services as she adds the additional responsibilities of heading the Helene Curtis account.
She succeeds Dawn Hudson, who joined DDB Needham New York as an executive vice president and managing partner.


Fireworks Big and Small Mark Fourth of July Celebrations


Caramoor's Eclectic Patchwork
Preceded on Saturday by Slide Hampton's Jazzmasters and followed on Monday by the Great American Main Street Band, Ivan Moravec played the piano at Caramoor this afternoon as a model of Central European decorum.
Mr.
Moravec -- performing Beethoven, Chopin, Janacek, Debussy and Brahms -- was just one more piece of the eclectic puzzle making up this venerable music festival's 49th outdoor season.
Caramoor's nine summer weekends offer all things to some people.
The impressive trees and fragrant flowerbeds, along with the sultry air that always seems to hang over these beautiful grounds, create a kind of languid hedonism.
And indeed programs throughout the summer promote rest and relaxation over challenge and exploration, Mr.
Moravec's, for example, being a model of familiar and obliging music.
Like so many such events, Caramoor is a vacation in sound.


Q&amp;A
Wild Tomatoes
Q.
I was taught that the tomato is native to America.
So where are all the wild tomatoes?


Mutual Funds Quarterly Review; Sluggish Results for 5 Experts
Perhaps the best thing that can be said about the second quarter is that it's over.
Given the tough sledding for stock funds, "We all should have indexed the S.&amp; P. 500 and gone on vacation for three months," said John Rekenthaler, editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds and one of five experts who created hypothetical retirement portfolios for The New York Times a year ago.


Bill Auction Held Today
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
Because of the Fourth of July holiday yesterday, the regular bill auction will take place today.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market's abbreviated session on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.18 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 4.64 percent.
The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: TAX EXEMPT  WEDNESDAY  Howard County (Md.), $61 million of general obligation bonds.
Competitive.
THURSDAY  New York State Dormitory Authority, $78 million of revenue bonds.
Competitive.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Alza Corp., Palo Alto, Calif., $825 million face amount of liquid yield option notes due in 2014, (about $300 million proceeds), Baa-3/BBB-.
Merrill Lynch.


Clashing Stories of 4 Ships And a Disputed Heroism
At the end of April 1975, as the war in Vietnam drew to a close, Tran Dinh Truong says, he used his fleet of cargo ships and tankers to rescue United States soldiers and civilians stranded in remote areas of the country.
At the time, he says, he owned 24 ships, along with more than 100 trucks, four hotels, and an airline.
Mr.
Truong has told the story of his heroism ever since he arrived in the United States.
But parts of it are disputed by those who took part in the evacuation, by a ship captain who worked for Mr.
Truong, and by Mr.
Truong's own conflicting stories in various court documents.


Mutual Funds Quarterly Review; Losses Prevail for the Second Time This Year
Mutual fund investors are getting used to pain.
For the second consecutive quarter, a majority of mutual funds lost value, as stocks, bonds and the dollar all tumbled.
Though many municipal bond funds had tiny gains, funds investing in taxable bonds fell, as did those investing overseas.
Hardest hit were funds that invest in American stocks, leaving them down almost 6 percent so far this year.
For the quarter, they were down 2.5 percent.


School's Out, but Lunch Program's in Session
Right around noon, on a hot, muggy day in this small inland town on the Delmarva peninsula, children start gathering at the playground, the big boys shooting hoops, the little girls sitting on the lawn -- all of them waiting for the big yellow school bus that brings them a free lunch.
When the bus arrives, the desultory basketball stops, and all the children line up for their turn to get a plastic-wrapped lunch tray that, for many, is the first meal of the day.


Rabies, Rampant in U.S., Yields to Vaccine in Europe
CONTINENTAL Europe and the United States share an ancient plague: the deadly scourge of rabies.
But although public health measures on both continents have made the disease rare among humans, Europe has moved years ahead of the United States in fighting the disease among wild animals.
In the last three years, Europeans have been bombarding red foxes, the continent's main carriers of the disease, with pellets of food laced with a potent new vaccine.


Observer; Groggy With Health
Written after deep health-care immersion:
America faces a grave health-care crisis, though maybe not.


Poles Will Press Clinton On NATO Membership
In earlier visits intended to encourage the Poles in their scrappy opposition to Communism, American leaders have been welcomed with great warmth.
But President Clinton will be coming to a different Poland on Wednesday and will be greeted by a people and a Government wary of what is perceived as Washington's favoritism toward Russia and its lack of understanding of Poland's security problems.


Kamieniecki Feeling the Frustration
Gazing at the scoreboard was unnecessary to document what was transpiring between the Yankees and the Athletics yesterday.
All anyone needed to do was study Scott Kamieniecki.
His body language was almost as revealing as the numbers being shown beyond the outfield fence.
Whether he was shaking his head, kicking the dirt, putting his glove on his hip or hollering, Kamieniecki's actions oozed frustration and exasperation.
But Kamieniecki wasn't the only one feeling ill at ease as Steve Ontiveros combined with four relievers to guide the A's to a 4-0 victory at Yankee Stadium.


Unifying the Police Forces
New York City mayors have long wanted to merge the city's transit and housing police forces into the Police Department, but have failed in the face of resistance from the two smaller forces.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani is determined to succeed, and there are solid reasons to believe he can.
Not least among them is that merger is an excellent idea.
Also, housing police officials no longer oppose it.
And the Mayor's popularity with law enforcement officers generally is exceptionally high.
This is, however, no ordinary bureaucratic reshuffling.
It would meld three large and proud police forces.
The Police Department has more than 35,000 uniformed officers.
The Transit Authority and the Housing Authority each have about 2,500 -- making each larger than the police departments of all but a dozen other cities.
Transit police cover the vast subway system, where crime involves more muggings than murders.
Housing police cover 324 public projects, with 600,000 residents and an oppressive pattern of drugs and violent crime.


Neo-Fascists Take to the Sea, And End Up Toasting Old Glory
Seeking to offset bad publicity generated by a fund-raising cruise on the Achille Lauro, Italy's neo-Fascist leader tossed a garland of flowers into the sea in memory of an American Jewish hostage who was killed on the ship, a spokesman for the politician said today.
The neo-Fascist, Gianfranco Fini, also called for one minute's silence in honor of the hostage, Leon Klinghoffer, 69, who was pushed overboard in his wheelchair by Palestinian terrorists who commandeered the ship in 1985.
The memorials were held over the weekend, the spokesman said.


Decision Today On Mattingly
After a week of waiting for the pain in Don Mattingly's right wrist to subside, the Yankees decided yesterday to wait one more day before probably placing him on the disabled list.
Mattingly, who fielded grounders before yesterday's game, will partake in batting practice today and a decision will be made afterward.
Since Mattingly has not played since last Monday in Boston (June 27), placing him on the disabled list would be retroactive to June 28 and he would be eligible to be activated July 14, the first game after the three-day All-Star Game break.
"I see the merit, in a sense, that I don't want to come back Thursday and have the wrist bother me Friday and then I've lost all the time I've been out," said Mattingly.


Village Where Fourth of July Harks Back to Day's Meaning
This tiny village, tucked away in the hills of Dutchess County, has never commemorated the nation's birthday by lighting the sky with fireworks or dazzling children with a brassy parade down Main Street.
The Fourth of July is taken a bit more seriously than that here.


Electronic Christmas Comes Early for Insiders
I HAVE seen the exercise bicycle that connects to a video game, the calculator that walks like a spokesmodel and the interactive multimedia storybook based on the novelization of the movie of the novel "The Secret Garden." I have seen the television receiver with a serial port.
I have seen modems that plug into cellular phones.
I have survived the Chicago Summer Consumer Electronics Show (CES).
CES is a sort of Christmas in June where the world of electronics parades its shiniest new wares, from upmarket high-fidelity audio equipment to utterly populist video games, all of them dependent in one way or another on fast-flowing electrons.
What emerges from this venerable conference is that virtually all of those electrons are converging upon the personal computer.
Next year, in fact, the show will officially be renamed CES Interactive.


Foundation Grant Sought To Start 50 Small Schools
An ambitious plan to create 50 new small schools in New York City is the centerpiece of a proposal that seeks a major share of a $400 million gift from the philanthropist Walter H. Annenberg.
The proposal, which has been endorsed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, builds on the experience of 50 other small, experimental schools that have been established over the last few years in the city.
The idea behind the schools is to replace large, overcrowded neighborhood schools with smaller ones in which students, parents and community members share in decision making.


Brooklyn Couple Shot in Robbery Attempt
The owner of a Brooklyn auto-parts store and his wife were shot and seriously wounded yesterday by a man who forced his way into their house and tried to rob them, the police said.
One victim, Victoria Cretella, 35, was shot in the head and was later listed in very critical condition at Brookdale Hospital, said a hospital spokeswoman, Kim Flodin.
The husband, Louis Cretella, 36, who was shot in the back, was in critical but stable condition at Brookdale.


A Couple of Miscues Mean Defeat for Irish
In the post-game's early moments, Jason McAteer paused with hands on knees to absorb the pain of it all.
Then, undaunted at finding no Dutch player to swap jerseys with, the Irish midfielder walked to one side of the Citrus Bowl and, pointing to a large block of Irish fans, began clapping.
Then he walked to the stadium's other side and repeated the gesture.
Ireland was eliminated from the World Cup today by the Netherlands, 2-0, but the Irish aren't going home because of lack of fan support.


An Indoor Picnic for the Fourth


Chess
The accepted word is that in short matches it is crucial to be the first one to win a game.
This was almost, but not entirely, borne out by the world championship quarterfinal matches organized by the Professional Chess Association.
In two of the eight-game contests, the first player to win did so by a wide margin, but in one match, the second player to win eventually took the match.
Moreover, in the remaining match, between Michael Adams of England and Sergei Tiviakov of Russia, even the Englishman's early 2-to-0 lead did not hold up, but after a 4-to-4 tie in the regulation series, he recovered and won the majority of the six overtime speed games.


How Downsizing Diminishes Bennington
To the Editor:
"Radical Answer to a Small College's Woes" (news article, June 23), on the drastic transformation of Bennington College, is uninformative.
The idea of a college's attempting something like "corporate restructuring" may be amusing, but tells nothing about consequences.


New Images Support Planets of Other Stars
MORE possible evidence for the existence of planets around stars other than the Sun has been detected by French astronomers examining new infrared pictures of the disk of dusty particles orbiting the star Beta Pictoris, about 52 light-years away.
The astronomers did not see any planets, but they did observe what they think is the gravitational footprint of at least one substantial planet around Beta Pictoris.
The inner region of the dust disk around the star appears to be swept clear of particles, indicating the possible effect of an orbiting planet.


Gay and Lesbian Youth Still Wait for Stonewall's Promise
To the Editor:
"From Night of Rage, Seeds of Liberation" (front page, June 23), on the original Stonewall riot, notes that gay activism after Stonewall "cracked the shell of shame and silence that many had been forced to live inside." While that observation is certainly true for millions of adult lesbians and gay men, sadly it does not describe the condition of lesbian and gay youth.


INSIDE
Testing Russian Capitalism
Russia is replacing vouchers with money, a new stage in converting to a market economy, and that will test whether the system works.
Page A3.
Fed Rate Rise Unlikely
Federal Reserve policymakers, at a two-day meeting starting today, will probably decide not to raise short-term interest rates.
Page D1.
Former Health Chief Dies
Dr.
David Axelrod, whose policies when he was New York State's Health Commissioner became models for the nation, was 59.
Page D14.
Cause of Crash Unclear
Investigators focused on weather and a possible wind shear in the crash of a DC-9 jet that killed 37 on Saturday in Charlotte, N.C.
But other causes were being considered.
Page 28.


Miscellany
*
GCI Group, New York, has acquired Jennings &amp; Co., San Francisco, a high-technology communications agency.
The terms were not disclosed.
Joseph W. Jennings, the former chairman and chief executive of Jennings, will head the company, renamed GCI Jennings, in a similar capacity.
Thomas Mattia, a former executive vice president at Hill &amp; Knowlton, Los Angeles, will be president and chief operating officer. *
Diane Seaman, former vice president of sales at Fox Broadcasting, New York, and Beverly Weinstein, former vice president of sales at Whittle Communications, New York, have opened Markham Media Inc., New York, a television sales company.


In Losing, U.S. Hopes It Nevertheless Won Interest of a Country
To the beat of Brazilian drums, the Americans marched through the brilliant sunshine and onto the field past a star-spangled sign that read like a mantra: "You Gotta Believe."
Two hours later, Ernie Stewart bent over at midfield, put his hands over his freckled cheeks and, with the drums still beating, sobbed because all the believing had ended in a predictable result: a Brazilian victory.


Northern Yemenis Intensify Attacks on South


Violence Begins at Home
An evening in Anywhere, U.S.A.
John and Jane Doe are in their bedroom.
Above them, and clearly audible, a man is beating a woman.
He is shouting, she is weeping.
The Does look at one another; Mr.
Doe then looks toward the phone.
Should he call the police?
A none-of-our-business shrug, and he turns off the light instead.
The scene is a fiction -- a television spot that is part of a new public education campaign from the Family Violence Prevention Fund.
But it is also a fact.
Millions of Americans have known for a long time what it is to hear the neighbors battling, or see a wife take a punch from her husband.
Those that didn't know do now.
The story of O. J. and Nicole Simpson has become a national teach-in.


How Nature Makes a Butterfly's Wing
THE spray of colors on a butterfly's wing, a vivid pattern painted with the iridescent dust of thousands of tiny scales, ranks among nature's more entrancing mysteries.
Though some like to keep wonders inviolate, others find a greater pleasure in understanding the elegant genetic machinery by which such beauty and diversity are generated.
For the latter, an article in the current issue of Science goes a long way toward explaining the miracle of how a butterfly's wing is made.
A team of biologists at the University of Wisconsin in Madison has traced out how a handful of genes become activated in the embryonic wing disks that are secretly budding while the butterfly is still a lumbering caterpillar.
The genes produce substances that mark the position of each cell in the future wing with almost the precision of defining squares on a piece of graph paper.
Once the coordinates are fixed, another crew of genes sketches out the dance of eyespots, chevrons, bands and dashes that make up butterfly wing patterns.


Russia Lurches Further Along the Capitalist Road
Nearly two years ago, Russia embarked on the most crucial part of its effort to become a market economy: selling the property of a state that once owned everything and thus founding a nation of property owners with a stake in the success of economic reform.
When the end of price controls wiped out savings, the Government chose to conjure up a middle class by giving away most state property, issuing 144 million vouchers free to every Russian to turn into shares.


New Reactor Solves Plutonium Problem
To the Editor:
Your June 26 editorial about the Integral Fast Reactor repeats a false accusation that the reactor, now in the final stages of research, is being developed as a breeder reactor.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Mutual Funds Quarterly Review
Losses prevailed among mutual funds in the second quarter, as stocks, bonds and the dollar all tumbled.
The bright spot remains Japan, and at home, financial services stocks.  [ Page D7. ]
Small investors kept pouring money into mutual funds in the first half of the year, despite wild swings in domestic stock prices and some poor performances abroad.
Their tenacity surprised some money managers, who had predicted that individuals would sell shares in a declining market, magnifying the downward spiral for all.  [ D7. ]
The S.E.C. requires funds to disclose very little about bailouts of mutual funds.
A series of bailouts this year, of money market funds and a Paine Webber bond fund, raise questions about what investors should be told.  [ D7. ]
John B. Neff, the man behind Vanguard's giant Windsor fund, has been vindicated this year after a slump.  [ D7. ] The Economy
Federal Reserve policy makers, who begin an eagerly awaited meeting today, will probably decide after long and spirited debate that the economy is slowing enough that they need not immediately raise short-term interest rates again.  [ D1. ]
Like many farmers, David Rothermel praises the Government's efforts to become more helpful.
But he sees the myriad Government programs and regulations as a drain on the time he needs to spend on the 2,900 acres he has planted.  [ D1. ]
The Treasury has adopted new tax rules under which corporations gain much greater flexibility in allocating prices among parent companies and their foreign subsidiaries.  [ D3. ] International
As the dollar has plunged almost daily to new lows against the yen, it is easy to conjure up images of traders in speculative frenzies.
But trepidation has triumphed over adventurism.  [ D1. ]
After pouring billions of dollars into China in recent years, Taiwan's investors are slowing their activity there.  [ D1. ]
The chairman of Alcatel-Alsthom of France was arrested for questioning over possible misuse of company funds.  [ D1. ]
The fall of the Schneider real estate empire claimed its first casualties in Germany's banking industry.  [ D2. ]
Russia will begin selling its remaining enterprises for cash, not vouchers, in a new step toward a market economy.  [ A3. ] Markets
The dollar set a record closing low against the Japanese yen in Tokyo before ending slightly higher in London.  [ D4. ] Companies
Once the bondholders of R. H. Macy were regarded as the bankrupt retailer's weakest creditors.
But now, as Federated Department Stores tries to woo Macy into a merger, the bondholders are newly empowered.
News Analysis.  [ D1. ]
Throughout metropolitan New York, new ventures and new companies in telecommunications are popping up.  [ A1. ] Today's Columns
A limited partnership asks its investors to make some tough choices right away.
Kurt Eichenwald: Market Place.  [ D4. ]
Is it possible to conjugate CBS and QVC?
And other questions to ponder.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D6. ]


Road Trips Made Easy, Home Use Still Easier
ON the road or at home, owners of portable computers sometimes need to use a file on a computer in the office, or send or receive a fax, or check a figure on Dow Jones.
Back in the office, they may need to transfer a file from the portable to the desktop computer or onto the network.
Traveling Software of Bothell, Wash., a leader in communications software for more than a decade, has put together all these abilities, and a few others, in its Commworks for Windows, a package that sells for less than $200.


Arafat Set to Leave Tunis To Live in Jericho and Gaza
Yasir Arafat will move permanently in a few days to the newly autonomous areas of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho, senior officials in his Palestine Liberation Organization said today.
Their remarks were the first clear signal that the P.L.O. chairman has been on more than just a visit to Gaza over the last four days, and intends to make the territories his home after years of basing himself in Tunis.


Acid's Role in Heart Ills Clarified in a New Study
SCIENTISTS have long been aware of a statistical link between high amounts of an amino acid called homocysteine and hardening of the arteries, or atherosclerosis, which underlies most heart attacks, strokes and other circulatory problems.
And scientists have theorized that if the high amounts could be detected and lowered by dietary and other modifications, damage from atherosclerosis might be prevented and deaths reduced.
But precisely how the amino acid might lead to atherosclerosis has been a scientific mystery.


David Axelrod, Health Chief Under Cuomo, Is Dead at 59
Dr.
David Axelrod, whose innovative policies as New York State's Health Commissioner for 12 years became models for the nation in the 1980's and 90's, died early yesterday at the Eddy Cohoes Rehabilitation Center in Cohoes, N.Y.
He was 59 years old and lived in Albany.
The cause of death was respiratory failure, said Peter Slocum, a spokesman for the State Health Department.
He noted that Dr.
Axelrod had never recovered from an incapacitating stroke suffered in February 1991, prompting his retirement two months later.


Retirement At The Times
Michael E. Ryan, a senior vice president of The New York Times Company, has retired after 38 years with the company, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the chairman, announced yesterday.
Mr.
Ryan, 56 years old, will be a consultant to The Times, handling special assignments.
He had supervised legal matters and the company's forest products division.
His many areas of responsibility since 1967 have also included corporate development, administration, finance, broadcasting, cable, real estate, human resources and public relations.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on June 24 about the risks in short-term Government bond funds misstated the form in which Lipper Analytical Services Inc. tracks the Franklin Adjustable U.S.
Government Securities Fund, the Scudder Short Term Bond Fund and the Fidelity Short-Term Bond Portfolio.
The three mutual funds are evaluated separately by Lipper; they are not included in Lipper's list of 104 short-term Government bond funds.


Chairman Of Alcatel Is Arrested
In the latest of a series of business scandals that have rocked France, the chairman of the telecommunications and engineering giant Alcatel-Alsthom was arrested today for questioning over possible misuse of company funds.
Pierre Suard, the suave 59-year-old chairman of the world's largest producer of telephone equipment, was held at a Versailles police station.
His arrest came in the midst of a widening investigation into overbilling and misappropriation of funds at Alcatel.
It also coincides with a wave of investigations -- and, in some cases, charges and convictions -- involving French corporate executives.


E. L. Doctorow's New York; A Native of the Bronx Chronicles a Century of the City
Entering Bryant Park, the rejuvenated public square behind the New York Public Library, the novelist E. L. Doctorow regarded it, a lovely greensward on a lovely day, with the appreciative surprise of an infrequent visitor to the city.
The park, of course, was reopened two years ago after a much-publicized renovation, but for Mr.
Doctorow, a 63-year-old Bronx native clad like a natty tourist in a blue blazer and crisp white trousers, it was a discovery.
"They've done a nice job with this, haven't they?" he said.
It was a curious moment, because Mr.
Doctorow, perhaps more than any other contemporary writer, is associated with New York.
Of his nine novels, seven are set principally in and around the city.
One, "Big as Life," written in 1966, is basically a science-fiction novel in which Manhattanites wake up one morning to find two giant human figures standing immobile in the Hudson River.
But since then, the books have fixed New York at particular moments in history and sought to render it realistically.


Indians Salute Doby by Retiring Number
The Cleveland Indians retired LARRY DOBY's No. 14 on Sunday night in a ceremony honoring the American League's first black player.
Doby, 69, joined the Indians on July 5, 1947 -- 11 weeks after Jackie Robinson became the first black player in the majors with the National League's Brooklyn Dodgers.
Doby, an executive with Major League Properties since 1990, hit .283 with 253 homers and 969 runs batted in in 13 seasons with the Indians, the Chicago White Sox and the Detroit Tigers.
He also coached and managed in the majors.


Zelma George, 90, Civic Leader, Singer and Black Music Scholar
Zelma Watson George, a sociologist, musicologist and performer who broke a color barrier on Broadway in 1950, died on Sunday at University Hospitals in Cleveland.
A resident of Cleveland, she was 90.
The cause was heart failure, said Raoul Abdul, a New York writer and longtime friend.


Corrections
A brief report by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day on June 21, about a lawsuit filed by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company against Unigestion International Ltd., a client of Askin Capital Management, misstated the financial status of Askin.
Askin has not filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, although three investment funds run by Askin have made such filings.


Mutual Funds Quarterly Review; Few Facts Disclosed In Fund Bailouts
When a mutual fund's investments go wrong, and the sponsor decides to bail out the fund, how much do the shareholders deserve to know about what happened?
Not much, according to current rules.
And should prospective shareholders be warned of the past problems?
Not for long, it seems.


When Egos Collide: Twilight at 'Sunset'
Patti LuPone's comment the other day about Andrew Lloyd Webber was terse and scathing: "I have nothing nice to say about the man, so I choose to say nothing at all.".
Two weeks ago, Faye Dunaway, speaking with cool anger, called the producer and composer capricious, a man who changes his mind daily.
But in the last few days, Ms.
Dunaway has opted to remain silent.
"At the suggestion of her attorneys," said Bob Palmer, her manager.


IRAN'S DIFFICULTIES LEAD SOME IN U.S. TO DOUBT THREAT
In the three years since the Iraqi defeat in the Persian Gulf war, Iran's drive to become a regional superpower has been thwarted by a worsening economy and an internal political struggle.
Despite the Clinton Administration's official portrayal of Iran as a rogue regime with similarities to Iraq before its invasion of Kuwait, Teheran lacks the money, military equipment and trained personnel to seriously threaten its neighbors, say a number of experts on Iran outside and even within the Administration.


Three Companies Select New Agencies
Three companies have changed agencies on their accounts.
The Golden Grain Company in Pleasanton, Calif., has moved its account to Young &amp; Rubicam San Francisco from Goldberg Moser O'Neill in San Francisco after eight years.
Billings on the account, for Rice-A-Roni, Noodle-Roni and Near East food products, were estimated at $8 million.


Work and a Gimmick Put Warsaw's Opera On the Musical Map
At a time when the big, cumbersome state arts institutions in Eastern Europe are often stumbling -- the Grand Theater in Warsaw being one example -- feisty smaller companies need a gimmick.
At first glance, the Warsaw Chamber Opera's annual Mozart Festival (this year, June 15 to July 26), in which every single blessed dramatic work Mozart ever composed is presented in fully staged performances, might seem just such a gimmick.
It has certainly put this 33-year-old company on the map.
The troupe tours widely in Western Europe and has an invitation to present its entire Mozart repertory at the Opera-Comique in Paris in the fall of 1995.
And to repeat that trick in Germany, as well.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  FRENCH ROLE IN RWANDA GROWS  The French troops in Rwanda have expanded their role, drawing a line in the sand to stop the advance of rebel forces, as the rebels were reported to have taken major installations in the capital.
A1


No Headline
"It's not the flashiest celebration, but I think it's one of the nicest. It's a chance to see each other, greet neighbors and just think about the  significance of the day before going off to picnics. It brings new meaning to why we celebrate." -- WILLA SKINNER, at the Independence Day ceremony in Fishkill, N.Y.  [ A1:1. ]


Review/Fashion; It's Elegance Again, With Whiffs of 1950's
If you put this season's Paris men's wear photos beside those of a year ago, they would look like the before-and-after pictures advertising some miraculous, life-enhancing elixir.
On your left, the wrinkly, droopy, washed-out before.
And on your right, the retouched, airbrushed after, trim at the waist, square-shouldered, vibrantly colored.
Don't send money, just visit your local retailer six months from now and ask for chiseled suits, shiny fabrics, vibrant colors and a dash of 1940's and 50's elegance.
"They're glamorous clothes," said Jon Weiser, the president of Charivari, who then issued an indictment of the preceding summer.
"Anyone can make a pair of washed linen pants. And they do."


Fernandez and 4 Homers Help Orioles Inch Closer
Orioles 9, Mariners 3
Leo Gomez hit two homers and Chris Hoiles and Mark McLemore had one apiece yesterday, powering the Baltimore Orioles past the Seattle Mariners, 9-3, at Camden Yards.


The Bottom Line Is the Health of All Americans; Increasing the Choices
To the Editor:
For decades, millions of employees and their families have known that whatever their doctor wants to do will be paid for by somebody else.
In theory, at least, a consumer who is also the payer will refuse to buy when price exceeds perceived value.
But a consumer who is not the payer will take the free lunch, and we are facing the fact that there is no such thing as a free lunch.


AIDS Mystery That Won't Go Away: Did a Dentist Infect 6 Patients?
CONTROVERSY over an investigation that linked transmission of the AIDS virus from an infected Florida dentist to six of his patients has flared up again.
Recently, there were suggestions that the infections occurred outside the office of the dentist, Dr.
David J. Acer of Stuart, near Palm Beach, and that he was not responsible for any of them.
These critics contend that the six patients probably became infected with H.I.V., the AIDS virus, through risks that epidemiologists from the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta and the Florida state health department failed to identify or overlooked.


Dollar's Sellers Are Acting On Caution, Not Conviction
As the dollar has plunged almost daily to new lows against the Japanese yen, it is easy to conjure up images of hyperactive traders in speculative frenzies, selling wave after wave of dollars.
After all, that's what was seen on the trading floors of Europe in the dog days of 1992, when a global run on the British pound drove Britain out of the European Monetary System.
That was then, and almost everybody was making money.
This is now.
Everyone -- or almost everyone -- has been losing it, and trepidation has triumphed over adventurism.


Markets Closed
The nation's financial markets were closed yesterday in observance of the Fourth of July.
An article about trading in foreign markets appears on page D4.


500 Houses Are Evacuated As West Battles Wildfires
Strong, dry winds and torrid weather hampered firefighters today as they tried to contain wildfires in desert communities about 100 miles east of Los Angeles.
A fire in the San Jacinto Mountains northeast of here has destroyed seven houses, and officials say hundreds of others are threatened.
By today, they said, the winds were so strong that firefighting planes and helicopters could not fly and residents in about 500 houses have been evacuated.


Europe Fights Invasion of Aggressive American Turtles
THE little American turtles look endearing and innocent and children love to keep them in aquariums, but scientists in several European countries have begun a campaign to stop their importation.
Since the sale of Mediterranean tortoises, also a favorite aquarium species, was banned a decade ago because they were becoming endangered, several million red-eared turtles, or what the French call Florida turtles, have been imported and sold as pets.
The turtles, of the species Trachemys scripta elegans, are also commonly called red-eared sliders.


Political Chasm Is Spanned To Have 2 Bridges Renamed
Naming a bridge might seem a simple enough thing for a Legislature to do, unless, of course, the bridge is in the state of New York.
In a cautionary tale about the ways of Albany, an assemblyman's crusade to rename two Hudson Valley crossings -- one for former President Franklin D. Roosevelt and one for his bitter critic, former Representative Hamilton Fish -- fell afoul of partisan maneuvering and personal pique before finally succeeding on Saturday.


Hevesi Rejects Compromise On Bond Sales
Rejecting a compromise proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi recommended yesterday that the city temporarily retain two companies to act as financial advisers for two important New York City bond sales.
Mr.
Hevesi also proposed that a panel of three to five independent financial experts be consulted on the issue, in which Mr.
Hevesi has urged the hiring of two financial advisers, while Mr.
Giuliani has advocated hiring just one company.


Ultraviolet Studies May Revise Understanding of Food Chain
IN a development that may change the way scientists think about the food chain, Canadian researchers have found that ultraviolet light, which in the short term is known to inhibit the growth rate of algae, may in the long term encourage it.
Although the radiation is harmful to the algae, it is also harmful to the organisms that feed on them, curbing their population over a period of time and allowing the algae to rebound.
In experiments conducted over four summers beginning in 1990, Dr.
Max L. Bothwell, a research scientist with Environment Canada, the Government's environmental agency, found that more algae accumulated in artificial stream beds exposed to ultraviolet radiation than in stream beds protected from the rays.


Sampras, Of Course. Martinez, Really?
On the 15th day, after the Wimbledon weather chart provided a blameless summer weekend during which a pair of Wimbledon champions played flawless tennis to earn their sport's most venerable title, matters reverted back to form and it rained.
But that didn't impede the new reign of Conchita Martinez, who made history on Saturday when she defeated the nine-time champion Martina Navratilova to become the first Spanish woman to win Wimbledon.
Nor did it dampen the spirits of Pete Sampras, the 22-year-old American who retained his Wimbledon crown and further established his autocracy atop the men's game with a straight-set triumph over Goran Ivanisevic on Sunday.


Police Investigate Reported Incidents of Sexual Abuse at Two City Swimming Pools
In incidents reminiscent of last summer's "whirlpooling," in which girls were attacked in public swimming pools, two teen-age girls were sexually assaulted over the holiday weekend at public pools in Manhattan and Brooklyn, the police said.
In contrast to the whirlpooling incidents, in which nearly all of those implicated were teen-age boys, grown men were arrested in both of this weekend's pool attacks.
Steven Merejeido, 22, was charged with sexual abuse in an incident Sunday at the Sunset Park Pool, on 42d Street and Seventh Avenue in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn.
Harry Humbart, 26, was charged with attempted rape and attempted sodomy of a girl yesterday at the Hamilton Fish Pool, at East Houston Street and Pitt Street, on the Lower East Side.


The Bottom Line Is the Health of All Americans
To the Editor:
Proponents of abandoning universal health insurance coverage for something significantly less argue, in effect, that universal coverage, and the means to achieve it, would be just too costly.
But what costs are they conspicuously not counting?


Steinbrenner a Factor In Low Stadium Gate
George Steinbrenner could not have asked for a better birthday present.
He wasn't at Yankee Stadium to receive the present personally on his 64th birthday, but for the modern Yankee doodle dandy it had to be as exciting a gift as a child's first baseball glove.


For Taiwanese Investors, The Mainland Loses Luster
After pouring billions of dollars into China in recent years, Taiwan's investors are slowing their activity there and are looking elsewhere at countries in Southeast Asia.
The slump in Taiwanese investment has accompanied a sharp slowdown in general foreign investment in China.
Late last month, China Daily, an English-language newspaper in Beijing, reported that contracts for foreign investments for the first five months fell 45 percent from a year earlier, to $32.7 billion from $58.76 billion.


Ghost in the Machine
To work with a computer is never to be alone.
We are not talking about big stuff, like the Internet, which enables you to communicate with the world.
We are talking about little stuff, the small conversational tidbits that go back and forth when you and your computer are alone together.
"Wrong command," it says when you forget something.
"Strike any key," it commands when you insert a diskette.
Ask for "Spellcheck" and it obeys.
Computers are, in short, good companions and may be even better ones once they have taken on faces: a goal of scientists, Science Times reported last week, in the U.S., Europe and Japan.
"Facial expression is a more sophisticated way of communications," says Dr.
Akikazu Takeuchi of Sony.
"What we want is not intelligence but humanity."


Buctouche Journal; Acadians Cling to Their Culture, and to Canada
Laurie Hebert, slicing into bacon and eggs in La Sagouine restaurant, says he fears a backlash from New Brunswick's English-speaking majority if Quebec bolts from Canada.
He is afraid that many English-speakers would be angry at seeing themselves cut off from the rest of Canada, and that it would jeopardize the hard-won linguistic, social and economic equality achieved by the French speakers of the Acadian coast of New Brunswick.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Is it possible to conjugate CBS and QVC? Why did L'Oreal name a hair-coloring product Casting?
COULD it be time again for another 20 questions inspired by events in advertising, marketing and the media?
*If Pepsi-Cola offers consumers "the ultimate taste," as commercials proclaim, does that make Diet Pepsi the penultimate taste?


A. Troubetzkoy, 84, Princess and Artist
Alexandra Troubetzkoy Malcom, a Russian princess and an artist who exhibited in this country and in Europe, died on Friday at Cabrini Hospital.
She was 84 and lived in Manhattan.
She had been in declining health for some time, said her daughter, Alexandra Rose.


The Emperor's Bow
To the Editor:
Re "Emperor Visits Site Near Pearl Harbor" (news article, June 25): The Japanese are a people of few words.
While accents may change from prefecture to prefecture, the language of symbols is universal.
When the Emperor, in a somber ceremony, approached the memorial at the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific, bent to place a wreath at the base of the granite monument and bowed for nearly a minute, he expressed with eloquence "shared sadness over the conflict."


Sports of The Times; Brazil Game Good Legacy For America
THEY will always have Stanford.
They will always have that Fourth of July in the sun, with the samba drums booming, with the most glamorous soccer team in the world so desperate that it began to take expansive dives and threw a punishing elbow at the temple of an American player.
They will always have the day they frustrated Brazil for 74 minutes.
They will always have the time they reached the second round of the World Cup, and forced Brazil to dig out its hipper-dipper flicks and feints, before the ball went in the net and Brazil defeated the United States, 1-0.


Dailey's Chairman Planning to Retire
Phillip Joanou, the chairman and chief executive of Dailey &amp; Associates in Los Angeles since November 1983, has announced his retirement effective July 31.
"Sometimes you get to a point where the challenges look the same," Mr.
Joanou said last week, adding that after being "so goal-oriented" all his life, he was seeking time to "pursue personal interests." Mr.
Joanou, who is 61, has been in the advertising industry for 33 years and at Dailey for the last two decades.


Brazil's Romario Makes Presence Felt in Game
"He is one of those guys you don't see for 80 minutes," said Marcelo Balboa.
"And all of the sudden, you see him for one minute and he is scoring the goal."
The little man in question was Romario, and today in Stanford Stadium, Balboa and his American teammates got more than their minute's worth.
The good news for the United States was that Romario did not score a goal; the rotten news was that he was the main reason Bebeto scored the game-winner.


The Bottom Line Is the Health of All Americans; Let Qualifed Doctors In
To the Editor:
As a practicing physician, I was disturbed by your June 25 report that physicians who have not joined health maintenance organizations are often finding the doors shut to them.
You imply that physicians wish to join H.M.O.'s only because they worry about losing income and that, further, we all had the choice to join several years ago but refused to do so.


Encore! This Time Devil Wins Suburban
One day after Holy Bull streaked through the homestretch toward the championship of racing's 3-year-old division, Devil His Due streaked through the same stretch yesterday toward the championship of the handicap division.
And both times, Mike Smith was perched in the saddle, just as he was two weeks ago when he guided Sky Beauty toward the championship of the handicap filly division.
Smith rode to his latest victory aboard Devil His Due in the 108th running of the Suburban Handicap at Belmont Park, outlasting Valley Crossing by half a length and completing New York's "handicap triple" with an encore performance.


Macy Bondholders' New Authority
Once, the bondholders of R. H. Macy &amp; Company were regarded as the retailer's weakest creditors.
But now, as Federated Department Stores Inc. tries to woo Macy into a merger, the bondholders are newly empowered -- and feeling their oats.
Indeed, satisfying their demands has become the key to combining the two retailers in a plan that would simultaneously get Macy out of bankruptcy protection and create the country's largest department store company.


An Unbalanced Guide On the Road to Paradise
The Kingdom of Matthias  A Story of Sex and Salvation in 19th-Century America  By Paul E. Johnson and Sean Wilentz  222 pages.
Oxford University Press. $25.
A charismatic leader who calls himself the Prophet and preaches an apocalyptic doctrine of redemption.
A band of devoted followers willing to abandon their earlier lives.
Rumors of sexual misconduct, followed by other allegations of criminal behavior.
Tension with the local community, culminating in a sensational showdown.
And finally, raucous tabloid headlines decrying the cult, fanaticism in general and the social disorder overtaking the country.


Katz Media in Pact With National Cable
National Cable Advertising and the Katz Media Corporation have, as expected, agreed in principle to a transaction that would merge National Cable, based in Boston, with the Cable Media Corporation, owned by Katz, in Farmington Hills, Mich.
The terms of the agreement to merge the companies, which are advertising sales representatives for cable television systems, were not disclosed.


A Chicago Task Force Versus Police Brutality
The "P.O.V." ("Point of View") series, now in midseason on public television, is advertised as a showcase for independent producers who might otherwise have difficulty getting their work shown in prime time or any other time.
And, indeed, "P.O.V.," which has lately enjoyed a substantial increase of support from the National Endowment for the Arts, fulfills part of its mission by welcoming subjects you are not likely to find on mainstream television.
This season brings, among other things, women with AIDS and women with mental-health problems; machismo in a Hispanic-American family, and the adventures of a man in Adm.
John M. Poindexter's hometown, Odon, Ind., who stole a street sign bearing the Admiral's name and held it for $30 million ransom.


Girl, 5, Is Shot on Swing
A 5-year-old girl whose father thought she had been injured in falling from a swing in a Brooklyn playground yesterday was found to have been shot in the head, the police said.
The girl, whose name was not released, fell at 2:30 P.M. from a swing in a playground at 23d Street and Surf Avenue in Coney Island.
Her father saw that she was bleeding, assumed that she had struck her head and took her to Coney Island Hospital, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck-Mladinich, a police spokeswoman.


Mutual Funds Quarterly Review; Investors Show a Willingness to Take On Risk
Although they pulled back somewhat toward the end, mutual fund investors showed a strong stomach for risk last quarter.
Money flowed into stock funds at home and abroad, despite wild swings in stock prices here and some poor performances in foreign markets.
Money poured out of the supposed bulwarks of safety, bond funds and utilities funds, as both suffered big losses because of the rise in interest rates orchestrated by the Federal Reserve.


Devils Cringe as Stevens Deals With Blues
Scott Stevens, a free-agent defenseman and the Devils captain the last two seasons, has signed an offer sheet with the St.
Louis Blues, the Devils confirmed yesterday.
According to a report in Monday's editions of The St.
Louis Post-Dispatch, the offer sheet was tendered and accepted on Sunday.
The deal is reportedly for $16 million over four years, including a signing bonus of at least $2.5 million.


First Lady's Health Strategy: Accept Less or Gamble It All?
Hillary Rodham Clinton faces a dilemma, and it can be summed up in a barb she once tossed at health-care lobbyists in a private bargaining session here.
"We were trying to work out varying ways of dealing with some of the differences" over national health insurance, recalled Pam Bailey, who heads a coalition of hospitals and medical companies, "and suddenly she said to us: 'Bill and I did not come to Washington to fudge the issue.' "
That was January.
Now, in July, many experts say a national health insurance plan will be passed by Congress only if the Clintons fudge the issue, relaxing their bottom-line demand that the insurance cover everyone and casting the passage of a less ambitious plan as a victory for society.
If the Clintons hold firm, they will be taking a high-stakes political gamble that they may easily lose.
It is a contest of politics and principle, and it is the mark of Mrs.
Clinton that principle remains a contender, at least in the minds of people who know her well.


CHRONICLE
JAMES HERRIOT , author of "All Creatures Great and Small" and other stories about his life as a British country veterinarian, was in a hospital yesterday after he was attacked by a flock of sheep, according to Reuters.
In what might be a scene from one of his books, the 77-year-old writer was apparently trying to stop the sheep from eating plants on his lawn when they butted and trampled him, breaking his leg.


English Star Undergoes Leg Surgery
PAUL GASCOIGNE, the English star, had followup surgery on his leg in London, the Italian League team Lazio announced yesterday.
The Italian news agency ANSA quoted a Lazio communique saying he underwent "light" surgery for the removal of a metallic plate applied when the midfielder broke his leg in two places during practice in April.
Lazio's offices were closed last night when called for details about the ANSA report.


CHRONICLE
MICHAEL DEVITO , a 32-year-old accountant, spends his Fourth of July every year participating in what he calls a sporting event.
Except after this competition, he tips the scale a few pounds heavier than before.
Mr.
DeVito ate 20 hot dogs yesterday at the annual July 4th hot dog-eating contest on Coney Island, assuring him victory for the fourth time in five years.


Health Plans, Side by Side
A look at how the health care proposals put forth by President Clinton and four Congressional committees stack up.
Page D13.


FRENCH ESTABLISH A BASE IN RWANDA TO BLOCK REBELS
France inserted itself more directly into Rwanda's civil war today, establishing a major base here six miles from the advancing Tutsi-led rebel army and manning it with Foreign Legionnaires and paratroopers supported by heavy artillery.
The purpose is to prevent the rebels' westward advance into the safe zone declared by the French intervention force.


A Low-Fat Version of Thailand's National Dish
A TRADITIONAL recipe for pad thai, Thailand's national dish, usually calls for one-half cup of oil.
But pad thai can also be made with water instead, to save on fat.
None of the intense flavor is lost, since it comes from ingredients like fish sauce, red pepper flakes, garlic and tamarind paste.
Fish sauce (nam pla in Thai), rice sticks (also known as flat rice noodles) and tamarind paste are available in some supermarkets and in Asian markets.
If tamarind paste is too difficult to find, omit it from the recipe and use two teaspoons molasses and a little more lime juice.


More Officers Caught in Stings, Police Say
As the New York City Police Department prepared for the release of a report on corruption that is expected to be highly critical of the department, senior police officials announced yesterday that about 10 officers who committed illegal and corrupt acts had been caught in internal sting operations carried out over the last several months.
The officials declined to provide specific details of the latest inquiry, in which officers were recorded on videotape while committing acts of brutality or dealing drugs.


How Pilobolus Keeps Nudity in Its Dances From Being Routine
Nudity is now fairly unremarkable in experimental dance in New York City.
What makes it remarkable at all, says Michael Tracy, a charter member of Pilobolus Dance Theater, is that men are involved.
"Female nudity is nothing new," Mr.
Tracy said.
But Pilobolus, which began baring all early in its 23-year history, was one of the first companies to make use of nudity simply as a choreographic ingredient rather than for shock effect.


On Campus; President of Dartmouth, Fighting Cancer, Seizes the Day
When James O. Freedman, the 58-year-old president of Dartmouth College, discovered that he has cancer of the lymphatic system, he began an informal offering of what might be called Mortality 101: an exploration of the intellectual and moral issues of coming to terms with the inevitability of human death.
"Hearing a physician say the dread word 'cancer' has an uncanny capacity to concentrate the mind," Mr.
Freedman, his hair thinned and whitened by chemotherapy, told the crowd of more than 3,500 at graduation ceremonies for the class of '94.
"That is what liberal education does, too."


Arafat Flies to Jericho for Rally And Swearing In of His Cabinet
Yasir Arafat set foot on the West Bank of the Jordan River for the first time in 27 years today, entering Jericho to be sworn in as the head of a new Palestine National Authority that will administer the town and the Gaza Strip.
Shortly before Mr.
Arafat presided over the first official ceremony -- to appoint 12 Palestinian officials to govern over these lands until free elections are held in October -- the P.L.O. chairman gave a speech to a modest crowd of Palestinians, vowing that this day would represent the start of "a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital."


Girl Is Sexually Assaulted In Public Pool in Bronx
A teen-age girl was sexually assaulted in a public pool yesterday, the third such attack in the four days that New York City's swimming pools have been open this summer, the police said.
In the wake of the latest incident, which occurred at the Claremont Park Pool in the Tremont section of the Bronx, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said additional police officers would be assigned to monitor the city's 33 pools.


Yankees Put Mattingly on Disabled List
The Yankees have waited and waited to make a decision about disabling Don Mattingly because it is Mattingly.
They have waited since last Tuesday to decide because if Mattingly thought he could play today or tomorrow with the injured right wrist, the Yankees would want him.
The wait finally ended last night when Mattingly was placed on the 15-day disabled list.
After Mattingly swung a bat yesterday for the first time since last Monday and did not feel right, Manager Buck Showalter twice told reporters he would inform them whether Mattingly would be put on the disabled list.
But the Yankees waited until the third inning before revealing the news.


Kenmore: Better, but Still Not the Plaza
Since the Kenmore Hotel was seized by United States marshals a month ago, security guards at the front door have stopped asking for bribes from people who want to go upstairs to buy a vial or two of cocaine.
Bright lights now flood the lobby.
Exterminators come every day.
Many of the broken stairwell lights have been fixed, even if some of the broken toilets have not.


Censorship by Death
A 31-year-old writer named Taslima Nasrin has been given until Aug. 4 by a court in Bangladesh to come out of hiding and face arrest on charges of insulting Islam in a newspaper interview.
If she does show up, she risks being killed.
A Muslim fundamentalist political leader has offered $2,500 for her death; snake charmers threaten to release 10,000 venomous cobras unless she is hanged.
Ms.
Nasrin has written a best-selling novel, "Lajja" ("Shame"), that describes the fanatic bigotry directed at a Hindu family in Dhaka by fundamentalists among the majority Muslims after Hindu zealots in India tore to pieces an ancient mosque in Ayodhya in 1992.
A rattled Government has banned her book, and her feminist views are assailed by Islamic radicals as impious.


No Headline
"One of the values we hold dear is integrity, openness and honesty about painful subjects. As a teacher, you seize opportunities to teach by example." JAMES O. FREEDMAN, president of Dartmouth College, on coping with cancer.  [ B7:1. ]


Wounded Golfer Released From Hospital
KIM WILLIAMS, a 31-year-old professional golfer from Boca Raton, Fla., was discharged from Cleveland Metro Health Medical Center yesterday after being shot last Saturday outside a pharmacy in Niles, Ohio.
Doctors decided not to remove a bullet lodged in a rib.
"It's a miracle," Williams said on Monday.
"I'm blessed. It's just God's grace that I'm alive and I'm walking and I'm not paralyzed." She said that she didn't yet know if her swing would be affected and that she would probably not compete in this weekend's Jamie Farr Toledo Classic.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a television review yesterday about "P.O.V.: The End of the Nightstick," misidentified the Government agency that was accused of carrying out a "disinformation" campaign against the Black Panthers.
It was the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


4 Baby Bells Want an End Of Court Role
Four of the seven regional Bell companies, seeking new competitive freedom, plan to ask a Federal judge this week to put an end to the antitrust agreement that broke up the AT&amp;T Corporation 10 years ago.
The four "Baby Bells" -- Nynex, Bell Atlantic, BellSouth and Southwestern Bell -- want to free themselves from restrictions in the antitrust agreement that bar them from entering the long-distance business or from manufacturing equipment.


Anthony D. Berns; Restaurateur, 53
Anthony D. Berns, a New York restaurateur and a member of the family that helped found the "21" Club, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 53.
The cause was colon cancer, said his daughter Rachel Berns.


Corrections
An article yesterday about E. L. Doctorow and New York City misidentified the area where Julius and Ethel Rosenberg lived.
It was the Lower East Side of Manhattan, not the Bronx.


Old Enemies Now Allied Against Crime
The director of the F.B.I., Louis J. Freeh, signed an agreement today to cooperate with Russian authorities in the fight against Russian-based organized crime.
Mr.
Freeh and the Russian Interior Minister, Viktor Yerin, said that both countries were at risk from well-funded criminal gangs, parts of which have increasingly broad international connections.
The prevalence of organized crime in Russia and the evident corruption of many underpaid officials and policemen are widely considered to be undermining the faith of ordinary Russians in market-oriented economic changes.


Real Estate
A LEASE by the Aurora National Life Assurance Company for 136,000 square feet of space in MGM Plaza, a 15-acre office center, is fresh evidence of the city's ability to compete successfully for corporate tenants.
Santa Monica, originally a beachfront resort, has become popular in recent years as a business center.
MGM Plaza is one of a number of low-rise office complexes in the city's Special Office District, a group of suburban-style office buildings set incongruously in an industrial district.


Miscellany
*
Hallmark Advertising and Tassone Stevenson, both of Pittsburgh, have merged to form Hallmark/Tassone.
Terms were not disclosed.
William S. Binstock, former president and chief executive of Hallmark, was named chairman and chief executive of the new agency, while Timothy Tassone, president and chief executive at Tassone, becomes president and chief operating officer.


Record Rain Pelts Georgia; 4 Die in Flood
The stagnant remnants of Tropical Storm Alberto stalled over northern Georgia today, dumping record rainfall on metropolitan Atlanta and causing at least four deaths.
Dams burst, roads were washed out, drinking water supplies were threatened and more than 500 people were evacuated in a triangular area stretching from Atlanta southwest to Columbus and southeast to Augusta.


Tom Hanks as an Interloper in History
When a television news report overheard in "Forrest Gump" mentions American astronauts, the audience can be forgiven for wondering whether the title character will soon be seen walking on the moon.
The charmed life of Forrest Gump has led him practically everywhere else, from the White House (where Presidents Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon appear to be greeting him amiably) to an Alabama boarding house (where he gives pelvis-shaking lessons to a guest, the as-yet-unknown Elvis Presley).
And "Forrest Gump" is such an accomplished feat of cyber-cinema that it makes these tricks, not to mention subtler ones, look amazingly seamless.
As he did in "Who Framed Roger Rabbit?" and the "Back to the Future" films, Robert Zemeckis is bound to leave viewers marveling at the sheer wizardry behind such effects.
Even the opening credit sequence, featuring a feather that drifts along a perfectly choreographed trajectory until it reaches its precise destination -- a fine visual embodiment of Forrest's own path through life -- is cause for astonishment.


Wine Talk
IT'S a hot day and lunch is in a garden -- yours, a friend's or a restaurant's.
Someone calls for white wine.
A bottle is broken out -- something simple, like a Frascati from the suburbs of Rome or a sauvignon blanc from California.
An ice bucket is produced.
And some ice.
The bottle, which was at room temperature, is jammed into the ice to chill it.
Everyone waits.
And waits.
The bottle isn't chilling.


Senator Lieberman Begins Re-election Campaign for 2d Term
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman opened his campaign for a second term today at a diner along a suburban shopping strip, saying he offered Connecticut voters an independent voice for common sense in Washington.
With $4 million in campaign funds and polls showing him to be one of the state's most popular politicians, the 52-year-old Democrat begins his campaign a heavy favorite to win re-election.
Democrats hope he will lead the state ticket to victory as the party tries to regain the governor's office, which it lost to Lowell P. Weicker Jr. in 1990.
Looking for a Record
Connecticut's senior Senator, Christopher J. Dodd, won by more than 300,000 votes in 1992, said the Democratic state chairman, Edward Marcus, "and it's a real possibility that Joe could break that record."


Goal! Goal! How Italian Scored Big With Voters
Time was, especially in a World Cup year, when a stranger could walk into any bar in Italy, order a beer or an espresso, and find instant camaraderie simply by offering the toast, "Forza Italia!" It was about as safe as shouting "How 'bout them Cowboys!" at a Super Bowl party in Dallas.
Nowadays, depending on the bar and its clientele, the stranger could just as easily be picking a fight.
Ever since Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi co-opted Italy's national cheer as the name of his new party, "Forza Italia" has become a muted cry.


Book Notes
Politically Correct
James Finn Garner, a comedian who lives in Chicago, wrote "Politically Correct Bedtime Stories" several years ago as an offshoot of a cabaret-comedy routine in which he made fun of current sensibilities by rewriting old fairy tales using seriously nonoffensive language.
He might have known comedy, but he didn't know publishing, because his book was turned down by the first 27 publishers who saw it.
"Mainly they were form letters," Mr.
Garner said of the onslaught of rejections.
"Some of the letters were nice. One publisher encouraged me to write more, and then when I had a full book they turned it down."


Europe Is Beckoning For U.S. Squad's Best
Even as officials of the proposed domestic soccer league hope to keep them at home, America's World Cup players are receiving a flurry of offers to play in Europe after their unexpected success in reaching the second round.
And although there is already expectant talk of reaching the quarterfinals in the 1998 World Cup in France, the United States faces several crucial decisions in the coming months, not the least of which is whether Bora Milutinovic will remain as coach of the national team.


S.&amp; P. Index To Drop UAL
In the continuing skirmishes among the nation's airlines, score another one for Southwest Airlines.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said yesterday that it would drop the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, from its S.&amp; P. 500 stock index next Tuesday, no matter what the outcome of a shareholders' vote on a bid by United's employees to gain a controlling stake in the company in return for concessions.


The French Don't Look Neutral in Rwanda; Better Than Africans
To the Editor:
Re "France's Risky Rwanda Plan" (editorial, June 24):


Crash Called Consistent With Wind Shear
Shortly after the pilots tried to abort their landing amid torrential rains and gusting winds, USAir Flight 1016 was slammed to earth in a way consistent with what a wind shear would cause, a National Transportation Safety Board spokesman said tonight.
A board member, John Hammerschmidt, also described to a press briefing the desperate efforts of crew members to gain altitude around 6:42 P.M.
Saturday.
The jet, a DC-9-30, experienced "a severe sink rate" just after it veered to the right and tried to circle Charlotte/Douglas International Airport, Mr.
Hammerschmidt said, and crashed, killing 37 people and injuring 20.


Englishman Goes Home Without Yellow Jersey
The dream ended for Chris Boardman in Calais this afternoon and he did not wear the yellow jersey of the Tour de France's leader when the bicycle race traveled hours later to his native England.
He rode heroically at the front of his Gan team, powering it along for kilometer after kilometer of a 66.5-kilometer (41.3-mile) windswept and hilly course in a team time trial.
In the end, though, his teammates were simply not up to his pace.


New York's Lethargic Legislators
New York State legislators were 10 weeks late in approving the budget this year, and consequently had little time left for other important issues.
They have now scattered to campaign for re-election on a record that includes more failure than accomplishment.
Unfinished business could call the members back later, but no one should count on it.
The lateness of the budget and the closeness of Election Day compounded the usual difficulty of getting agreement between a Senate dominated by upstate Republicans and an Assembly dominated by New York City Democrats, with Gov.
Mario Cuomo trying to bridge their differences.


Mystery in Envelope Given to Judge Remains a Mystery
The contents of a mystery envelope in the O. J. Simpson case remained a mystery today.
When the bulky yellowish-brown envelope was turned over on Friday to Judge Kathleen Kennedy-Powell, who is conducting a preliminary hearing in the case, she announced that she intended to open it.


Cherry Corp.(CHER,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Ground Shifts in California's Water Wars
To the Editor:
Re "As Drought Looms, Farmers in California Blame Politics" (front page, June 24):


St. John's Stony Sentinels Are Taking Form


A Pair of Setbacks For DDB Needham
Two major setbacks for DDB Needham involving a longtime client and a key creative executive were announced yesterday.
The Mobil Corporation said that it had placed in review its Mobil 1 synthetic-oil account, which has been handled by DDB Needham New York for more than 30 years.
Billings were estimated at $7 million to $10 million.


Off the Menu
Cub Room
Yesterday the Cub Room opened in SoHo at 131 Sullivan Street (at Prince Street).
Anyone who recalls the Stork Club, high society's favorite night spot decades ago, might also remember that it had a small dining room called the Cub Room.
"We wanted a name that was evocative of New York restaurants and supper clubs in the 1940's," said Philip Saunders, who owns the new Cub Room with Henry Meer, a former sous-chef at Lutece.
The two have taken over a large space that had been vacant for years to create a restaurant, bar and cafe.


Bonds in Lull As Traders Watch Fed
As Federal Reserve policy makers began meeting in Washington yesterday, bond traders sat on their hands, watching and waiting for something that most of them did not expect to happen, at least this week: an official increase in short-term interest rates.
As a result, Treasury securities ended the day almost unchanged.
The yield on the bellwether 30-year bond edged down, to 7.58 percent, from 7.60 percent.
The bond's price, which moves in the opposite direction from its yield, rose 6/32 , to 8414/32 .


The Art and Business Of Courting the Camera
Arthur Elgort's Models Manual
By Arthur Elgort
Illustrated. 384 pages. Grand Street Press. $35.
In this month's Vogue, Claudia Schiffer, the supermodel who combines the knowing poutiness of Brigitte Bardot with the pastoral blankness of a Nordic milkmaid, is pictured lying on a striped bedspread, wearing a bright-pink angora sweater with cap sleeves.
A black-and-white movie is playing on the television screen behind her, but for the moment she pays it no mind.
She is gazing dreamily at us -- the camera, the viewer, the consumer -- and her hand caresses the book she has apparently been reading: "Mrs. Dalloway," by Virginia Woolf.


Shorn and Shod, New Cadets Begin At West Point
The class of 1998 had its first day at the United States Military Academy last week, stepping from a civilian life of family and friends onto the bottom rung of a military experience steeped in discipline and tradition.
Of the more than 1,100 freshman cadets, about 13 percent are women.
Ahead of them lies a grueling summer of basic training; a pair of "broken-in shoes" was ominously recommended by a welcoming brochure.


Digital Negotiating Sale Of Part of Storage Unit
After months of speculation that it would begin to sell off parts of its business, the Digital Equipment Corporation said yesterday that it was negotiating the sale of part of its storage business unit to the Quantum Corporation, a maker of disk drives.
A spokesman for Digital, based in Maynard, Mass., said that the deal with Quantum, which is based in Milpitas, Calif., and recorded $1.7 billion for its 1993 revenue, had not been completed and that no details were available.
But the company acknowledged in a news release that Quantum would acquire some portion of Digital's storage unit, which is estimated to account for more than $1 billion of Digital's $14 billion in annual revenues.
The discussions include Digital's magnetic disk, digital linear tape drive, solid-state disk drive and thin-film heads businesses.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AT&amp;T CORP., Basking Ridge, N.J., announced a series of agreements with Holiday Inn Worldwide, a subsidiary of Bass P.L.C., London, for long-distance services valued at $425 million over four years.
COMERICA INC., Detroit, a bank holding company, announced that Pacific Western Bank, San Jose, Calif., a subsidiary of Pacific Western Bancshares Inc., had merged with Comerica Bank-California, and now operates under the Comerica name.


France Backs Away From Battle in Rwanda
With rebel forces on the verge of victory, France stepped back today and insisted that its two-week military intervention in Rwanda was not intended to influence the outcome of the civil war.
A day after the French force established what officers described as a line in the sand to prevent a military victory by the advancing forces of the Tutsi-led rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front, President Francois Mitterrand, who was on a visit to South Africa, asserted the rebels "are not our enemies, and we are not trying to prevent them from winning the civil war."


METRO DIGEST
NEW TOWER PITS FORDHAM AGAINST GARDEN
To make good neighbors of Fordham University and the New York Botanical Garden again, you might need a fence 480 feet high.
For that is the intended height of a radio tower under construction on Fordham's Rose Hill campus in the Bronx.
What infuriates the neighbors is that the tower is directly across Southern Boulevard from the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory, the lacy Crystal Palace that serves as symbol and centerpiece of the garden itself.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


W. S. Renchard, 86, Banker Who Guided Growth at Chemical
William S. Renchard, who guided Chemical Bank from a largely regional institution into what was to become a global financial power, died on Monday at Glen Cove Hospital.
Mr.
Renchard, who lived in Glen Cove, L.I., was 86.
The cause was a stroke, his daughter, Christine Huffman, said.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about a bond and preferred stock sale by the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, included an erroneous figure supplied by the company for the cash that would remain on its balance sheet if shareholders approve an employee buyout on July 12.
UAL's cash would total $1.5 billion, not $1.07 billion.


A Tower Pits Fordham vs. Botanical Garden
To make good neighbors again of Fordham University and the New York Botanical Garden, you might need a fence 480 feet high.
For that is the intended height of a radio tower under construction on Fordham's Rose Hill campus in the Bronx.
What infuriates Fordham's neighbor is that the tower is directly across Southern Boulevard from the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory, the lacy Crystal Palace that serves as symbol and centerpiece of the garden itself.


Now We're Leaving a Junkyard in the Sky
To the Editor:
It should come as no surprise, as you report in "Space Station Faces Danger From Flotsam" (front page, June 27), that "dead satellites, shattered rocket stages and thousands of other pieces of man-made space junk" are speeding around the Earth, endangering a planned international space station.


CHRONICLE
Former President JIMMY CARTER scaled new heights yesterday when he climbed Mount Fuji, Japan's tallest mountain, The Associated Press reported.
Mr.
Carter began his ascent of the mountain at about 7,600 feet.
With 30 security escorts, he reached the 12,388-foot summit several hours later.


Wellfleet and Synoptics Plan $2.7 Billion Computer Union
Wellfleet Communications and Synoptics Communications said today that they would merge in a stock transaction worth about $2.7 billion, creating a powerful new player in one of computing's fastest-growing markets.
The resulting company, which has not yet been named, would immediately become a dominant provider of the computer communications equipment that businesses use to switch data between computers to share files, send and receive electronic mail and conduct video conferences.


Lumme Gets Multiyear Pact With Canucks
Defenseman JYRKI LUMME has signed a multiyear contract with the Vancouver Canucks, the team said yesterday.
Lumme, 27, had 13 goals and 42 assists last season.
He also accounted for 13 points -- 2 goals and 11 assists -- in the playoffs.
Lumme, a native of Finland, has played for Vancouver for four seasons after being acquired from the Montreal Canadiens in March 1990.
Details of the contract were not disclosed. (AP)


Yankees Put Mattingly on Disabled List
The Yankees have waited and waited to make a decision about disabling Don Mattingly because it is Mattingly.
They have waited since last Tuesday to decide because if Mattingly thought he could play today or tomorrow with the injured right wrist, the Yankees would want him.
The wait finally ended last night when Mattingly was placed on the 15-day disabled list.
After Mattingly swung a bat yesterday for the first time since last Monday and did not feel right, Manager Buck Showalter twice told reporters he would inform them whether Mattingly would be put on the disabled list.
But the Yankees waited until the third inning before revealing the news.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  A SHIFT ON HAITI POLICY  The Clinton Administration abruptly changed its policy and said it would no longer accept Haitians intercepted at sea.
Instead they will have temporary "safe haven" in Panama and other countries.
A1  A boat with Haitian refugees overturned, killing 150 people.
A8


Judge Allows Deportation Of Drug Dealer
A Federal judge in Manhattan reluctantly refused to block the deportation of a convicted drug dealer to China yesterday, even though the judge acknowledged that he could be sending to his death a man who had helped the United States prosecute a number of important drug cases.
"It is not disputed," said Judge Charles S. Haight, that the defendant, Sik Sze Yan, 42, "faces a very real risk of assassination if he is returned to China."


Broken Bone No Barrier As Mitchell Slugs Away
Reds 9, Marlins 4
An X-ray discovered a bone fracture in Kevin Mitchell's left foot.
It didn't seem to bother the slugger.
Mitchell led the way with two of Cincinnati's five home runs as the Reds won their fifth straight game, scoring a 9-4 victory over the Florida Marlins in Miami last night.


Bank Penalized for Mislaying Bonds
As almost every bank that has struggled with glitches in its automated teller machines can attest, the transition to high-tech, computerized banking can be both costly and embarrassing.
Just ask the Seattle First National Bank.
In a highly unusual action, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency jointly announced late last week that Seafirst, as the banking company is known, had agreed to settle charges that it lost track of nearly $3 million in municipal and corporate bonds.
The bonds were supposed to be shipped to a New York clearing bank, but they ended up in the hands of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Food Notes
The Food Network Moves
The Television Food Network, which is broadcast around the clock in many cities, has had to cut back its hours in Manhattan.
The original agreement between the Time Warner Cable Group, which owns Paragon and Manhattan Cable, and the food network was for it to share Channel 50 with a New Jersey public broadcasting station, WNJN.
Earlier this year, however, the food network was able to begin broadcasting around the clock on Channel 54 because that channel was not being used.
But on July 4, WNBC started broadcasting "America's Talking," its 24-hour talk-television program, on Channel 54, through an earlier agreement with Time Warner.


Business Leader to Leave Cabinet in South Africa
President Nelson Mandela suffered the first serious loss from his young coalition Government today when the most influential capitalist in the Cabinet announced that he would quit as Finance Minister in October.
Mr.
Mandela moved swiftly to reassure jittery investors by naming a prominent former bank chairman, Chris Liebenberg, to succeed the official, Derek Keys, and vowed that the business-friendly economic policy Mr.
Keys helped shape would continue.


Executive Changes
CS FIRST BOSTON CORP., New York, named Gordon Paris a managing director working with leveraged buyout groups.
COMERICA MORTGAGE CORP., Detroit, named John R. Haggerty president and chief executive.


25 Years Later, Wiseman Goes Back to School
Back in 1968, when Frederick Wiseman was a cinema verite pioneer, he made average-length films like "High School," which captured the all-American educational system in action at a Pennsylvania school.
"You don't talk, you just listen!" yells a burly, crew-cut teacher as he bullies a student into putting on a gym uniform.
Some things have changed since then.
Mr.
Wiseman is now a master of the epic documentary.
And his new, 3-hour-40-minute film, "High School II," brings his leisurely but incisive style to Central Park East Secondary School, an alternative public school in East Harlem.
It urges its students, a multiracial mix that includes political organizers and teen-age parents, to talk, listen and think for themselves.
Both "High School" and "High School II" open today at Film Forum 1.


Youth Is Killed in Brooklyn Gang Conflict
Under the aural cover of Fourth of July fireworks, eight men with semiautomatic handguns and a submachine gun strolled up to a group of youths hanging out on a street in East New York, Brooklyn, on Monday night and opened fire, the police said, killing one teen-ager and wounding four other people.
Two of the wounded were bystanders.
The shooting was apparently in retaliation for an incident several days earlier in which shots damaged a car belonging to a member of a gang engaged in "an ongoing dispute between project thugs," said Detective Thomas Ferro of the housing police.
"Word on the street is that a street war is about to escalate," the detective added.


Of Beauties and Beasts Loose in a Stylish Jungle
Beautiful women, artfully coiffed and draped.
Hunky men, nursing bruised egos.
Improbable plot lines, piled on fast to defy any threat of logical analysis.
Welcome once again to the escapist-trash world of Aaron Spelling, the producer whose astoundingly successful career began with series like "Charlie's Angels" and "Dynasty." More recently, Mr.
Spelling and Fox Broadcasting discovered that in a business devoted to surface images, they were made for each other.
Mr.
Spelling is responsible for two of Fox's most successful series: "Beverly Hills 90210" and "Melrose Place." Each puts a predictably attractive cast through diverting soap-opera paces.
But Mr.
Spelling clearly prefers glitzier pastures, the kind Joan Collins campily traipsed about in "Dynasty."


Amway Asia Pacific Ltd.  (AAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Ground Shifts in California's Water Wars
To the Editor:
Re "As Drought Looms, Farmers in California Blame Politics" (front page, June 24):


Second Act for DelBello, Who Makes Senate Bid
F.
Scott Fitzgerald once told the world "there are no second acts in American lives," but Alfred B. DelBello seems not to have paid attention.
After the curtain came down in 1985 on his first act -- a successful nine-year stint as Westchester County's executive and two exasperating years as New York State's lieutenant governor -- Mr.
DelBello bade farewell to public office.
He chose instead to work as an executive in a garbage-recycling company and then as a land-use lawyer here, leaving him far more financially comfortable than he had been in public life.


Actidev Inc. reports earnings for Year to April 30


Correction
An editorial on Sunday, "African Despair, and Hope," misstated the annual amount of U.S. development aid to sub-Saharan Africa; it has hovered at about $800 million for the last three years.


Clinton Focusing on the World Economy
President Clinton declared today that United States security and the success of his Presidency are tied to economic growth worldwide, and that the major industrial nations have a rare chance "to create jobs in a world of prosperity."
Just before leaving for Europe and the annual summit meeting of the seven major industrial democracies, Mr.
Clinton used a gathering of business leaders and diplomats at the Commerce Department to make the case that his policies have revived the economy and asserted global leadership.


The French Don't Look Neutral in Rwanda
To the Editor:
"Rwandan Enemies Struggle to Define French Role" (front page, June 27) states that 1990 was the "last time the French sent paratroopers to Rwanda." This is incorrect.


Walesa, Once Atop a High Pedestal, Seems to Stand on a Slippery Slope
Once considered the country's most admired man for his defiance of Communist rulers, Lech Walesa is viewed today as one of Poland's most unpopular politicians.
The former union leader, who was elected President four years ago, has transformed himself into an emblem of broken promises, a character driven by power rather than a savior of the underclass.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Forget Stuns Medvedev in Swiss Open  Guy Forget, a wild-card entry from France, stunned the second-seeded Andrei Medvedev in straight sets yesterday during the first round of the $485,000 Swiss Open in Gstaad.
The Ukrainian, ranked eighth in the world, was beaten, 6-3, 7-5.
Medvedev's downfall was sealed after he sprained the little finger of his racket hand during the second set.


Personal Health
ON March 28, Thomas Rezza, a collegiate swimmer from Massachusetts who was on his spring break in Key West, Fla., dived from a motel pier into the murky, shallow waters of the Atlantic Ocean and broke his neck.
He was paralyzed from the neck down and suffered severe brain damage.
Eight years earlier, 17-year-old Aaron Stromholt of Key West also became a quadriplegic after diving from that pier, which extends 300 feet from the shoreline, prompting some people to expect deep water below despite signs proclaiming "No Diving, Shallow Water." Two years before Mr.
Stromholt's accident, Robin Schimmel, a high school senior and football hero, met with the same fate off the same pier, and two years before that accident, another young man had a similar one.


Simms May Do His Passing From ESPN or Fox Studios
Phil Simms has not yet been able to catch on with another football team since the Giants cut him three weeks ago, but he may still be calling signals this fall in a television studio near you.
Simms, one of the game's best quarterbacks ever, was released after 15 years because of his age (38), a recently operated-upon shoulder and a $2.5 million salary.
But he has drawn a large amount of interest from ESPN and Fox as a football analyst.
Simms had an audition with ESPN Friday; it is unclear if the audition was for studio analyst, color commentator or both.


Debate on Sexism Lands in the Pentagon Bookstore
The battle over sexism in the United States military has reached ground zero: the Pentagon bookstore.
At a time of heightened sensitivity to sexual harassment in the armed services, a handful of service members are objecting to the prominent display of a sales rack for Penthouse and Playboy magazines in a store whose shelves run more toward titles like "A Higher Form of Killing" and "The Grunts."


Johnson Is a Crowd Pleaser Who Attracts a Crowd, Too
This may be summer and the games might not count, but Leslie Johnson was being given everything she could handle this afternoon.
This was the bronze medal game of the Olympic Sports Festival women's basketball competition.
Johnson, the dynamic center for Purdue, was playing for the North today against the East.
Every time the ball went into the pivot, Johnson was surrounded by two, and sometimes three, defenders.
Every time, all game.


A's Can See the Top Of Mediocre Division
About two months ago, Stan Javier approached Ron Darling and another one or two of his teammates with a bizarre thought.
"He came up to us," Darling said, "and said, 'Close your eyes and just think what it would feel like if we came back and won this.' It brought a smile to our faces."


5 Bids Seen for Madison Sq. Garden
The bidding has apparently been narrowed to five prospective buyers for Madison Square Garden, the New York Knicks and New York Rangers sports teams and the MSG cable television network, two New York business executives familiar with some aspects of the sale said yesterday.
The two executives, who spoke separately and have no business ties to each other, named four of the same bidders as finalists: the Liberty Media Corporation; Nike Inc.; a partnership of the Cablevision Systems Corporation and ITT Hartford Insurance, and a partnership of The New York Times Company and the Delaware North Companies, a sports concessionaire whose holdings include the Boston Garden.


Where Thoughts of Simpson Linger
At the Potrero Terrace Market, a short uphill walk from where O. J. Simpson grew up in a housing project, Jack Woo watched the first week of televised court proceedings against his former customer and offered his own snap analysis.
"So far, so good," Mr.
Woo said.
"Not much evidence against O. J."
He remembers an 8-year-old boy who used to come in, the picture of politeness and youthful energy.
"Give me a bubble gum, Mr. Woo; give me Bazooka bubble gum," the market owner, now 70, recalled his words.


Scott's Hospitality reports earnings for Year to April 30


Stocks End Day Mixed, With the Dow Up 5.83
Stocks were mixed yesterday, following the lead of the dollar, bonds and commodity prices.
After opening narrowly lower, blue-chip issues were able to quickly reverse course amid strength in the oil sector.
Aside from that, many market participants either did not make it back from the holiday weekend yet, or they simply preferred to await the outcome of the meeting of the Federal Reserve's open market committee, the Fed's policy-making arm, that began yesterday and concludes today.


EATING WELL
The bagel: Not exactly a low-cal nosh. C4.


Cost-Cutting Fervor Can't Save Bill to Kill Some State Mandates
Thus far this year, the watchword in New Jersey's capital has been cost cutting, from cuts in income taxes to the virtual elimination of two state departments.
But one change that would have saved local municipalities more than $10 million was stymied at the 11th hour.
For decades, towns have had to foot the bill for actions required by one state law or another.
Passing bills that require special training of municipal workers or specific tests or expanded bureaucracies has been a favorite pastime in the Legislature.
For lawmakers, it has been an easy way to seem to solve problems without worrying about the cost to the state itself.


A Menu Tailored to a Summer Evening
LIGHT soups, served hot and made with fresh greens, a little pasta and eggs, fill the bill on warm -- but not hot -- summer evenings.
It is especially important to use a good stock, since the quality of the stock is more apparent in lighter soups.
I make mine from chicken and turkey carcasses or from raw poultry neck bones, which I save in the freezer until there are enough to use as a base for stock.
My stock is totally defatted and salt-free, so I've added salt to the recipe; if a commercial broth is used, omit the salt.


Eating Well
BAGELS have become a staple of the healthful eater as well as the dieter, taking the place of Danish pastries, croissants and even muffins for those pursuing fewer calories and less fat.
But those virtuous eaters are in for sticker shock.
Even without a slathering of butter or cream cheese, some bagels sold in New York contain more than 500 calories each.


Potomac Electric Power Co.  (POM,N) reports earnings for 12mos May 31


Ground Shifts in California's Water Wars
To the Editor:
Re "As Drought Looms, Farmers in California Blame Politics" (front page, June 24):


Many Joined the Stonewall March to Support Equal Rights
To the Editor:
"Invisible People, Made Visible" (editorial, June 28) states of the June 26 march in Manhattan to mark the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall rebellion: "tens of thousands of gay men and lesbians marched to commemorate the evening in 1969 when police, harassing patrons of a gay Greenwich Village bar called the Stonewall Inn, met fierce resistance for the first time."


Mississippi In '64: Fact Vs. Fantasy
IT was stunning the other day when a local television news anchor mentioned the 30th anniversary of the brutal slayings of three civil rights workers, Andrew Goodman and Mickey Schwerner, white New Yorkers, and James Chaney, a black Mississippian, by the Ku Klux Klan.
"It was this incident," she said solemnly, for those whose grasp of history might be shaky, "that inspired the movie 'Mississippi Burning.' "


No Lead Is Safe as Yanks Stumble Again
Pick an inning, any inning, last night and the chances were decent that the Yankees mishandled a lead against the Athletics.
If you chose the second, fifth or seventh innings, you would understand why it was another frustrating night at home for the Yankees.
Their leads vanished faster than hot dogs at the concession stands.
While the occasional hot dog is edible at Yankee Stadium, there was nothing appetizing to Manager Buck Showalter about watching Terry Mulholland lose 2-0 and 4-2 leads and then watching Greg Harris follow with an imitation of the starter by botching a 7-6 edge.


Texaco Will Sell U.S. Fields
The Texaco Corporation announced yesterday that it would sell about half its 600 producing fields in the United States and cut 2,500 jobs as part of broad move to reduce costs.
The cutbacks, among the largest in United States oil operations, come after a two-year cost-cutting effort that shrank Texaco's work force by 13 percent, to 32,000 people.


No Day in Court for Baby Bells
The seven major regional phone companies, known as the Baby Bells, rejoiced when the House voted last week to let them compete against long-distance phone carriers and cable-television operators.
But the Baby Bells feared the Senate would backtrack and keep them out of long-distance phone markets for years to come.
So they are planning to petition the courts this week to set them free.
The courts ought not to oblige.
It is a historical quirk that U.S.
District Judge Harold Greene has ruled telecommunications policy since he presided over the breakup of AT&amp;T into seven regional offshoots 10 years ago.
But Congress, not a judge, is supposed to make national policy.
And the Senate is on the right track, even if the Baby Bells disagree.


Ex-Haitian Leader Told to Pay Victims
Ruling that a deposed Haitian leader is responsible for acts committed by his Government, a Federal judge awarded $41 million Friday to six political and labor leaders who said they were tortured on orders from Gen.
Prosper Avril when he was President of Haiti.
The decision is a warning shot to Haiti's current rulers, said lawyers for the Center for Constitutional Rights, which argued the case and announced the ruling today.
It was handed down by Judge Wilkie Ferguson.


Saberhagen, Perfect in 6, Shows Stuff Of All-Star
Once Bret Saberhagen threw that one nasty curve to strike out Mark Carreon, no one could avoid the thought.
Saberhagen had been behind by 3-0 against Carreon, the Giants' right fielder, and he had come back to leave Carreon gaping at a 3-2 pitch for the strikeout.
It was a masterly pitch, and it left everyone from the fans to the Giant hitters wondering whether Saberhagen was about to throw his second career no-hitter, or perhaps even a perfect game, this afternoon at Candlestick Park.
"I saw that pitch," said Todd Hundley, the Mets' catcher, "and all I could think was, 'Man, I'm glad I'm not facing him today.' I have to admit, I was thinking about the no-hitter then." First Mistake of the Day
The Carreon strikeout ended the fifth inning and Saberhagen cruised through the sixth and then faced Darren Lewis leading off for the Giants in the bottom of the seventh.
On a 2-2 count, Saberhagen made his first mistake of the day, giving Lewis a pitch that he pulled over the fence in left field to spoil Saberhagen's bid for a perfect game and what would have been the first no-hitter in the 32 1/2-year history of the Mets' franchise.


CHRONICLE
WILLIAM M. KUNSTLER will turn his attention away from the courtroom, if only for an evening, when he celebrates his 75th birthday tomorrow night.
His wife, MARGARET RATNER, is giving him a party at Gus's Place, a restaurant on Waverly Place that was recently shown in the movie "The Paper" (as was Mr. Kunstler).
Yesterday, the flamboyant Mr.
Kunstler said all the requisite modest things about not wanting to celebrate.
But he was quick to add, "I love a party, so what can I do but go in good grace?"


U.N. Reports New Cases Of Harassment by Serbs
Bosnian Serb police officers beat about 40 Muslim refuge-seekers outside the United Nations refugee-relief office in the northwestern town of Banja Luka on Monday night in the latest in a series of incidents of harassment aimed at uprooting the area's Muslim population, a United Nations official said today.
"Beating people up right outside the United Nations office is taking things to a new level of intimidation," said the Sarajevo spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Kris Janowski.


Many Joined the Stonewall March to Support Equal Rights; Gay, Black and Obese
To the Editor:
The upper-middle-class white gay community is no better than its straight counterparts.
Stonewall 25 was a bust in my opinion.


Stevens Says Blues Will Pay Him $17.5 Million
Scott Stevens had trouble hiding his joy here this morning in discussing the contract offer he has signed with the St.
Louis Blues that will make him, by far, the highest paid defenseman in the National Hockey League.
Stevens said in an interview here this morning that he had a four-year contract with the Blues for a total of $17.5 million, of which $3 million was a signing bonus.


More Hope for Spinal Injuries
THE longstanding assumption that severe spinal cord injuries cause permanent, incurable paralysis is being challenged by studies suggesting that some "dead" nerve cells can revive or regenerate.
The findings open the possibility that doctors may one day be able to reverse part or all of the crippling caused by accidents that crush or sever the spinal cord.
Most of the studies, conducted in animals, involve the transplantation of nerve cells from fetal spinal cords.


Gerard Coad Smith, 80, Is Dead; Atom Arms Expert and Lawyer
Gerard Coad Smith, a principal arms negotiator for the Nixon and Carter Administrations, an expert in the intricacies of nuclear weaponry, as well as a noted lawyer, died on Monday in Easton (Md.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 80 years old and had lived in Easton since moving from Washington in 1989.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


In America; Dyson the Disdainful
The thing about John Dyson is that he doesn't even bother to keep up a front.
Most politicians, as they engage in the long-term mugging of the electorate, try to finesse things a little.
They tell you how wonderful you are and what great things they are going to do for you.
They lie, but they do it engagingly, with pretty words and lots of embraces, the political equivalent of flowers and chocolate.
Ronald Reagan was peerless at this.
Americans seldom felt better than during the period when Mr.
Reagan and his henchmen were masterminding the wholesale transfer of capital from the middle class and the poor to the very, very rich.


Wildfires Kill 11 in Spain


Pacific Bell Selects Goodby, Silverstein
Pacific Bell said yesterday that it had selected Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners of San Francisco to handle its account, with billings estimated at $30 million.
The account had been handled by Foote, Cone &amp; Belding San Francisco until the agency and the company parted in April over potential conflicts presented by the relationship between a sibling Foote, Cone agency, FCB/Leber Katz Partners of New York, and an important client, AT&amp;T.


Days of Hope and Testing for Biogen
Biogen Inc., one of the few biotechnology companies that make money, should know by the end of the summer whether it is ready to grow into an operational drug manufacturer, with substantially larger earnings.
The company, based in Cambridge, Mass., already earns royalties on drugs and vaccines, which it developed and licensed to large pharmaceutical companies including Schering-Plough, Merck and SmithKline Beecham.


Empire of Hotels Riddled With Crime and Drugs
On April 30, 1975, the day Saigon fell to the Communists, Tran Dinh Truong boarded one of his 11 ships in the harbor and fled with two suitcases full of gold.
After arriving in New York, Mr.
Truong used his gold and his shrewd sense of opportunity to buy up shabby hotels.
In Buffalo, he bought the Lafayette.
In New York, he bought the Opera, sold it, and bought the Longacre, the Carter and the Kenmore.


Accounts
*
Paging Network Inc., Plano, Tex., to Larkin, Meeder &amp; Schweidel Inc., Dallas, to handle advertising for its Pagenet paging services account, previously handled by Rumrill-Hoyt, Rochester; Joiner Rowland Serio Koeppel, Dallas, and May &amp; Co., Dallas.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.


Market Place; Message From Insiders Is 'Buy'
The dollar is down, and interest rates are up.
There is talk of a new bear market.
In that atmosphere, who would want to buy stocks?
Corporate insiders.


New Bosnia Peace Plan Has Serb Corridor
The United States, Russia and the European Union unveiled a new plan today to end the war in Bosnia that they described as a "peaceful ultimatum" and a last chance to avoid a mounting conflict in the area.
"It would be a mistake of historic proportions for either party to believe they can serve their people well by rejecting this plan," Secretary of State Warren Christopher said after a sometimes strained meeting of foreign ministers here.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.38
3.82
3.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.31
4.18
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.74
4.64
3.11
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.29
7.32
5.78
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.58
7.60
6.68
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.37
8.44
7.41
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.47
6.48
5.72
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Advocate in Budget Fight
Public Advocate Mark J. Green asked Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday to restore $325,000 that was cut from his office's budget, saying the Mayor's rationale for the cut was no longer valid.


Douglas Is Reportedly Hospitalized
The former heavyweight champion JAMES (BUSTER) DOUGLAS was reportedly hospitalized in Columbus, Ohio, and is said to have been in a diabetic coma.
WBNS-TV of Columbus said that Douglas, 34, was in stable condition yesterday afternoon at Grant Medical Center.
A hospital spokeswoman, KAREN WALDBILLIG, said the family asked that no information be released.


INSIDE
French Back Off in Rwanda
With Rwandan rebels near victory, the French appeared to pull back and said they did not intend to influence the outcome of the civil war.
Page A6.
Winds' Role in Crash
Federal safety officials said the plane crash on Saturday in which 37 people died showed indications of being caused by wind shear.
Page A12.
Chipping at Simpson Alibi
Testimony from a limousine driver helped prosecutors challenge O. J. Simpson's alibi.
Page A16.
From Saigon to the Kenmore
He left Vietnam with two suitcases of gold and ended up with a string of shabby New York hotels.
Page B1.
Italy and Bulgaria Advance
Italy beat Nigeria in overtime and, in the first game in this World Cup decided on penalty kicks, Bulgaria defeated Mexico.
Page B9.


Leave Somalia Alone
Once again, United Nations peacekeepers are crouched behind sandbags watching Somalia's factions fight it out.
This round of fighting, the heaviest since before the United States-led intervention in December 1992, was started by Ali Mahdi Mohammed, who means to drive his rival, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, out of Mogadishu once and for all.
To its credit, the U.N. hasn't gotten involved in the clashes.
Yet its inaction raises a question: if the peacekeepers aren't keeping the peace, what are they doing?
Why did the Security Council extend the mandate for the operation in Somalia until the end of September?
The cost will be more than $300 million, beyond the $1.5 billion already spent.


In Shift, U.S. Will No Longer Admit Haitians at Sea
After a sharp increase in the number of Haitians seeking asylum, the Clinton Administration abruptly shifted policy today and said it would no longer allow refugees intercepted at sea to be resettled in the United States.
Instead, Haitians fleeing by boat who qualify for asylum will be taken to Panama or other Caribbean countries until the political crisis in their country is resolved.


Cannes Winner to Open New York Film Festival
"Pulp Fiction," the film that won the top prize, the Palme d'Or, at this year's Cannes International Film Festival, will open the 32d New York Film Festival on Sept. 23 at Lincoln Center.
The festival will run through Oct. 9.


WIC Western International reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bulgaria Has Winning Touch at Shootout Time
The World Cup got its first penalty-kick shootout today, and its finish produced the eerie sight of about 70,000 people on their feet, standing stark still and silent.
That's approximately how many in the Giants Stadium crowd of 71,030 seemed to be rooting for Mexico, but it was Bulgaria that won.
The Bulgarians put three of their four tie-breaker shots into the net, to just one for Mexico, and won the game, 1-1 (3-1 in penalties) to advance to the quarterfinals, where they will meet Germany in Giants Stadium on Sunday.


Man Is Guilty In Sex Abuse Of L.I. Girl
Sal Inghilleri, who was the closest thing to a father figure in the troubled life of Katie Beers, was convicted today of sexually abusing her when she was 8 years old.
A Suffolk County jury took only an hour and a half to convict Mr.
Inghilleri, a 41-year-old disabled taxi driver from Bay Shore, who testified in his own defense last week, maintaining that he had never abused Katie and that the police had coerced him into signing a confession.


DIVIDED LATVIANS AWAITING CLINTON
A hundred yards from the idyllic spot where President Clinton plans to toast Latvia's independence and democracy after his arrival Wednesday morning, a crowd of 2,000 to 3,000 angry Russians chanted and waved signs today, denouncing Latvian "fascism" and "apartheid."
Mr.
Clinton is the first American President to visit the Baltic countries, but the symbolism of his visit is blurred by its timing.


Oh, for the Life Of the Mediterranean
A MAN is squinting at paint chips in hues of deep yellow, gold and orange at a store on Canal Street in lower Manhattan.
He wants to turn his TriBeCa loft into a patch of Tuscany.
"You know," he says, "faded but sunny."
A woman whose leather briefcase, gold watch and harried expression say Serious Professional emerges from a taxicab near Times Square, espadrilles first.
Steam from a nearby subway grate catches her purple and orange sarong.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; As Taco Bell puts its account in review, the question becomes: Where's the spice?
FIRST came the disappointing report of flat quarterly earnings for Pepsico Inc.
Then there were the rumblings in the trade press -- "Bell Tolls for FCB," one headline in Adweek stated.
So, when the Taco Bell Corporation, a Pepsico unit, said yesterday that it was placing its account, estimated at $150 million in billings, up for review, it was hardly a surprise.
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding's San Francisco office has represented the whole Taco Bell enchilada for nearly six years now.
Given Taco Bell's prior success, the real surprise will be the introduction of a new advertising and marketing strategy, a move alluded to in a statement yesterday by Kenneth Stevens, the president of Taco Bell: "While we have seen tremendous growth of our business in the last several years, we believe it's time to take a fresh approach with our advertising to maintain our competitive leadership profile."


Many Joined the Stonewall March to Support Equal Rights; Laws Change Slowly
To the Editor:
Your "Stonewall Revisited" special report (front page, June 23) states in describing life in 1969, "Landlords could evict gay tenants, and an employer could evict gay workers." That accurately states the law in 1969 America.
Unfortunately, it still applies to the law in 1994 in 41 of the 50 states, including most of New York State outside of New York City.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Named Kip Motta assistant coach.


Summer Deals a Hand for Fun


Rap Star Is Arrested on Driving License Charge


Sports of The Times; Roberto Baggio Stops Ugly Trip Back Home
YOU could say Roberto Baggio was not having a wonderful World Cup.
In the first 359 minutes of this tournament, the best soccer player in the world had no goals, and what is worse, he was receiving -- in the Rodney Dangerfield sense of the phrase -- no respect.
Not only had he been removed from the field in Italy's second game, for strategic purposes, but he had also been called "a wet rabbit" by the man who pays his extensive salary on the Juventus team in Turin.
That is exactly what Gianni Agnelli, the proprietor of Fiat cars, called him after Baggio's rather wimpified performance against Mexico.


Sports of The Times; A Soccer Shootout in The Shadows
THEY were wearing all forms and all shades of green, white and red.
Large flags were wrapped like a serape around their shoulders.
Small flags were perched on the tall crowns of straw sombreros.
Some had the colors painted on their faces, many on dozens of different T-shirts.
Others were parading with red and green lettering on white bedsheets.
"Viva Mexico," one banner shouted.


Turmoil in Haiti Dims Future of Its Students
Like most other children of eighth-grade age here, Yves St.
Hilaire has never known regular schooling.
This year Haiti's schools were open for a total of about five months as classes were delayed, interrupted and then abruptly ended because of the economic sanctions and ensuing turmoil.
It has been like this since February 1986, when a popular uprising forced Haiti's President, Jean-Claude Duvalier, to flee the country.


Hit Makers Warily Explore the Computer Frontier
When Geffen Records released the previously unavailable Aerosmith song "Head First" as a computer file on the Compuserve on-line network last month, it was heralded as a technological and commercial triumph.
Compuserve subscribers with PC's were now able to download the song for free and listen to it at their leisure.
But some hackers are wondering just whose side Geffen is on.
Where other on-line songs that are just as long as the 3-minute-14-second "Head First" take less than 10 minutes to download, or transfer into a sound file, it takes from 60 minutes to several hours to download the Aerosmith song, depending on the speed of the modem being used.


G.O.P. Leader and Pataki May Resolve Feud
The Republican Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, has agreed to be chairman of a major fund-raiser for one of his most bitter rivals: Senator George E. Pataki, the leading Republican candidate for governor.
But the arrangement does not seem to have ended the factional warfare that has plagued the Republican Party for months.
Mr.
Marino and Mr.
Pataki have feuded since Mr.
Pataki was elected in 1992 with the help of an anti-tax organization, Pack-Up, that had worked against Mr.
Marino's re-election that year.
Mr.
Marino, the most powerful Republican in state government, unsuccessfully sought to block Mr.
Pataki's nomination at the Republican state convention in May.


Public &amp; Private; What They Stand For
Bob Dole appears to be running for President.
This is scarcely notable; Mr.
Dole always seems to be running for President or preparing to run or thinking about running.
He is this generation's Harold Stassen, a man known more for what he seeks than for what he believes.
But what Mr.
Dole and his fellow Republicans really believe will soon become critical, not only for their party but for all of America.
Moderates were quietly confident that a move to the middle would follow the incendiary and exclusionary rhetoric of the 1992 Republican Convention.
But they were wrong.
The Christian Coalition, the religious right group that coalesced around Pat Robertson's failed bid for the Presidency, has emerged a powerful phoenix from the ashes of that debacle, fielding candidates for everything from school boards to Congress.


Prosecutors Use Testimony of 2 Men to Suggest Simpson Had Time to Commit Killings
Testimony by a friend living in a guest house on O. J. Simpson's estate and a limousine driver who took Mr.
Simpson to the airport helped prosecutors suggest today that he was away from his home when his former wife and a friend of hers were stabbed to death at her own house, about two miles away.
Mr.
Simpson has said through his lawyers that he was home around 11 o'clock on the night of the killings, June 12, waiting for a limousine ride to Los Angeles International Airport for a business trip to Chicago.
But in recent days the prosecution has sought to place the time of the killings as earlier than 11, and that effort continued today with testimony from the two witnesses at a Municipal Court hearing that will determine whether Mr.
Simpson stands trial on murder charges.


Mental Illness Comes In All Shapes and Sizes
To the Editor:
In "Is Bad Writing a Mental Disorder?" (Op-Ed, June 20), Stuart A. Kirk and Herb Kutchins, two professors of social work, fault the American Psychiatric Association for revising its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, soon to be published in its fourth edition, apparently believing an earlier edition was the last word on mental illness.


Drownings of Haitians Rise As Island Exodus Continues
As the number of Haitians seeking to flee the country by boat continues to rise, the number of people drowning at sea is also mounting.
Many here say that rough seas and the flimsiness of the craft many Haitians use in attempting their flight will create even more casualties if the exodus of people by boats continues.


Cogeco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Baggio Brings a Last-Gasp Victory for the Italians
There is no two-minute warning the way the rest of the world plays football.
There is no need.
If you are ahead you play through the moment.
If you are behind you ignore it.
That is the crushing lesson Nigeria will take home from Italy's dramatic 2-1 overtime victory this afternoon, after the most important game in its modest soccer history was reduced to two minutes that stood between the Super Eagles and their most memorable triumph.
Emmanuel Amunike's goal in the 27th minute was about to send Nigeria to the quarterfinals of the World Cup and create the earliest exit for three-time champion Italy since 1974.
A red card against Italy, in the 75th minute, compounded Nigeria's advantage and forced the Azzuri to compete one man short in the decisive moments.
With Nigeria's most famous athlete, the basketball star Hakeem Olajuwon, holding a small flag high above the field at Foxboro Stadium, his countrymen were about to take their own step up on to a global stage.
The clock ticked upward, and two minutes remained.


Politics and Municipal Bonds: A Bubbling Stew in Louisiana
For eight years now, Mary L. Landrieu, the 38-year-old Louisiana State Treasurer, has been attacking the good-old-boy network that allowed politicians to steer lucrative municipal finance business, often at taxpayer expense, to their families and friends.
Her record is impressive.
No longer are tax-free bonds issued by cities and towns here for no reason other than to generate fat fees for a coterie of local lawyers and bankers.
No longer are small-town banks propped up by cheap deposits courtesy of the state.
And no longer does Louisiana borrow money without professional oversight and without competitive bids from dealers selling its bonds.


Metropolitan Diary
THE CONVERSATION: Overheard one Monday morning by Laura Thompson, teacher, and Caraig Seip, guidance counselor.
The scene: A private school on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.


Roadway Services Inc.(ROAD,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 18


Island Gatekeepers; Across Two Centuries on the Ferry
It takes just two minutes to cross the churning channel that separates Shelter Island from the Hamptons.
But for the family of William Y. Clark, it is a ferry ride that has lasted more than 200 years.
Since 1790, one or another member of the Clark clan has escorted travelers through the tricky currents of Shelter Island Sound.
First it was a rowboat and the strength of a Clark man's arms that got people from shore to shore, delivering them across a waterway that was frequently shrouded in fog or clogged with ice or alive with the chatter of terns and gulls and osprey.


Stevan Dohanos, A Stamp Designer And Illustrator, 87
Stevan Dohanos, a leading illustrator who designed 40 United States postage stamps and painted many covers for The Saturday Evening Post, died on Monday at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 87.
The cause was pneumonia, said the Society of Illustrators in New York, of which Mr.
Dohanos was a lifetime member.
He served as its president from 1961 until 1963.


Lobby for Small-Business Owners Puts Big Dent in Health Care Bill
The National Federation of Independent Business did not need to engage in any soul-searching debate on health care.
Almost from the moment President Clinton's plan was announced, the lobbying group representing small-business owners knew what it wanted to do: kill the requirement that employers buy health insurance for their workers.


Guarding Gascon Honor In a Duel Over Confit
It was hot and muggy; a day for cucumber salad.
Instead, two dozen chefs and food writers gathered at La Colombe d'Or to witness a duel of duck legs, a confit conflict.
All in the name of culinary accuracy.
None other than D'Artagnan -- the foie gras and duck dealer, not the Dumas hero of "The Three Musketeers" -- threw down the gauntlet.
At issue was whether the duck legs had to be salted for 12 hours or so before they were simmered in duck fat to make confit, as tradition dictates in Gascony, where it is a specialty.


Police Project On Street Vice Goes Citywide
Proclaiming success at recent attempts to combat quality-of-life crimes in the West Village, the New York City Police Department said yesterday it would take the strategy citywide by giving precinct commanders increased power to fight everything from graffiti to public beer drinking and prostitution.
The initiative, a draft report of which Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani plans to announce today, will give the city's 75 precinct commanders more autonomy in addressing types of behavior like aggressive panhandling and public drunkenness, problems the Mayor has called "visible signs of a city out of control."


AT WORK WITH: Joe Allen; No Ambition, Just Success
JOE ALLEN was sitting at a corner table in the theater district restaurant that bears his name.
He had finished his chicken salad and bottled, no-fizz water and was talking in little spurts about his life and relationships.
Mr.
Allen, who is 61, shares few characteristics with many of his colleagues in the restaurant business.
He is not a greeter, nor is he particularly comfortable with strangers, although he often sits at the bar.
There, he chats laconically with friends, which he said translates to "looking at the world through a thin cloud of cynicism."


Sebokeng Journal; Mandela Is Facing Squatter Challenge
It was here, on a dusty stretch of veld about 40 miles south of Johannesburg, that Jacob Raboroko and his flock of 300 established a ramshackle settlement three months ago.
They called it Canana -- Canaan in the Sotho language -- for the promise that the land held in their quest for a home of their own.
Three months later, Canana is less a promised land than a crowded squatter camp of 3,200 people whose presence is a sign that the new Government of Nelson Mandela cannot move fast to enough to make good on its promise of housing for the poor.


Dutch Are Rising to Level Of 1974, 1978 Glory Days
The Orange Flame from the Netherlands, as the Dutch like to call themselves, is rising again in this World Cup in a way reminiscent of 1974 and 1978, when the Dutch reached the championship game of those tournaments.
After an average showing in the first round, the Dutch unleashed a spark in the second round of their 2-0 triumph over Ireland here Monday that earned them a date with Brazil Saturday in Dallas.


Southwestern Public Service Co. (SPS,N) reports earnings for 12mos to May 31


Colleges Caught in Middle As Parents Seek Best Deal
To get into the college of his choice, Lyndon Allin knew that he needed good grades, high scores on his college entrance examination and a lot of financial aid.
He also needed some gamesmanship.
Mr.
Allin, one of the nation's top-ranked high school graduates, was accepted by some of the nation's leading institutions.
Northwestern University, which costs $24,283 a year, offered him $8,700 in scholarships and loans; Vanderbilt University offered $13,000, about half its annual costs.


Walesa's Star Fading
Lech Walesa, who will greet President Clinton on his second stop in Europe, has become one of Poland's most unpopular politicians.
Page A10.


Wanted: An Air-Conditioned Taxi
There comes a time in the New York summer when the pavement heats up for good, and the air rushing up the subway stairs seems ablaze with the fires of Hades.
It is then, even more than in the depths of winter, that New Yorkers are apt to say: "What the heck, let's take a cab." An air-conditioned cab.
This summer that cool, comfortable ride has been a rare thing indeed.
Here comes that cab, its windows rolled up, pretending to be cool inside, but actually as hot as the subway platform the New Yorker sought to avoid.
The problem: the Plexiglas partitions that separate drivers from passengers keep the cool air in the front.
The partitions were once optional.
But as of last Friday the Taxi and Limousine Commission made them mandatory, the aim being to protect drivers from robbery attempts.
The drivers are safer -- and cooler, too.
But now the passengers swelter and swear.
Tips will no doubt decline as the temperature rises.


Arafat's Jewish Neighbors
While Yasir Arafat formally installed his provisional government in Jericho, Anna Meller sat a mere two miles away today in this Israeli settlement and contemplated the befuddling ways of diplomacy that had suddenly brought her this new neighbor.
Yasir Arafat virtually next door? It is fine with her, she decided.


Big Hopes Put on Electric Wires
Even as cable television and telephone companies clamor to provide the main information pipeline into American households, another industry is quietly looking for an opening.
Electric companies, which already have wires running to virtually every home, are devising ways to send bits and bytes along with the kilowatts that course through those circuits.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Mary L. Landrieu, the Louisiana State Treasurer, has shaken up the old-boy network that let politicians steer municipal finance business to their families and friends.
Her latest attack is on an arrangement in which First Boston and Lazard Freres say they were coerced into giving half their fees from a recent deal to a firm that did no work -- but whose owner can deliver votes for Gov.
Edwin Edwards.  [ Page A1. ]


Strawberry Shows Flashes of Old Form
In his first games since admitting to a substance-abuse problem three months ago, DARRYL STRAWBERRY has found his familiar home-run stroke.
Strawberry went 2 for 4 with a home run for the Class AAA Phoenix Firebirds in Monday night's 9-7 loss to Vancouver at Peoria, Ariz., and then hit a third-inning homer last night.


Prudential May Face New Round of Lawsuits
After complaining that their brokers misled them into joining a criticized class action settlement, some former clients of Prudential Securities who lost millions in a real estate investment may be getting another day in court.
But the litigation this time would focus not on securities trades, but rather on a more unusual contention: that some Prudential brokers were practicing law without a license.
A ruling quietly issued recently by a Federal judge has caused a number of former clients and their lawyers to explore bringing new litigation against the firm and its brokers for actions they say were taken in the class settlement of claims arising from Prudential's sale of the VMS Mortgage Investment Fund in the late 1980's.


People
*
James B. Giffin was named to the new position of president at Big Idea Inc., New York.
He was previously vice president at Austin Knight Advertising, New York.


Parallan Computer
Shares of Parallan Computer Inc., which rose last week on an agreement with the International Business Machines Corporation letting the software maker sell I.B.M. technology and products under its own name, fell sharply yesterday because the company will no longer receive financing from I.B.M., its leading source of revenue.
Parallan said it would show significant losses for the quarter and year.


Candy to Be Honored by the Argonauts
John Candy will be remembered this season by the Toronto Argonauts, the Canadian Football League team he owned along with WAYNE GRETZKY and BRUCE McNALL.


Record Heat Fuels 34 Wildfires in the West
After a week of searing heat in the Southwest, crews battled fires in 11 states today at the start of what officials said could be an unusually dangerous fire season.
Here in the Southern California desert, and around the Southwest, record heat, dry air, erratic winds and lightning storms have come together to create what one Federal official called "explosive fire conditions."


Corrections
A chart yesterday describing the work of Congressional committees on health care gave an incomplete description of legislation proposed by the House Education and Labor Committee.
In addition to a version of President Clinton's plan, the committee also approved a bill that would create a Canadian-style single-payer system.
This bill would provide all Americans with a standard package of benefits, paid for by a payroll tax of 8.4 percent on big companies and 4 percent on small ones, a 2.1 percent tax on incomes, an increase of the cigarette tax to $2 and a tax on ammunition.


Basil Vlavianos, 91, Educator and Editor
Basil Vlavianos, an educator and editor who was a prominent member of the Greek-American community, died on June 27 in Alexandria, Va.
He was 91 and had moved to Alexandria from Yonkers four years ago after the death of his wife, Katie.
Mr.
Vlavianos made Hellenism the central theme of his life's work.
He was the editor and publisher of The National Herald, a Greek-language newspaper, from 1940 to 1947.
From then until 1961 he taught political science and regional studies at New York University.
He was the editor in chief from 1978 to 1981 of the daily Proini, a Greek-language sister publication of the English-language Greek American.


Raging Waters Across Georgia


Sports of The Times; Is Sports On Trial With O. J.?
WHILE the O. J. Simpson murder case and continuing pretrial hearing have made an immediate impact in regard to proposed legislation in some states to curb domestic violence, and while this has encouraged more women to ring hot lines to battered women's shelters, the case has, in a fashion, also put sports in America on trial.
Is this what we make of our celebrated athletes: Men who believe they have the right of entitlement, which includes the physical abuse of their spouses, or to stalk and intimidate their former wives or girlfriends?


No Evidence Clears Dentist in AIDS Case
To the Editor:
In "The Gay Card" (column, June 26), Frank Rich tries to discredit Kimberly Bergalis and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention documentation of transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus from dentist to patient by stating that the "Big Lie technique" was used to "vilify" David Acer, the Florida dentist who infected six patients with AIDS.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Carpeting a Tree
Q.
There's a large dogwood in my front yard under which grass does not grow.
Would you recommend a ground cover here, and if so, what type? -- Mary Ann Tappero-Rovere, Rockville Centre, L.I.


Reading Mixed Signals
Is President Clinton really willing to risk American lives to restore democracy to Haiti?
Aides say Mr.
Clinton has not decided what to do.


Balkan War-Crimes Prosecution Bogs Down
More than a year after the United Nations created a tribunal to punish war crimes in Croatia and Bosnia, no cases have been brought and Russia, Serbia's historic ally, is blocking efforts to name a chief prosecutor, American officials say.
The hopes of bringing such war criminals to international justice, the officials said, have been dimmed by wrangles among United Nations member nations and lack of enthusiasm among key European allies, who fear that prosecution might interfere with the continuing search for a diplomatic settlement.


U.S. Moves to Exclude 2 Lawyers
The United States Attorney in Manhattan argued yesterday that William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby should be disqualified from representing a defendant accused of conspiring to bomb New York City landmarks because the lawyers' earlier involvement with other defendants in the case would pose a conflict of interest.
The two lawyers represent Ibrahim A. El-Gabrowny, who was initially charged with interfering with the investigation of the World Trade Center bombing and who is now charged as a co-conspirator in an alleged bombing plot.
But until he recently obtained a new lawyer, they also represented Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, a major defendant in the case who has recently agreed to cooperate with the Government.


One of Game's Finest Will Come Full Circle
The last time Buck Leonard put on a baseball uniform in Pittsburgh as a player, the emotion that struck him was the same as always.
And it was not love.
He played there admirably for nearly two decades as a member of the Homestead Grays, the dominant team of the Negro leagues.
Leonard, who played Lou Gehrig to Josh Gibson's Babe Ruth, is one of a handful of survivors who can testify first-hand to what that era did to the hearts and minds of a people.
Now age 86, he can also testify that time has healed a lot, in the United States, in Pittsburgh, in baseball.
And on Tuesday, when an old Homestead Gray walks into Three Rivers Stadium as the honorary captain of the National League All-Stars, the healing will be all but complete.


Goodfellow reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


L.I.R.R. Has a New Front Door at Pennsylvania Station


Bruno Schachner; Lawyer Was 82
Bruno Schachner, who practiced law in Manhattan for more than four decades, died on Saturday at New York Hospital.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Times Company Is Selling Its British Golf Magazines
The New York Times Company has agreed to sell its three British golf magazines to IPC Magazines, a subsidiary of the British-Dutch publisher Reed Elsevier P.L.C., the two companies said yesterday.
The magazines, which are published and circulated in Britain, are Golf World (U.K.), Golf Weekly and Golf World Industry News.


Florsheim Selects J. Walter Thompson
The Florsheim Shoe Company said yesterday that it had selected J. Walter Thompson Chicago to handle its account, which had been previously handled by Nahser Advertising of Chicago for the last three years.
Billings were estimated to exceed $6 million.
Thompson was awarded the account of the men's shoe maker and marketer after a two-month review that was narrowed to two other finalists: Campbell Mithun Esty and McConnaughy Stein Schmidt Brown, both of Chicago.
A campaign is expected to begin in the fall.


Memorial for Schneerson
A memorial service for Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, who headed the worldwide Lubavitch Hasidic movement from 1950 until his death in June, will be held at 6 P.M. on Sunday at Congregation Shaare Zion, 2030 Ocean Parkway, Gravesend, Brooklyn.
The gathering signifies the end of the 30-day mourning period after Rabbi Schneerson's death.
There will be eulogies and rabbinical commentaries in Yiddish, Hebrew and English by leading Orthodox rabbis, including Rabbi Abraham B. Hecht, President of the Rabbinical Alliance of America, and Rabbi Meyer Shapiro, former Chief Rabbi of Buenos Aires.


Carolina Freight Corp.(CAO,N) reports earnings for 12wks to June 18


Bridge
Slightly more than half a century ago, there were exactly three unhappy bridge players in New Delhi.
One of them, Tim Horan, solved their problem with a visit to the airport.
He was in the Office of Strategic Services, and knew that an O.S.S. civilian was about to make a stopover.
"Are you the Alfred Sheinwold who writes for Culbertson?" he demanded.


Y.&amp; R. Alliances In Central America
Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising said yesterday that it was establishing five new agency partnerships in Central America and a regional network linking those shops.
The agency said it had agreed to purchase a "substantial equity interest" in Eco S.A. of Guatemala City.
Terms were not disclosed.
The new shop, called Eco/Young &amp; Rubicam S.A., will be headed by Eduardo Toriello, the managing partner of Eco, who will continue in that role.


Bosnia Map: A Bitter Pill; Clinton's Tough Step Supports Serbs' Gains
In drafting and backing a new map for a territorial settlement in Bosnia, the Clinton Administration has taken a difficult step: it has formally backed the handing over to Serbs of towns in which they killed, imprisoned or evicted tens of thousands of Muslims.
The map, a copy of which was shown to The New York Times, was formally handed to the Muslim-led Bosnian Government and the Bosnian Serbs today, and they were given until July 19 to respond.


Astros' General Manager Undergoes Surgery
The Houston Astros' general manager, BOB WATSON, underwent successful surgery yesterday for removal of his cancerous prostate gland.
The team said the surgery was performed at Barnes Hospital in St.
Louis.
Watson, 48, was expected to remain hospitalized for five days before returning to Houston.
Watson said last week that the cancer was discovered after a prostate specific antigen blood test by his personal physician. (AP)


Mets' Pitchers Take Advantage of Punchless Giants
No wonder the Giants want Darryl Strawberry in their lineup as soon as possible.
No wonder they are happy that Strawberry has declared himself ready for major league baseball after only three days of work with the franchise's Class AAA franchise in Phoenix.
The Giants need offensive help. And they need it desperately.


Spaniard Wins Stage, but Not Hearts
Like the Wife of Bath, the Pardoner and the Man of Law, the Tour de France traveled to Canterbury.
Plus Royal Tunbridge Wells.
And the Garden of England in southern Kent.
Also Piltdown, hometown of the hoax prehistoric man.
This was the Tour's first visit to England in 20 years and only the second in the bicycle race's 91-year history.
Organizers' predictions that a million people would watch today's stage were spot on, as they say here.


42d Street Says Move Over SoHo
A lot of pedestrians on the predominantly vacant strip of 42d Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues looked bemused yesterday.
Some took a moment to look into what was described as a peep show, a traditional fixture of the street.
Then they shook their heads.
Lurking behind the windows of a newly painted electric yellow facade, the site of a former pornography shop at 228 West 42d Street, were photographs of a variety of people, from President Clinton to Nelson Mandela to men and women on the street, holding up an electric-yellow sign reading "Love." Clearly, this was not what most viewers had expected to see.
Nor were the unrecognizable faces beneath the coming-attractions signs in vitrines flanking the Empire Theater.
Or the messages on some of the movie marquees, one of which read "My Reflection Splattered by the City Bus Onto My Pants." But one image familiar to everyone was Dr.
Seuss's Cat in the Hat, which appears in a mural-size painting at No. 232. 'Ringmaster' of the Imagination
"The Cat in the Hat is the ringmaster of your imagination," said Cee Scott Brown, the executive director of Creative Time, a 20-year-old nonprofit contemporary-arts organization.
"He's saying 42d Street can be magical."


Hurt by Bond Plunge, Salomon Foresees a Record Loss
Stung by losses in its stock and bond holdings, Salomon Inc. said yesterday that it expected to post a net loss of about $200 million for the second quarter.
The after-tax loss would be the largest ever reported by Salomon, whose investment banking and securities unit, Salomon Brothers, was rocked by the plunge in bond prices earlier this year.
Salomon lost $130 million in the fourth quarter of 1984 -- up to now, the worst quarterly hit it has ever taken.


Intermetco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Fed Fails To Move On Rates
The Federal Reserve ended a two-day strategy session on monetary policy today without announcing an increase in short-term interest rates or explaining its apparent inaction.
Analysts took this to mean that the central bank, which had raised rates four times since early February, was satisfied with early signs that the economy is slowing enough to minimize the risk of resurgent inflation.


Rostenkowski's Lawyers Unveil Strategy
Representative Dan Rostenkowski's lawyers said today that their strategy would open with a Constitutional attack on the 17-count felony indictment against Mr.
Rostenkowski in an effort to win a quick dismissal, or at least a narrowing of the charges, before the case comes to trial.
At a half-hour hearing in Federal court here, Dan K. Webb, Mr.
Rostenkowski's chief lawyer, said the defense would file three motions by Aug. 3 arguing that many of the counts should be dismissed because the Constitution shielded Mr.
Rostenkowski from intrusions by other branches of the Government.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  U.S.
REHEARSED HAITI INVASION  American forces secretly rehearsed a plan to seize the airfields and ports of Haiti two weeks ago.
Such an operation, if approved, would be aimed at ousting Haiti's military rulers.
A1


Excerpts of What the Commission Found: Loyalty Over Integrity
Following are excerpts from the final report of the Mollen Commission, which spent 22 months investigating police corruption in New York City.
Summary
What we found is that the problem of police corruption extends far beyond the corrupt cop.


Haiti Adds Rape To Asylum Claims
To the Editor:
Your June 26 report on the difficulty Haitian rape victims face in proving their asylum claims, as detailed in the case of an activist who fled after having been assaulted by four police agents, highlights the inadequacy of our present asylum system in dealing with the claims of women.


A Fortuny Lamp Made for Romance
MOST lamps are designed to read or work by.
Mariano Fortuny's lamps were designed mainly for romance.
In the 1920's, Fortuny, the Spanish designer who invented a technique for pleating silk, also designed opulent, fanciful lamps inspired by turbans, shields and pagodas.


Striking Oil but Straining Families
When Jimmy Josey left for work recently, he hugged his two young sons and kissed his wife goodbye.
But instead of heading to nearby Bilco Tools in his pickup truck, he drove about 40 miles northeast to New Orleans International Airport.
Then, starting his 28-hour journey to the oilfields of Kazakhstan, he moved into the routine that is now part of his life in the domestic oil industry: He heads overseas, for a month at a stretch, to teach Kazakh, Hungarian and Russian workers to operate drill pipe-handling equipment made by his company.


Ukraine Is to Russia As Ireland Is to Britain
To the Editor:
In "Same Roots Nourish Russia and Ukraine" (letter, June 28), Michael Averko states that Ukraine and Russia cannot be considered separate nations because they are too related, citing as a comparison Scotland, Wales and England, the components of Britain.
Mr.
Averko forgets that Ireland was once part of Britain, and is now (save for six counties) an independent nation.
This is despite a great number of the very interrelationships he cites, including a common language, an interrelationship Russia and Ukraine cannot claim.


Where to Find It
MANHATTAN'S best-known hair salons are not noted for bargain prices.
Haircuts typically cost $60 to $200, and color treatments can start at $50 and zip past $300.
But most top salons also offer cuts and color that cost $20 or less.
The bargains can be found at training sessions for salon assistants, who are licensed cosmetologists but not yet full-fledged stylists.
To become a stylist, assistants at most well-known salons are required to take training classes for up to two years, in which they cut, color, perm and style hair on volunteers or, in salon parlance, models.


15 Killed as Downpours Inundate Georgia
The relentless downpour in Georgia continued today and the resulting death toll rose to 15 as rivers pushed toward record crests.
The downtown area of Macon, a crossroads city of 106,000 in the center of the state, was ordered evacuated this evening.
Two major highways that link Atlanta to points south, Interstates 75 and 16, were closed by broken dams or flooding rivers.
In a reminder of the devastating flooding in the Midwest last summer, streams overwhelmed water purification plants and ruined the fresh water supplies for a half-million people.


U.S. Planning New Controls Over Poultry
The Agriculture Department will propose poultry inspection rules next week that would prohibit any level of fecal matter on the birds, officials said today.
The proposed regulations, meant to reduce the level of disease-causing bacteria, would also require that all birds contaminated with fecal matter be reinspected and that the birds be sprayed with anti-bacterial rinses before they are chilled.


Buster Douglas Being Treated for Diabetes
JAMES (BUSTER) DOUGLAS was hospitalized in serious but stable condition and was being treated for complications of diabetes, the Grant Medical Center in Columbus Ohio, announced yesterday.
Douglas, 34, was being treated for diabetic keto-acidosis in the hospital's coronary-care unit.
The announcement was the first statement the hospital has released about the former champion since he was admitted Monday.
No other details were released at the request of Douglas's family, the statement said.
Messages left at the home of his father, BILL, and the office of his business manager, LAWRENCE NALLIE, were not returned.
No one at a recreation center Douglas built on the city's east side after he became champion had further information.


A Garden That Thinks It's a Piano
WHEN teachers and students at the Children's Storefront, a private elementary school at 70 East 129th Street in Harlem, want the smell of grass and rambling roses, they simply unlock the gate at the back of the school and enter a garden designed to look like the interior of an upright piano.
The trees at the rear of the garden are the piano's pegs, and the flower beds, planted with delphinium, yarrow and clematis, are the harmonic curves, divided from each other by winding foot paths.


ConAgra Inc.(CAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Dow Rises 22.02 as Most Other Indexes Fall
Stocks were mixed yesterday for the second consecutive session, with the main blue-chip indicator up and the broader market indexes down, but off the lows for the day.
Mindful of the bond market and weakness of the dollar, many investors were still unsure about the possibility of another increase in interest rates by the Federal Reserve, and moved to the sidelines to await the release tomorrow of employment data for June.


Accounts
*
Purdue Frederick Co., Norwalk, Conn., to Holland Advertising, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising and promotion for its Senokot Children's Laxative Syrup and Betadine First-Aid over-the-counter products, previously handled in-house.
Combined billings were estimated at $4 million. *
Montenay Power Corp., New York, to Porte Advertising, New York, to handle advertising for the operator of waste-to-energy facilities, previously handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


Troubled Metallgesellschaft Chooses Chief for U.S. Arm
Metallgesellschaft A.G. yesterday named Thomas A. McKeever, the former chief executive of Amax Energy Inc., to be president and chief executive of its main United States subsidiary.
Mr.
McKeever's selection to run the subsidiary, the MG Corporation, comes after a revamping at MG, which ran up huge losses last year speculating in oil futures on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


Debate Rages On Ball Park In Mt. Vernon
With its towering red brick columns and columned grandstand, Memorial Field resembles the sentimental new ball parks that have charmed fans and critics in Baltimore, Arlington, Tex. and Cleveland.
But unlike Baltimore's Camden Yards and its architectural cousins, the 6,000-seat stadium on this city's south side doesn't just look old.
It is and it is showing its age badly.


David D. Gray, Insurance Executive, 68
David D. Gray, a retired insurance executive in Manhattan, died on Monday at his summer home on Nantucket.
Mr.
Gray, who also had a home in Greenwich, Conn., was 68.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Lucile.


F.C.C. Allows Bell Atlantic to Offer Cable TV
In a move that will make New Jersey one of the first battlefields pitting telephone and cable television companies against each other, the Federal Communications Commission approved an application today by the Bell Atlantic Corporation to offer interactive television service for 38,000 homes.
This is the first time that the F.C.C. has cleared the way for a telephone company to offer commercial cable television, and it suggests similar action on a backlog of 21 similar requests from other regional Bell companies that would cover millions of homes nationwide.


Horizon Healthcare Corp.(HHC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Relative Identifies Girl, 2, Found Alone on Subway
A 2-year-old girl from Newark found abandoned on Tuesday in a subway car in the Bronx was identified early yesterday after her great-grandmother recognized her photograph on a television newscast, the authorities said.
The New York City transit police were searching the city for the toddler's father, David Davis, 32, who had brought the child, Shyrissa Mills, to visit with relatives in Brooklyn late Monday night.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Anchor and Dime savings banks agreed to merge, combining two longtime names in New York banking and creating the largest savings institution on the East Coast.  [ Page A1. ]  The chief of the combined institution will be Richard D. Parsons, a rising political prospect and one of the country's visible black executives.  [ D4. ]
Bell Atlantic will offer interactive television service to 38,000 homes in New Jersey.
It is the first time that the F.C.C. has allowed a telephone company to offer cable television.  [ D1. ]


The Logic of the Cup: There Really Is None
The World Cup quarterfinals have arrived, and the only three triple champions are still alive.
Brazil, Italy and Germany have each won the trophy three times, and perhaps their presence in the final eight is testimony to some sort of sporting logic.
But perhaps not.


Abuse Found In Center For Retarded
From 1988 to 1992, the state and Federal governments spent $2 million to care for 10 mentally retarded patients in a community home in Flushing, Queens.
But state investigators say in a report that the money bought ragged clothes, vermin-infested beds, a regular diet of pork and beans and a tongue-lashing if residents spoke during meals.
Much of the money was siphoned off for other purposes, the report asserted.
A state oversight agency charged yesterday in the report that the home's executive director, operating under a fictitious name, diverted $510,000 for unexplained purchases, paid himself $310,000 in salaries and used public funds to lease and maintain four luxury cars.


Should Charles Lie?
To the Editor:
Why do we consider Prince Charles to have tarnished his image by admitting that he committed adultery (news article, June 30)?
His adultery was widely presumed, and his image well tarnished as a result.
Would we have him be a liar as well?


For Bulgaria, Silence Is Definitely Golden
The Bulgarians came to America without a victory in 16 games in 5 previous World Cup appearances.
They were the last of the European countries to qualify, and they did that by scoring a goal in the last 10 seconds against France in Paris.
When they were shut out by Nigeria in their first game this year, it looked as if the Bulgarians would pull their same old fast fade: two more losses in the first round and off they would go into the Balkan sunset.


A product's campaign seeks to remove the remaining stigma surrounding a once-taboo issue.
WHEN the Kimberly-Clark Corporation first had the effrontery to advertise these products in the early 1980's, the television networks were so shocked they refused to let the commercials be seen on the national news.
The company's advertising agency had to give impassioned presentations to uneasy network executives to change their acceptability guidelines.
Even then, it was a challenge to present the products with sensitivity and taste.
But through the years "the advertising itself has indeed helped to bring this issue out of the closet," said Beth L. Miller, a senior vice president in the Minneapolis office of Campbell Mithun Esty, which has had this problematic account for the last 11 years.


Lenox Account Split Between 2 Agencies
Lenox Inc. of Lawrenceville, N.J., said yesterday that it had named Grey Advertising of New York to handle advertising for its Lenox brands, and Altschiller Reitzfeld of New York to handle advertising for its Hartmann luggage and leather goods.
Both accounts had been at FCB/Leber Katz Partners of New York until that agency and the company mutually agreed to part ways in February.
Billings were not disclosed.


Events: Garden Tours, Lecture, Crafts Show
Day Lilies  New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx; (718) 817-8700.
On Saturday and Sunday from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M., there will be tours of the garden's day-lily beds.
No charge with garden admission of $3; those 65 and older and children 6 to 16, $2.


Rabin and Arafat Begin Talks on Broadening Palestinian Rule
The Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, and the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, moved into a new phase of their peace talks at meetings that stretched into the early hours today in Paris, where they began to map out the next stage of Palestinian self-rule.
After their first session on Wednesday, the two leaders said they had made enough progress to hold a second session at midnight.


Nordiques Pick Crawford, 33, to Coach
MARC CRAWFORD, who built a reputation for working well with young hockey players, has jumped from a minor league coaching career to take charge of the Quebec Nordiques of the National Hockey League, the team announced yesterday.
The 33-year-old Crawford, who moved from the Toronto Maple Leafs' affiliate in St.
John's, Newfoundland, took over the coaching job from PIERRE PAGE.
The search for a replacement began after Page, who was also general manager, was let go after the 1993-94 season when the Nordiques missed the playoffs for the sixth time in seven years.


AT HOME WITH: Faith, Hope and Charity; 285 Years Young
CHARITY CARDWELL LAWSON wheels herself as she leads a visitor through the quiet halls of the Holiday Retirement Center, a nursing home at the edge of this windy West Texas town.
She rolls right on over to two other women, also in wheelchairs.
"This here is Faith," she says, introducing her sister.
"This is Hope. Say hello, Hope. I'm Charity.


Mentally Ill Homeless Often Need Antipsychotic Medication
To the Editor:
"Let's Not 'Treat' the Problem of Homelessness With Drugs," Peter Breggin's June 28 letter on the psychiatric treatment of the homeless, is scientifically inaccurate and misleading.
Homelessness represents far more than a symptom of failed social policy and poverty.
The critical fact Dr.
Breggin omits is that a substantial proportion of the homeless suffer from a diagnosable and treatable mental illness such as schizophrenia, substance abuse or depression.


Where Textiles Tell Stories
IN ancient Assyria and Egypt, when women wove cloth, they were not just making skirts for the body or sheets for the bed; they were accumulating power.
So concludes Elizabeth Wayland Barber, a professor of archaeology and linguistics at Occidental College in Los Angeles and the author of "Women's Work: The First 20,000 Years" ( W. W. Norton, 1994), which traces the cultural and economic importance of textiles.
In ancient times, "the ups and downs of women's rights had to do with how important to the culture and the economy their textiles were," Dr.
Barber said.
Four thousand years ago, women in Mesopotamia, for example, sold textiles for gold and silver.
The women pictured above are shown gathering saffron to use as a yellow dye.
In Egypt during the Middle Kingdom (2000 to 1786 B.C.), linen sheets were a chief means of barter.


Reporter's Notebook; Growing Up in the Melting Pot Called Hope, Ark.
Today was the first time Bill Clinton had ever laid eyes on Poland and the Baltics.
But to listen to him tell it, a boyhood in Arkansas amounted to pretty good preparation.
Even before he spoke this afternoon of an "unbreakable" chain binding the United States and the Baltic countries, Mr.
Clinton was making out that his hometown, Hope, was a pretty worldly spot.


The Rising Star From Dime Savings
The ideal of an American meritocracy wouldn't appear to have too many better representatives than Richard D. Parsons.
Born in Bedford-Stuyvesant and raised in Queens, he finished first in his law school class, served on the governor's staff in Albany and on the White House staff in Washington.
He then became a partner in a blue-chip New York law firm and the chairman of a bank.


Gen. C. L. Donnelly, 64, Dies; Allied Air Chief for Europe
Gen.
Charles Lawthers Donnelly Jr., who rose from fighter pilot in Vietnam to command all of America's and NATO's air power in Europe, died on Sunday in Malcolm Grow Medical Center at Andrews Air Force Base.
A resident of Arlington, Va., he was 64 years old.
The cause of death was cancer, a spokesman for the Air Force said.


Valvano's Brother Gets Coaching Job
BOB VALVANO, the younger brother of the late Jim Valvano, was named men's basketball coach at Bellarmine College in Louisville, Ky.
Valvano, 36, comes to Bellarmine from St.
Mary's College of Maryland.
He was head coach at the Maryland school since August 1992, setting a record for victories last season with a 14-12 record.
He had previously been head coach at Catholic University, St.
Francis College in Brooklyn and Kutztown University.
Jim Valvano, who died last year of cancer, won the national championship at North Carolina State in 1983.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  NEW YORK YANKEES -- Called up Russ Davis, infielder, from Columbus of the International League.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Placed Jerome Walton, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 1.
Called up Steve Pegues, outfielder, to Indianapolis of the American Association.
National Basketball Association  CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Signed Dave Twardzik, director of player personnel, to a multi-year contract extension.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Named Bob Lanier assistant coach.
NEW YORK KNICKS -- Exercised the option on the contract of Anthony Bonner, forward.
Waived Rolando Blackman, guard.
Boxing
USA BOXING -- Named David Lubs director of support services.
Football  National Football League  ATLANTA FALCONS -- Signed Mitch Davis, linebacker, to a three-year contract.
Released Reggie Furgeson and Keith Jack, wide receivers.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Jamie Dukes, center.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Waived Thomas Orr, cornerback, and Jerold Jeffcoat, defensive end.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Named Ernie Accorsi assistant general manager.
Promoted Harry Hulmes to special assistant to the general manager.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Agreed to terms with Joe Nash, defensive tackle.
Waived Kevin Murphy, linebacker.
Signed Carlester Crumpler, tight end.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Agreed to terms with Pete Pierson, offensive tackle, on three-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK RANGERS -- Signed Shawn Reid, defenseman.
PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Signed Craig MacTavish, forward, to a two-year contract.
QUEBEC NORDIQUES -- Named Marc Crawford coach.


Market Place; Analysts pick and choose among the riverboat casino stocks.
THE rough ride for riverboat casino stocks appears to be calming after they were buffeted for most of the year by concerns about delays in the expansion of gambling in states like Missouri and Texas and rumblings from Washington about an excise tax on gaming revenues.
Some professional investors suggest that the time may be right to tiptoe into the gaming group.
But they warn that not all riverboat casino stocks are alike and investors should scrutinize the companies before buying.


Dime and Anchor Plan a Merger To Form No. 4 U.S. Savings Bank
Two venerable New York savings banks, Anchor and Dime, said yesterday that they had agreed to merge to become the largest savings institution on the East Coast and the fourth largest in the country.
The combined bank will operate under the name Dime Bancorp and use Dime's headquarters in Manhattan.
Richard D. Parsons, chairman of Dime and a key supporter of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, will be chairman and chief executive of the new company.
James M. Large Jr., chairman of Anchor Bancorp, based in Hewlett, L.I., will be president.


As His Backers Protest, Philip Berrigan Is Sentenced to Prison
As scores of peace demonstrators outside the courthouse sang spirituals and waved signs saying "War No More" and "Arms Are for Hugging," a Federal district judge today sentenced Philip F. Berrigan to an eight-month prison term for vandalizing an Air Force fighter-bomber last winter.
Such 60's-style scenes of protest may now be rare, but Mr.
Berrigan's advocacy of antiwar sentiment has outlasted the cold war and the transformation of hippies to yuppies.
Mr.
Berrigan, a 70-year-old former Roman Catholic priest, estimates that he has been arrested more than 100 times in the two dozen years since he took up the fight against the Vietnam War.
And he has spent more than six of those years, including the last seven months, in prison.
Predawn Battering
Mr.
Berrigan and three companions were convicted of willfully damaging Federal property in using household hammers to batter the antennae, the landing gear and the fuselage of an F-15E jet at Seymour Johnson Air Force Base in Goldsboro, N.C., 145 miles southwest of here, before dawn last Dec. 7.


Wesgate Crown Is Favored
Wesgate Crown, last season's divisional champion trotting colt, was installed yesterday as the 8-5 morning line favorite in Saturday's $286,280 Yonkers Trot, the first leg of trotting's triple crown.
Driven by Walter Case Jr., Wesgate Crown will be starting from Post 6 in the event at Yonkers Raceway.
The raceway also announced yesterday that one of trotting's centerpiece events, the International Trot, would be suspended for 1994 for economic reasons, as well as because of declining attendance and handle.
The International, originally scheduled for Aug. 13, began in 1959 at Roosevelt Raceway in Westbury, L.I., and was moved to Yonkers in 1988.
Its promoters hope to bring it back next year.


Yankees Get Swept Away and Also Lose Stanley
Maybe the Yankees should simply postpone the last four games before the All-Star Game break.
They could relax.
They could stop being frustrated, and they might remain in first-place if the Orioles sputter for a few games.
With the way injuries and losses have mounted, excusing themselves might be shrewd strategy.
Who could have predicted this?
When the Yankees were one victory from sweeping the Red Sox in Boston and from moving 21 games over .500 for the first time since 1980, who could have contemplated advising them to seek a timeout eight days later?


Giuliani Says Drive on Petty Crime Is Worth Risk of Graft
As the commission that investigated police corruption began distributing its report, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was announcing his plan to have the police crack down on quality-of- life offenses, and acknowledging that it could pose new temptations for street officers.
The Mayor avoided any direct response to the commission report, which will be officially released today.
But he said he had been mindful of the sort of corruption problems that a generation ago lead the police department to keep its patrol officers away from the temptations that might follow crackdowns on drugs and vice.


Mercury Finance Co. (MFN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
Chorus: Universal Coverage
Members of President Clinton's Cabinet fanned out around the country to rally support for the Administration's health plan and preach the gospel of universal coverage.
Page B8.
Defending Simpson Search
Two police detectives say they entered O. J. Simpson's estate without a warrant because they feared for the safety of the residents.
Page A17.
Violence in the Schools
Hundreds of principals have underreported violent incidents in New York schools, a report shows, suggesting conditions are more turbulent than previously acknowledged.
Page B1.
New 100-Meter Record
The sprinter Leroy Burrell yesterday won the 100-meter dash in 9.85 seconds at a meet in Lausanne, Switzerland.
It was a world record.
Page B9.
Interactive TV Approval
The Federal Communications Commission approved an application by the Bell Atlantic Corporation to offer interactive television service for 38,000 homes in New Jersey.
Page D1. 11 Firefighters Killed
Flames trapped about 50 firefighters battling a wildfire in Colorado, killing at least 11.
Dozens of fires continued to burn around the West.
Page A14.


Now MacTavish Tries To Win Cup as Flyer
Three weeks after they won the Stanley Cup, the Rangers have lost one of the players who helped them earn hockey's top prize.
Craig MacTavish, a 35-year-old center acquired March 21 from the Edmonton Oilers, became an unrestricted free agent after the playoffs, and yesterday he signed a two-year contract with the Philadelphia Flyers.


Decorators In Full Bloom
By the time the 1994 Rogers Memorial Library Designers' Showhouse opens in Southampton on Sunday, it will look just like such houses are meant to: a turn-of-the-century summer cottage, as large rambling homes are called in these parts, set on a panoramic site, three floors of rooms awash in fresh fabrics in a gamut of styles and the last word in au naturel landscape design.
But Swan Lawn, as this particular house is called, not only strikes just the right note in summer decorating but also has a touch of spirituality that sets it apart from other show houses.
Eugenia Au Kim, a decorator; Elya Horen, her partner, and Ronald Chin, an architect, celebrated the completion of their covered porch overlooking the tennis court with a feng shui ceremony.
Feng shui, an ancient Chinese art, is meant to insure harmony of spirit and financial profit by the placement of furniture and objects.


If It's July, This Must Be Mostly Mozart
The Fourth of July, the beach, Central Park, baseball: all are part of a "classic New York summer," the new Mostly Mozart Festival brochure says, along with, of course, the familiar festival, which began its 28th season on Tuesday night in Avery Fisher Hall.
Lincoln Center officials have been eager to dismiss as rumor any reports that this roster of classics may change, with Mostly Mozart going the way of Ebbets Field.
Nathan Leventhal, the president of Lincoln Center, said in an interview yesterday, "There will be a Mostly Mozart for the foreseeable future." But discussions continue, with the most probable scenario involving a shorter festival; this would make room for increased programming by the New York Philharmonic and the evolution of a larger performing-arts festival.
Next summer will still have baseball and the beach, but probably not seven weeks of Mostly Mozart.


CHRONICLE
Russian lawmakers voted yesterday to invite ALEKSANDR SOLZHENITSYN to address the lower house of Parliament when he ends a cross-country journey and returns to Moscow.
Mr.
Solzhenitsyn returned to his homeland on May 27 after 20 years of exile.
He set off on a train trip across Russia to rediscover the country.
Yesterday he was in Omsk, about 1,600 miles east of Moscow.


2 in Congress Hear Firsthand of Town's Clash With Lesbians
Two members of Congress came here today in an effort to shed light on the case of a lesbian couple complaining of repeated harassment in a rural Mississippi town, and were met by the same heated emotions that have characterized the episode since it sprang to public attention last December.
The two legislators, Representatives Barney Frank of Massachusetts and Jerrold Nadler of New York, both Democrats, heard testimony from the couple and from their opponents, who denied any effort to run them out of town but condemned the radical social agenda that the critics said was being promoted at the couple's feminist camp.


A Cabinet Push on Universal Coverage
In a drive to stir up public enthusiasm for President Clinton's health care plan, members of the Cabinet fanned out around the country today to preach the gospel of universal coverage.
To help guide that single-minded message, White House officials distributed a memorandum to the Cabinet members emphasizing why it was important to have most of them participate in health care activities on a single day.


Clinton's Haiti Problem: What Price Democracy?
As American commandos rehearse for war and Administration officials insist that the crisis in Haiti must end soon, the unanswerable question is whether President Clinton himself is really willing to risk American lives to restore democracy to Haiti.
His aides insist that despite intensified military planning for an invasion and increased war talk, Mr.
Clinton has not yet decided what to do.


By Way of the West, a Tale as Tall as It Is True
Last Go Round  By Ken Kesey  With Ken Babbs  Illustrated. 238 pages. Viking. $21.95.
It was "a great yarn" his father told him by a campfire one night, writes the novelist Ken Kesey in his introduction to "Last Go Round," a history in the form of a novel written with the aid of research by Mr.
Kesey's friend Ken Babbs.
The Keseys had been traveling to hunt antelope when they ran into the heavy traffic headed for the Pendleton Round Up, a famous rodeo in Oregon.
That reminded the author's father of what happened at the first roundup, on the weekend of Sept. 16, 1911.
He described it over the campfire that night, and it made, as Mr.
Kesey repeats, "a marvelous yarn."


Ewing Undergoes Knee Surgery
Knicks center PATRICK EWING underwent arthroscopic surgery on his right knee yesterday at the Beth Israel Medical Center-North Division in Manhattan.
The procedure, performed by Dr.
NORMAN SCOTT, the Knicks' team physician, was intended to clean out loose cartilage.
The team said the procedure went well.
"There were no surprises," Dr.
Scott said.
Ewing will rehabilitate the knee for six to eight weeks, beginning with stretching exercises, swimming and biking.
Ewing, who has missed only five games in the last five seasons, had similar procedures were performed in 1986 and 1989.


Paris Journal; They Think, Therefore They Are Very French
Does knowledge inhibit the imagination?
Is a coherent thought necessarily true?
Can a work of art be considered immoral?
Or how about this one?
Is passion compatible with wisdom?
O.K.
Now, over the next four hours, write a five-page dissertation on one of these topics.


Segregating by Sex at Public Pools Is Considered
After a series of sexual assaults on girls in New York City pools, the Parks Commissioner said yesterday that he was considering an experiment to segregate some pools, with separate areas for girls and boys or for adults and youngsters.
The Commissioner, Henry J. Stern, and other officials emphasized that no final decision had been made and said that there were many logistical and other problems to consider with any plan to divide the pools.
But they said they would most likely try some form of segregation at some pools beginning next week.


Group Finds Widespread Rights Violations Continuing in World
Widespread violations of human rights continued around the world last year, including political killings by governments in 61 countries, Amnesty International says in its annual report.
The political killings, detentions and "disappearances" occurred despite some positive changes in many countries in the post-cold-war era, like moves toward democracy and the establishment of groups to monitor human rights.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about cutbacks at Texaco Inc. misidentified the division for which the company plans to seek an alliance with another company.
It is the marine division, not the trading and transportation division.


Robert Buchholz, 40 Singer and Composer
Robert Buchholz, a singer, pianist and composer, died on June 27 at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 40 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said Tim Cahill, a friend.


Writing Copyright Law For an Information Age
The Commerce Department is about to release recommendations for rewriting copyright law to protect the creators of books, recordings, movies and other forms of information in the digital age.
The recommendations, contained in the draft of a report to be released Thursday, would also outlaw the use of technologies that can pick electronic locks that copyright owners place on their works.


Tracking Police Corruption Over the Years
Sept. 23, 1986: More than a decade after the Knapp Commission focused wide attention on corruption among the police and after years of relative quiet, the police department is rocked by the arrests of eleven officers from the 77th Precinct in Bedford-Stuvesant who knocked down doors, stole money and drugs from drug dealers and resold the stolen drugs.
The "Buddy Boys" case is the department's first major corruption scandal since the Knapp Commission exposed organized "pads" that ran extortion operations out of nearly every precinct house.
It was out of the Knapp Commission that the Internal Affairs Division was born.
Oct. 31, 1986: Twenty-seven supervisors are transferred out of the precinct by Commissioner Benjamin Ward, but no need is seen for an investigation of the department's anti-corruption efforts.
March 1991: Apparently no corruption troubles are in sight.
The state disbands the office of Special Prosecutor for corruption and agres to give money to the district attorneys to fight corruption.
To date, only a fraction of the money promised has been delivered.
May 7, 1992: A group of six New York City police officers, led by Officer Michael Dowd, are arrested for cocaine trafficking by the Suffolk County police, raising a host of questions about oversign and the Blue Wall of Silence.
Why didn't the department's own investigators uncover the scandal in light of flagrant misconduct over many years by Officer Dowd?
Had the department looked the other way?
One person, anyway, sees no major cracks.
Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown calls the department's system for weeding out corruption "a system that police agencies across the country look to." June 25, 1992: Mayor David N. Dinkins announces the creation of a special panel to investigate corruption, and as its head, names Milton Mollen, a former judge and former Deputy Mayor for public safety, as well as a close friend.
Commissioner Brown, who opposed the panel, was conspicuously absent from the announcement.
June 29, 1992: Commissioner Brown finally acknowledges a problem.
He announces tougher anti-corruption measures that on the surface seem rather basic.
Investigators will finally be supplied with modern surveillance equipment and even new cars that will help them avoid detection from officers under scrutiny.
He also asks his top deputy, Raymond W. Kelly, to prepare a report on why the department failed to stop Officer Dowd.
But law enforcement officials say the response is too late, that the Internal Affairs Division had been bungling cases for years.
One officials calls it a "secret waiting to come out." July 30, 1992: More problems for Michael Dowd.
He is arrested on Federal charges that he took huge weekly cash payments from drug gangs.
Officials say he offered protection from police raids and in return took in as much as $8,000 a week.
Nov. 16, 1992: Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly announces a major revamping of the Internal Affairs monitoring system, starting with an upgrading of its status to Internal Affairs Bureau and creating more accountability among investigators.
Mollen Commission officials say the changes do not go nearly far enough.
Sept. 27, 1993: The Mollen Commission begins the city's first public hearings on police corruption in more than 20 years with a star witness: Michael Dowd.
He says that early in his career other officers indoctrinated him with the attitude: "never rat against another cop." There is testimony from a hooded informant named "Mr. X" and from former police officials and investigators who reveal tales of corruption and brutality in the 9th Precinct in the East Village and in many of the city's minority communities.
It is learned that Internal Affairs has long maintained a secret "tickler" file for charges made against its own investigators, rather than pass the allegations on to prosecutors.
Dec. 28, 1993: An interim report released by the Mollen Commission is a sign of things to come.
The commission declares the department "incompetent" in policing itself.
March 8, 1994: The commission produces its first criminal case when three officers from the 73d Precinct in Brownsville are charged with dealing drugs, usually while on duty.
The officers called themselves the Morgue Boys because they often met divide their profits outside a factory that had once manufactured refrigerators for morgues.
March 18, 1994: Three officers from the 30th Precinct are caught on videotape beating up Harlem residents and stealing drugs and cash.
Eleven more officers from the precinct will eventually be arrested.
And another new police commissioner, William J. Bratton, tries to put his own stamp on the corruption battle.
He pronounces that no one will ever wear the badges of the arrested officers.
To date, he has transferred eight of 22 supervisors from the precinct, as well as 25 of the precinct's 191 officers, many on suspicions that they knew about corruption but did not tell.
July 6, 1994: The Commission's final report is issued.
Its central proposal is the creation of an independent commission, appointed by the Mayor, to review police department efforts to eliminate corruption and to conduct its own investigations.
CRAIG WOLFF


Clinton Makes Appeal to Latvia To Accept Its Russian Civilians
President Clinton told a crowd of 35,000 Latvians today that he will rejoice with them when Russian troops complete their withdrawal from the Baltics by the end of summer, but he also appealed to the Latvians to show more tolerance of the Russian civilians who want to continue living among them.
Mr.
Clinton's soaring, Jeffersonian oratory hailing Latvia's independence was greeted with cheers, applause and the waving of American flags by the crowd packed into the central Freedom Square in Riga.


Where Are the Yankee Fans?
The Yankees responded to recent articles about their attendance of 22,021 fans against Oakland on July 4 at Yankee Stadium by blaming poor parking, inadequate access and perceptions of safety, Jack Lawn, the team's vice president and chief of operations, said yesterday.
"Although the New York Yankees have the largest potential fan base in the American League, attendance has been lackluster," said Lawn.
"We now have one of the most talented and exciting teams in the majors, but the fans are clearly demonstrating their reluctance to travel to the Bronx."


CHRONICLE
WILLIE L. BROWN JR., the powerful Speaker of the California State Assembly, has joined the Los Angeles law firm of Christensen, White, Miller, Fink &amp; Jacobs.
Mr.
Brown has practiced law in San Francisco during his 28-year career in the Legislature.
The last Los Angeles firm with which he was affiliated, Kelly, McAuliffe &amp; Rein, was dissolved about a year ago.
Since then, he has had his own office, which will now merge with a new San Francisco office of the Christensen White firm.


Corrections
A brief music review and a picture caption on June 11 about the singing group Zap Mama described it incorrectly.
It is a quintet, not a quartet.


For Volleyball Player, a Rich Athletic Tradition
The man wearing a white T-shirt and an intense gaze leaned forward, surveying the court as the South played the East in the second day of volleyball competition at the United States Olympic Festival today.
The object of his focus was Jennifer Johnson, a tough 5-foot-10-inch outside hitter for the South squad and one of the best young players competing here.
Before the match, the man had given a critical evaluation of Johnson.


Miller (Herman) Inc.(MLHR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 1
June 24
July 2
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.7
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.2
3.2
Gasoline stocks
215.0
217.4
220.2
Distillate stocks
118.7
116.6
109.5
Crude imports, daily
7.4
7.6
6.1
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.9
1.8
Crude stocks
326.8
327.4
349.7
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
96.5
96.4
96.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Editorial Notebook; Life in the Information
Anyone who claims to think seriously about how new technologies shape the human experience has to have read a fair bit of science fiction.
This certainly includes William Gibson ("Neuromancer" and "Virtual Light"), and especially the dear departed and somewhat paranoid Philip K. Dick, author of 40 books of fiction, most notably "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?" from which the cult film "Blade Runner" was made.
Bioethics.
Genetic engineering.
The information superhighway.
It's all there, examined in vivid detail.
There is also a thought or two about the rapacious character of advertising.
Back when advertising was still in its crib, Mr.
Dick correctly forecast that it would someday be a consuming force.
In the world of "Blade Runner," skyscrapers are covered top to bottom with television screens that scream with ads 24 hours a day.
Commercials no longer sit still and beg to be looked at.
Instead, they become fly-like robots that perch on the pillow and whisper sweet nothings while you sleep.
The next morning you wake up craving foods you've never eaten.
Mr.
Dick's characters defend themselves by keeping their windows closed -- and making heavy use of fly swatters.
The idea is to get them before they get to you.


AAR Corp.(AIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Allwaste Inc.(ALW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Japanese Made Gains In June Vehicle Sales
The leading Japanese auto makers posted strong sales and gains in market share in June, driving up total car and light-truck sales for the month despite a weaker performance by the Big Three.
Over all, sales sustained the moderate growth they have managed since easing off in May, sticking to a pace that analysts say bodes well for continued slow growth in the economy.
Sales of cars and light trucks rose 6.8 percent compared with a strong period a year earlier.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the re-election hopes of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut, omitted the identity of a candidate seeking the Republican nomination to oppose him.
He is Dr.
Joseph Bentivegna of Wethersfield.


Murray Fuhrman, Radiologist, 82
Dr.
Murray Fuhrman, a radiologist whose 50-year career was spent in medicine, research and teaching, died June 30 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 82.
The cause was congestive heart failure, family members said.


For Endowment, One Performer Means Trouble
As the deadline neared for Congress to debate next year's budget for the National Endowment for the Arts, the agency's supporters had reason for cautious optimism.
With a popular new chairwoman in place, it seemed possible that the endowment might receive a small increase, or at worst, no cuts.
For an agency that has seen its purchasing power decline by 46 percent since 1979 and that took a 2 percent cut last year, merely holding the line would be a major victory.
It's not turning out that way.


Journal; Specter's Righteous Stand
When Arlen Specter, the moderate Republican Senator from Pennsylvania, spoke out against the radical religious right at his party's Iowa convention last month, he was booed.
His words were far from incendiary.
He was merely defending "the basic American principle of separation of church and state." The speech was heartfelt, telling of his penniless immigrant father's escape from Russia to America in 1911.
The Senator seemed to be speaking not just as a politician but as a Jew.
Is it coincidence that Mr.
Specter, the only Jewish Republican Senator, is one of the very few G.O.P. leaders who have dared criticize the Christian right?
Hardly.
If you are an American Jew, you have every reason to worry about a political movement whose most powerful leader, Pat Robertson of the Christian Coalition, calls the constitutional separation of church and state "a lie of the left" and vows to dismantle it.
I, for one, still remember how it felt to be a Jew involuntarily praying to Jesus in a public elementary school before the Supreme Court outlawed school prayer in 1962.


Ernst Theimer, Chemist, 83; Studied Scents
Dr.
Ernst T. Theimer, a pioneer in the field of fragrance chemistry, died on Saturday at the Riverview Medical Center in Red Bank, N.J.
Dr.
Theimer, who lived in Rumson, N.J., was 83.
The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease, said his wife, Jo-Anne.


CML Group
Shares of CML Group Inc., down more than 50 percent since January, slid a little further yesterday when the company said it expected to post lower earnings this year.
CML, a specialty retailer and the maker of Nordic Track exercise machines, also said it would double its stock repurchase program to three million shares.


Department of Energy Pushes Competitive Bids
The Department of Energy said today that it would put up for competitive bid contracts valued at tens of billions of dollars, shaking up the companies that manage some of the Government's biggest laboratories and nuclear sites.
The announcement would more than triple the potential value of the contracts already under competition at main nuclear sites, and could present the Westinghouse Electric Corporation with especially intense competition as a prominent manager of big parts of the Government's nuclear complex.


In Argentina, the Poor Seem to Get Poorer
In the largest demonstration against President Carlos Saul Menem in three and a half years, tens of thousands of Argentines, mostly from the provinces, gathered in the capital today to demonstrate against Government economic policies that they say have doubled unemployment and left them in poverty.
The demonstration underlined a growing problem in Latin America as governments, seeking to spur growth and steady their volatile economies, have risked widening the gap between the rich and poor.


Officer Flaunted Corruption, And His Superiors Ignored It
Over a span of six years, the New York City Police Department received 16 complaints alleging that Police Officer Michael Dowd had been robbing drug dealers and dealing cocaine as part of a gang of corrupt officers in the 75th Precinct in the crime-ridden East New York section of Brooklyn.
That wasn't all.
The officer drove to work in a bright red Corvette and sometimes had a limousine pick him up at the station house for gambling trips to Atlantic City.


METRO DIGEST
CORRUPTION INQUIRY FINDS A 'WILLFUL BLINDNESS' IN POLICE DEPARTMENT
A "willful blindness" to corruption throughout the ranks of the New York City Police Department has allowed highly organized networks of rogue officers to deal in drugs and prey on black and Hispanic neighborhoods, according to the final report of the commission that investigated the department.
A1.
CORRUPTION CASE AND POLICY OF INACTION
For years, the Police Department received complaints alleging that Officer Michael Dowd had been robbing drug dealers and dealing cocaine.
Yet an investigative commission concluded that senior officers repeatedly ignored the allegations or blocked efforts to check them out in a deliberate policy to shield the department from scandal.
A1.


Results Plus
GOLF  Twitty Takes Lead in Scottish Open  Howard Twitty of the United States shot a six-under-par 64 yesterday to take a two-stroke lead after the first round of the Scottish Open in Gleneagles.
The 45-year-old Twitty carded a five-under 30 on the back nine, with a stretch of five birdies in eight holes.
Two shots back were Ian Woosnam of Wales, Lennie Clements of the United States, Jonathan Lomas and Peter Baker of England, Wayne Riley of Australia and Per-Ulrik Johansson of Sweden.
Mark McNulty of Zimbabwe had a hole-in-one at the par-3, 178-yard fifth.
He finished at 67, along with 10 others.
John Daly was among a group at 68, while the United States Open champion, Ernie Els, had a 72. (AP) FENCING  Becker Wins World Saber Title  Felix Becker of Germany rallied from a 12-3 deficit to beat Stanislaw Pozdnyakov of Russia, 15-14, yesterday to win the men's saber title at the world fencing championships in Athens.
In the men's team foil, Italy beat Germany by 5-3, led by Alessandro Puccini's three-bout sweep.
Pozdniakov was coming off a 15-5 semifinal victory over Bence Szabo of Hungary, the 1992 Olympic gold medalist and the runner-up at last year's world championships. (AP)


The Box That Isn't
WHEN the architect Eric Owen Moss designed "The Box," an arresting, 1,000-square-foot building on top of a renovated warehouse at 8520 National Boulevard in Culver City, Calif., he was challenging what he calls "the antiquated, three-dimensional Euclidean form." The structure begins traditionally as a box but aspires to something new.
"It is a box but isn't a box," Mr.
Moss said.
"I am both trying to take it apart and reassemble it so that it is about going forward and backward." What is even more mysterious than Mr.
Moss's explanation is the box itself, which is being completed this month as a conference room. (No tenant has yet signed a lease.)


Which Haiti Policy?
Give them this.
This White House team knows how to upstage a Presidential trip.
When Mr.
Clinton was in Europe for D-Day observances, all eyes were on North Korea.
Now, as he visits Poland, comes news that commando units of the United States Army and Navy have been practicing a takeover of Haiti's ports and airfields.
It is hard to believe that the Pentagon's willingness to discuss these "secret" maneuvers is not part of a plan to flush Gen.
Raoul Cedras and his henchmen out of Haiti.
That is a worthy goal, but the timing is amateurish and the underlying message is troubling.
Washington and the United Nations have only recently gotten serious about enforcing meaningful economic sanctions.
These need to be given a chance to produce political results.
And a new refugee initiative unveiled Tuesday at least temporarily relieves the political pressure from that direction.


Report Finds More Violence In the Schools
Hundreds of principals have underreported violent incidents in New York City schools, school officials said yesterday. suggesting that conditions are far more turbulent than has previously been acknowledged.
A month ago, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines rejected a report on violence in the city's schools, saying he suspected that school administrators were covering up some events to make their schools appear less chaotic.


COMPANY BRIEFS
INTERSTATE WASTE TECHNOLOGIES, a subsidiary of Interstate General, St.
Charles, Md., signed a contract with the city of Bridgeport, Conn., to build a $200 million facility to recycle sludge into methanol.
IVAX CORP., Miami, said it would acquire a 60 percent stake in Galena A.S., a leading Czech pharmaceutical company, for $20.6 million from the National Property Fund of the Czech Republic.


An Antic Duet of . . . Plants? Minerals? Funguses?
"Animundi," the latest premiere by Pilobolus Dance Theater, is a vibrant little duet for two creatures who fall in love.
What is not clear is whether they are animal, vegetable or mineral.
As the title suggests, such ambiguity is very much to the point.
Pilobolus, at its most antic, has always had trouble distinguishing mankind from plant life.
The company's name, if one needs reminding, refers to a fungus that inclines toward the light.
On the instant, this image became a metaphor for a style of dancing that is based on leverage and leaning and, by extension, mutual support.


Telemedia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


2-YEAR CORRUPTION INQUIRY FINDS A 'WILLFUL BLINDNESS' IN NEW YORK'S POLICE DEPT.
A "willful blindness" to corruption throughout the ranks of the New York City Police Department has allowed highly organized networks of rogue officers to deal in drugs and prey on black and Hispanic neighborhoods, according to the final report of the commission that investigated the department.
The report by the Mollen Commission on its two-year investigation into police corruption is particularly powerful in its criticisms of sergeants and other commanders of five precincts found to be riddled with corruption.


Management and Labor Play the Waiting Game
While negotiators for the baseball players continue to ask questions about the owners' proposals, the owners' negotiators continue to wait for the players' first proposals.
"We didn't get a proposal," Richard Ravitch, the clubs' chief labor executive, said yesterday after the two sides held a two-hour bargaining session.
"I'm awaiting a proposal. Don told me we'd get one next week. I've waited this long. There's nothing I can do about it."


Walter Clemons, Literary Critic And Editor, 64
Walter Clemons, a book critic and writer who was on the staff of Newsweek in the 1970's and 80's, died yesterday morning in his house in Long Island City, Queens.
He was 64.
The cause was complications from diabetes, said Bernard X. Wolff, a friend, who found Mr.
Clemons's body.


F. R. Duncombe, 93, Children's Writer
Frances Riker Duncombe, a writer long active in Westchester community affairs, died on June 27 at Brandywine Nursing Home in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
A resident of Cross River, N.Y., she was 93.
She suffered a lengthy illness, her family said.


Corrections
An article in the Mutual Funds Quarterly Review pages of Business Day on Tuesday about John B. Neff, the money manager of the Vanguard Group's Windsor mutual fund and the Gemini II closed-end fund, misstated the value of his holdings in the two funds.
They total about $6 million, not $90 million.


A Jazz Festival Where Practice Transcends Theory
The oddest thing about the JVC Jazz Festivals is that they are, year in and year out, much better in practice than on paper.
The concerts are badly presented, usually fueled by that most tired of formulas, the tribute.
They never address any of jazz's hot topics, nor do they, like Lincoln Center's jazz program (and the American Jazz Orchestra before it), indulge in programming that finds its backbone in a theme.
Nevertheless, over and over again, the festival pulls off a handful of concerts that are truly special.
This year's festival was no exception, and most of the epiphanies came from the least likely places.
A concert built around the pianist Dick Hyman, a fine player and historian but hardly known for his transcendental abilities, turned out to be, well, transcendental.
Mel Torme, the 68-year-old singer, performed a concert full of bravura and showmanship and stunning musicality, which was a pleasure both for the musicians and the audience.
And at what could have been a jam session run amok, last Friday night's tribute to the Rev.
John Garcia Gensel, the pastor to the jazz world, the constantly shifting group of improvisers maintained a level of music that's often found in clubs but rarely on concert stages.


Bronx Welcomes A Haven for Books; Readers Revel in a New Library
On a sweaty afternoon in a battered Bronx neighborhood, a little girl in shorts and a turquoise shirt peered through the glass door of the brand-new Sedgwick branch library and had a vision.
Spotting a gray-suited security guard, she declared, "I see a man with a tuxedo."
Libraries do that to people.
All that knowledge waiting to be unbound, making almost anything seem possible.
Even gray polyester magically becomes elegant.


Labatt to Buy Part of Mexican Brewer
John Labatt Ltd., the Canadian brewing giant, said today that it would spend $510 million to acquire a stake in one of the two largest beer companies in Mexico in a transaction signaling the dramatic growth of Canadian business interest in Mexico under the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Labatt, one of the most profitable beer companies in North America, has chosen as its Mexican partner Fomento Economico Mexicano S.A., known as Femsa, which controls 48 percent of the Mexican beer market with brands like Tecate, Carta Blanca, Superior and Dos Equis.


Detectives in Simpson Case Defend Search
Two Los Angeles police detectives testified today that fear for the safety of people in O. J. Simpson's home led them to enter its grounds without a search warrant in the early morning after Mr.
Simpson's former wife and one of her friends were found murdered nearby.
The detectives, Mark Fuhrman and Philip L. Vannatter, contended that their unauthorized entrance over a five-foot-high fence was justified because there were so many unanswered questions and because time was at a premium in the hours immediately after the killings of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.


PG&amp;E Joins With Bechtel In Venture
PG&amp;E Enterprises and Bechtel Enterprises announced yesterday that they would jointly acquire the J. Makowski Company for $250 million to $300 million, a move that would mark a step toward the consolidation of independent power producers in the Northeastern United States.
The details of the proposed deal were not disclosed.
But J. Makowski, based in Boston and known as JMC, is expected to work closely with the U.S.
Generating Company, based in Bethesda, Md., a partnership formed by PG&amp;E and Bechtel in 1989 to develop independent power.


Using Their Heads to Keep Cool


Haitians Are Undeterred By New Clinton Policy
Haitians in this fishing village said today that the Clinton Adminstration's new policy of barring boat people from entering the United States would do little to discourage them from seeking to flee Haiti by sea.
"Anywhere is better than Haiti," said Andre Esper, a fisherman in this hamlet just west of Port-au-Prince.
He said that his plan to leave by boat would not change.
"There is hardly no fish in the ocean. And the little that I catch I can't sell them."


'Starter' Marriages: So Early, So Brief
TIM BARNARD married when he was 25, fresh out of graduate school.
His wife was a 21-year-old college student.
"At that age," recalled Mr.
Barnard, now 36, "I didn't comprehend what it took to stay in a long-lasting relationship. It seemed that if you're in a serious relationship and you're committed to another person, the next logical step is to get married."
Four years later, they were divorced.
He got the credit-card debt and she got the washer and dryer.


CHRONICLE
CECILIA MARSHALL, the widow of the Justice Thurgood Marshall of the Supreme Court, is coming to New York today for a cause she said would have been near and dear to his heart: the Thurgood Marshall Summer Law Internship Program.
The program, now in its second summer and sponsored by the City Bar Association, provides summer jobs for 130 inner-city high school students in law firms and schools, corporate law departments and Government and nonprofit agencies.
Today, there will be a reception for the students and their employers.


The History of Central Park Through a Handful of Benches
YOU may not think that seven benches could tell the nearly century-and-a-half story of Central Park.
But if you know what you're sitting on, they can.
Across from the park, at the Cooper-Hewitt National Museum of Design, at Fifth Avenue and East 91st Street, is a handful of benches deceptive in their profound simplicity.
A few evocative old photograghs, accompanied by some well-chosen words, capture the essence of each bench's moment in time.
But essentially these seats just sit -- in the museum's elegant garden, which was first designed to set off Andrew Carnegie's 64-room mansion when the steel magnate and his family moved uptown in 1902.


Let Taiwan First Give Up Its Claims to China
To the Editor:
You illustrate the desperate attempts of Taiwan's President, Lee Teng-hui, to develop relations between Taiwan and other nations in a June 26 news article, pointing out the obstacle of mainland China's refusal to allow the global recognition of Taiwan.
But you neglect to explain why Taiwan's Kuomintang Government is responsible for this predicament.


Burmese Junta Continues to Shun Laureate
The Nobel peace laureate and dissident leader in Myanmar is approaching the fifth anniversary of her house arrest with no sign that her captors in the military intend to free her, or even talk to her.
Diplomats, human rights groups and the American legislator who met with the dissident, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, in February say they are dismayed that the military Government of Myanmar, formerly Burma, continues to refuse to open any sort of dialogue with her despite the junta's indications earlier this year that it was finally ready to negotiate.


Giants Are Giving Young Some Assistance
The new National Football League salary cap and all of its complexities are enough to overwhelm almost anyone, even hard-working George Young, the Giants' general manager.
So today the team announced that it had hired Ernie Accorsi, an experienced N.F.L. executive, as assistant general manager to take over some of Young's duties.
Accorsi, who was in charge of player personnel decisions and contract negotiations in Cleveland, where the Browns went to three straight American Football Conference championships, will primarily handle player contract negotiations and other duties that involve the new collective bargaining agreement.


Which Haiti Policy?
Give them this.
This White House team knows how to upstage a Presidential trip.
When Mr.
Clinton was in Europe for D-Day observances, all eyes were on North Korea.
Now, as he visits Poland, comes news that commando units of the United States Army and Navy have been practicing a takeover of Haiti's ports and airfields.
It is hard to believe that the Pentagon's willingness to discuss these "secret" maneuvers is not part of a plan to flush Gen.
Raoul Cedras and his henchmen out of Haiti.
That is a worthy goal, but the timing is amateurish and the underlying message is troubling.
Washington and the United Nations have only recently gotten serious about enforcing meaningful economic sanctions.
These need to be given a chance to produce political results.
And a new refugee initiative unveiled Tuesday at least temporarily relieves the political pressure from that direction.


No Headline
"What we found is that the problem of police corruption extends far beyond the corrupt cop." -- THE MOLLEN COMMISSION.  [ B2:1. ]


U.S. TROOPS STAGE MILITARY EXERCISE WITH EYE ON HAITI
Stepping up preparations for a possible invasion of Haiti to oust its military leaders, United States forces have secretly rehearsed a plan to seize airfields and ports there, Pentagon officials said today.
The exercise, which involved more than a thousand commandos who would most likely serve as a vanguard, took place two weeks ago in the southeastern United States and the Gulf of Mexico, the officials said.


In Aftermath of Oil Spill, Alaska Waters Languish
Before the Exxon Valdez ran aground in 1989 and spilled 11 million gallons of crude oil in Prince William Sound, spring was a season of joyous preparation for the fishermen in Cordova.
The sound teemed with herring and salmon and the promise of bulging summer catches, worth as much as $40 million a year to this port village of 2,100 people, 800 of whom are fishermen.


Leroy Burrell Breaks Mark For 100 Meters
When Leroy Burrell was a schoolboy in Landsdowne, Pa., a Philadelphia suburb, Carl Lewis of nearby Willingboro., N.J., was his hero, the winner of four track and field gold medals in the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics.
Now they are friends, teammates, training partners and business partners, and last night, for the second time in three years, Burrell broke Lewis's world record for the classic sprint distance of 100 meters.
In the annual meet in Lausanne, Switzerland, on a warm, humid night, Burrell won the 100 in 9.85 seconds.
That clipped a hundredth of a second off the world record set by Lewis in the 1991 world championships in Tokyo.


Connecticut House Limits Citizens' Resale of Guns
The State House of Representatives moved tonight toward approving a bill aimed at shutting down the street sales of guns that authorities say are the largest source of weapons for criminals.
The bill would regulate the sale of handguns by private citizens to one another and create a paper trail that the police could use to trace more guns used in crimes back to their sellers.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about Hillary Rodham Clinton's health care efforts referred incorrectly to the beneficiaries of Project Hope.
The organization -- which employs Gail Wilensky, a former Bush Administration health care adviser who was quoted -- provides health care assistance to developing countries, not to residents of public housing in America.


Mubarak and King Hussein Discuss Coming Jordan-Israel Talks
King Hussein of Jordan conferred with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt today about Jordan's planned peace talks with Israel that are due to begin later this month.
Israel and Jordan agreed last month to conduct direct negotiationsstarting in July.
Egypt and the Palestine Liberation Organization backed Jordan's decision to hold direct talks with Israel, but the move was criticized by Lebanon and Syria.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.50
4.37
3.39
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.24
4.31
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.69
4.74
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.28
7.29
5.78
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.59
7.58
6.67
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.39
8.37
7.41
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.46
6.47
5.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Just Tell Us What the Call Costs
To the Editor:
Legislating price controls to correct abuses by the companies that own and operate pay phones (news article, June 29) is akin to trying to kill a mosquito with a sledgehammer.
The simplest, fairest and most sensible solution to the price-gouging practiced by those phone companies is to require that the cost of the call be disclosed to the customer before the call is put through.


Ford Sets Higher Prices For Some 1995 Models
The Ford Motor Company said today that it had notified dealers that it was raising the prices of certain 1995 model cars an average of 1.2 percent over similarly equipped 1994 models, an increase that Ford described as "less than half the projected rise in the Consumer Price Index."
Including the addition of new equipment that was previously optional, the base prices of these Ford models will rise 2.2%, on average.


Wrestling Promoter's Trial On Steroids Charges Begins
A Federal prosecutor today promised to expose "the dark, corrupt underbelly" of professional wrestling as the trial of Vincent K. McMahon, a wrestling promoter, began in Federal District Court here.
Mr.
McMahon and his Titan Sports Corporation, based in Stamford, Conn., have been charged with illegally distributing body-building steroids to performers in Mr.
McMahon's World Wrestling Federation.
He faces an eight-year prison term and a $500,000 fine if convicted.


Binks Manufacturing Co.  (BIN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Frank J. Antun, Restaurateur, 90
Frank J. Antun, a New York restaurateur and caterer, died on Saturday at St.
Francis Hospital-The Heart Center in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 90 and a resident of Manhasset.
Mr.
Antun, who remained active in his business until recently, had a heart attack after a brief illness, his family said.


Corrections
A chart in the Mutual Funds Quarterly Review of Business Day on Tuesday about the performance of five hypothetical retirement portfolios misstated the quarterly returns of the five Fidelity funds in the portfolio created by Eric Kobren, president of Insight Management and editor of the publication Fidelity Insight.
The figures shown were from the first quarter; for the second quarter, the Fidelity Value fund rose 3.7 percent, the International Growth and Income fund rose seven-tenths of 1 percent, the Capital and Income fund fell 2.43 percent, the Short-Term Bond fund fell 1.14 percent and the Capital Appreciation fund fell 1.96 percent.


Economic Scene; An old idea is dusted off to aid Russia: special drawing rights.
INTERESTED in a painless way to give Russia a financial hand? Join the queue.
On the eve of the Group of Seven's economic summit meeting in Naples this weekend, the leaders are generally inclined to offer the Russians something to offset their loss of face in being excluded from the meeting.
And they are specifically inclined to reward Moscow for its recent (unexpected) fiscal restraint.


The Demon Donor
Ross Perot rails so loudly against the special interests that it is easy to forget he is one.
Mr.
Perot made millions processing Government medical forms.
Now he has offered the Republican National Committee at least $1 million to finance a prime-time network television program saying what kind of medical care policies the Government ought to have.
Mr.
Perot's answer, of course, is simple.
He does not want the ones proposed by President Clinton.
He justifies his expenditure with the trumped-up reason that NBC's evenhanded health-care special on June 21 was tilted toward the White House plan.


In Connecticut, Five Centuries of Chinese Art
From New Haven to Hartford, with stops at Kent and Ridgefield in between, Connecticut offers a variety of stimulating art shows this summer.
The exhibitions range from a fascinating overview of a five-century period of Chinese art to several interesting selections of modern and contemporary work.
New Haven
Disproving the notion that summer art shows are necessarily lightweight is "The Jade Studio," at the Yale University Art Gallery through July 31.
This superb exhibition features masterpieces of Chinese painting and calligraphy from the 15th to the 19th century, taken from the collection of Wong Nanping, a leading collector in Shanghai and Hong Kong until his death in 1985.


On Stage, and Off
The On Stage, and Off column will resume with the new theater season in the fall.


Restaurants
Two young Japanese women walk into the room and instantly lower the median age of the clientele.
They giggle as the maitre d'hotel leads them across the green carpeting.
They bounce as they settle onto the pink banquette.
One smooths her long hair behind her ears; the other examines the mural just behind her, staring intently at the little figures.
As the maitre d'hotel stands at attention, they whisper to each other.
The women order glasses of white wine and twist around to look at the gracious, old-fashioned room.
When the captain begins explaining the $70 tasting menu, the women giggle with embarrassment.
The one with long hair leans forward and says in halting English, "Can you do it more slowly? We don't understand." He tries, but his French accent is too much for them.
He breaks off and says gently: "Wait. I will get somebody who can explain it better."


King World Productions Inc.(KWP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Minority Company to Sell Its Mutual Funds Directly
Starting next Friday, Ariel Capital Management, one of the country's largest minority-owned money managers, will sell its mutual funds directly to investors.
Ariel is dropping its longtime partner, the Calvert Group, which specializes in "socially responsible" investing.
Calvert distributes Ariel's two mutual funds through stockbrokers and financial planners and charges a 4.75 percent "load," or sales commission.


Long Island Shows Concentrate on Painting
Painting rules in the major museums on Long Island this summer.
De Kooning is to the east, American and French landscape painting of the 19th and 20th centuries to the west.
In between are shows devoted to American naive painting and to an overlooked Abstract Expressionist, Robert Richenburg. (In addition, a retrospective of the painter Joan Snyder is to open at the Parrish Art Museum in Southampton on Sunday.) Roslyn Harbor
One of the goofiest exhibitions in recent memory is "Normandy and Its Artists Remembered" at the Nassau County Museum, an exercise in misplaced patriotism that mixes artistic and military history to the benefit of neither.
The show's focus is Normandy, the large region in northwest France whose varied terrain figures prominently in the history of 19th-century and early 20th-century painting.
Pre-Impressionists, Impressionists, Fauves and Pointillists alike were successively drawn to its dramatic coastlines and seaside villages and resorts.
Further inland lies Giverny, which many American Impressionists, following the path of Monet, began to visit in the late 1880's.
As if this weren't enough to tackle, the exhibition commemorates the 50th anniversary of the Allied invasion of Europe, in which Normandy also played a crucial role.


Marriott International Inc.(MAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 17


Spoofing The Artists And Art Of New York
"The Genius" was shown as part of last year's New Directors/New Films Series.
Following is Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on April 2, 1993.
The film opens today at Anthology Film Archives, Second Avenue at Second Street.
Few subjects are riper for satire than the New York art world, with its hyperinflated egos and exalted prices for gimmicky trash.
And in their goofy 16-millimeter feature, "The Genius," the directing team of Joe Gibbons and Emily Breer has created a ramshackle art-world farce whose charm lies in its not taking itself too seriously.


House Postal Workers Tell of Idleness and Favors
Two years after a Congressional inquiry into the House post office, transcripts of interviews with postal employees were made public today, providing a portrait of a sloppily run mail operation eager to perform favors for powerful members of Congress.
The interviews were conducted during a House review of management problems at the post office, which led to a series of corrective steps, including the hiring of Michael Shinay, a professional postal manager.
He took over in October 1992 from Robert V. Rota, who was forced to resign after initial reports of wrongdoing.


Break the Police Corruption Cycle
New York City is aswirl with police news -- the Mollen Commission report, the Mayor's plan to crack down on "quality-of-life" offenses, the debate over how to prevent sexual assaults in municipal swimming pools.
Of course, the findings of the Mollen Commission, coming after two years of investigation, claimed the bigger headlines, but all the police news is connected in one sense.
The city and its new administration face a watershed opportunity to reform the Police Department.
The Mollen Commission has turned up story after story of rogue cops who peddled guns and drugs or sold protection, openly profiting from the brutality that besieges the city's most desperate neighborhoods.
In such neighborhoods, it rings hollow to talk about quality-of-life crimes when the police have shredded the social fabric by committing felonies in plain sight.


Fox Chairwoman Is Out in Shake-Up
Lucie Salhany, the highest-ranking woman executive in network television, resigned from Fox Broadcasting yesterday after a management restructuring that eliminated her position as chairwoman.
Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of Fox Inc. and its parent, the News Corporation, announced the shake-up, which also created a new Fox Television division.


Spectrum Sheds a President But Adds 4 Outside Directors
Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. said yesterday that its embattled president, Peter T. Caserta, had terminated his contract with the company, more than three months after voluntarily stepping aside and taking a leave of absence.
At the same time, Spectrum, in an attempt to improve its tarnished reputation, named four new outside directors, three of whom are experts in the cellular industry in which Spectrum means to make its fortune.


The Sadness of, the Madness of Love
MURDEROUS obsession, a medieval romance, a lovesick soldier and a woman in love with a chimp: the French don't own the idea that love is strange, but they've always known what to do with it.
Now it is the basis for a wickedly delightful series celebrating crazy love.
"L'Amour Fou: French Films of Passion, Romance and Obsession," begins today and runs for the next five weeks at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
The idea is irresistible, probably because it is so obviously true.
You could make a good case that amour is always fou; if it's rational it's not love, but more like a business deal.
One of tonight's opening features, the alluring, little-known 1937 film "Gueule d'Amour," features Jean Gabin as a Foreign Legionnaire in the south of France.
Known as Lover Boy (Gueule d'Amour), he has the society matrons complaining; in the last six months they have lost nine maids, all distracted by his charms.
Even now, on screen, it's easy to see why women would have followed the dashing Gabin into the desert.


Storm-Tossed on a Sea of Emotions; New York's Haitians Feel Betrayed, Angry and Confused by New Policy on Refugees
Abner Celestine sees only danger in the desperate sea voyages that so many of his fellow Haitians have embarked upon in recent weeks, and has even written to his three brothers in Haiti warning against such risks.
Nevertheless, Mr.
Celestine voiced misgivings over the Clinton Administration's announcement on Tuesday that no Haitian refugees fleeing the country by boat would be resettled in the United States.
To him and other Haitians in this suburban enclave about 25 miles north of Manhattan, it was as if their adopted homeland had turned its back on their native Haiti.


S.E.C. Gets Fed Case Data
The Federal Reserve's Inspector General, Brent Bowen, has turned over to the Securities and Exchange Commission the results of an investigation of Wayne D. Angell, a former Fed official, the chairman of the House Banking Committee disclosed today.
Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, Democrat of Texas, said Mr.
Bowen sent the findings to the S.E.C. after he had urged him to do so because of dissatisfaction with the inspector's inquiry into whether Mr.
Angell used privileged Fed information to advise clients of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.


Fatherhood Initiative Serves No Party
To the Editor:
In "Let's Not Revive Family Stereotypes" (letter, June 29), Judsen Culbreth, editor of Working Mother magazine, characterizes the National Fatherhood Initiative as "Republican-backed." This is not true.
The initiative is neither affiliated with nor receives funds from any political party.
Our advisory board is made up of both Democrats and Republicans.


Jacome Has Them Forgetting Predecessor
Jason Jacome was summoned to the major leagues to replace Dwight Gooden in the Mets' rotation, a situation that did not sit all that well with the 23-year-old rookie left-hander from Tucson, Ariz.
With a string of strong performances for the Mets' Class AAA franchise in Norfolk, Jacome felt he deserved the opportunity to pitch in the big leagues, he just felt a little antsy about the reason.
At this point, though, Jacome is doing his best to make Mets' observers forget whom he is here to replace.


Smart &amp; Final Inc.(SMF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Stolt-Nielsen S.A. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


On Duty on the Hudson In a Ritual of Summer
Here, where the Hudson River cuts so deeply through the valley that steep hills sweep down on both sides to meet the broad expanse of the water, Ulster County deputy sheriffs trade their patrol cars for power boats.
It is a ritual that repeats itself each summer, as the only full-time police boat patrol on this leg of the river, 90 miles north of New York City, enforces New York State's boating laws.


Moving to Compensate Families in Human-Organ Market
At 2:30 A.M. on Feb. 16, 1990, Susan Renea Sutton of Moore, Okla., ended a quarrel with her boyfriend by pulling a small pistol from her purse and shooting herself in the right temple.
After she was declared brain dead at an Oklahoma City hospital, her parents gave doctors permission to remove her heart, liver and corneas, as well as some of her bones and skin, for transplantation.
The hospital and medical teams that removed the organs and tissues received thousands of dollars for their services from patients who needed transplants, from the patients' insurance companies or from Medicare or Medicaid.
The nonprofit agency that coordinated the transplants also received thousands of dollars, as did the surgeons and hospitals where the transplants took place.


METRO DIGEST
CORRUPTION IN UNIFORM: WHAT NEXT?
Mayor Giuliani promised a thoroughgoing effort to root out corruption in the New York City Police Department.
But he stopped well short of endorsing a special panel's call for the creation of a permanent, independent police commission with broad powers to investigate the nation's largest police force.
A1.


No Headline
"This is a rare and wonderful thing. There are mysteries in the park and the mysteries are really wonderful." -- ELIZABETH BARLOW ROGERS, administrator of Central Park, on the visiting green herons.  [ A1:2. ]


Ganim Is Leaving Race for Governor
With Connecticut's Democratic convention less than a week away, the Bridgeport Mayor, Joseph P. Ganim, withdrew from the gubernatorial race today and threw his support behind John B. Larson, State Senate President pro tem and the front-runner for the party's nomination.
Mr.
Ganim, 34, has been Mayor of the state's largest city since 1991.
He had been running third in a field of four candidates but polls showed he was gaining momentum.


NIKE INC. (NKE,N)
Nike Inc. said yesterday that a 10 percent decline in its fourth-quarter earnings was less severe than expected because of higher American sales of its outdoor, cross-training, walking and tennis shoes.
The world's largest athletic shoe company earned $69.2 million, or 93 cents a share.
The results were about 20 percent higher than expectations, according to a survey of 14 analysts by Zacks Investment Research, who predicted the company would earn 77 cents a share.
"These results have reaffirmed the strength of the industry and reaffirm our leadership role within the industry," Philip H. Knight, Nike's chairman, said.


Nina Stroganova, 78, Ballerina Who Became a Notable Teacher
Nina Stroganova, a Danish-born ballerina who was a founding member of American Ballet Theater and who became a noted dance teacher in New York City, died on Tuesday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 78 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was leukemia, said her daughter, Ludmilla Dokoudovsky-Zalewski.


Strawberry Bats Softly (0-3) and Carries Some Big Hopes
The boos rained down in the eighth inning, moments after he jumped into the batter's box and the pitch slowly veered outside.
Ball one.
Three more to come.
Darryl Strawberry produced a faint smile.
He could still draw an intentional walk.
They still didn't want to pitch to him.


Herons and Birders' Hearts Flutter in Park
Charles Francis Kennedy was the first one to spot the two green herons coming and going on their elegant bowed wings from a pin oak near the Lake in Central Park.
He crept up through the trash-strewn underbrush to get a closer look through his binoculars.
He couldn't believe his luck. A nest.


For Judge, a Case Where Circumstances Outweigh Safeguards
In ruling today to admit evidence seized without a warrant at O. J. Simpson's house, Judge Kathleen Kennedy-Powell of Municipal Court here relied on her interpretation of a well-established legal principle.
That principle holds that there are times when searches and seizures can take place without a warrant because "exigent circumstances," meaning those that have a certain urgency, outweigh the usual constitutional safeguards provided by the Fourth Amendment.


Charles S. Benson Is Dead at 72; Expert on Education Economics
Dr.
Charles Scott Benson, an expert on the economics of education, died on Saturday in Carlsbad, Calif., while on a weekend visit with relatives.
He was 72 and lived in Kensington, Calif., outside Berkeley.
The apparent cause was a heart attack, said the University of California, where Dr.
Benson was a professor emeritus and, from 1964 until his retirement three years ago, taught educational administration and policy analysis.


A Carnival Replaces Jayne Mansfield's Head
Loud, campy and sophomoric.
Right down to the exclamation point in the title, those adjectives just about sum up "Blood Orgy of the Carnival Queens!," the hectic little musical at the Hamlet of Bank Street Theater, at 155 Bank Street in Greenwich Village.
It's not bad, but it's not novel either, being one of those shows that finds its inspiration in Grade Z horror films, the fashions of the late 1960's, the headlines of supermarket tabloids and the wistfulness of Dorothy Gale of Kansas and Oz.


Caray Is Released From the Hospital
The Chicago Cubs broadcaster HARRY CARAY was released from a Chicago hospital yesterday, two weeks after he stumbled and fell before a Cubs game in Miami.
Caray, 77, was being treated for an irregular heartbeat discovered after he apparently was overcome by heat before the June 23 game at Joe Robbie Stadium. (AP)


TBWA Gets Control Of Danish Agency
TBWA International said yesterday that it had acquired a majority interest in Mark B TBWA, an agency in Copenhagen in which it formerly held a minority interest.
Terms were not disclosed.
The agency, with billings estimated at $10 million from clients like Absolut vodka, will be renamed TBWA Copenhagen and will continue to be headed by Claes Rasmussen and Christian Marfelt as co-managing directors.


Decades Later, Echo of Montana Firestorm
It is as if the same units that stormed Anzio or Gallipoli did so once more with a new generation of soldiers, just as powerless as those who fell the first time to escape the slaughter .
The date July 6, 1994, will from now on be paired with Aug. 5, 1949.
The fire that killed at least 12 firefighters outside Glenwood Springs, Colo., on Wednesday bore a ghoulish resemblance to a fire 45 years earlier in Mann Gulch, Mont., that killed 13 and indelibly altered the way forest fires are fought.


Gold, Lots of It, in a Bid for Canadian Mines
In what would be one of the largest mining takeovers ever in Canada, Royal Oak Mines Inc. of Vancouver announced today that it would try to acquire all the shares of Lac Minerals Ltd. of Toronto, a company more than twice its size.
The total value of the offer is $1.4 billion (United States).
If the proposal goes through, the new enterprise, with combined annual gold production of 1.5 million ounces, would become one of the top-tier North American gold producers, joining the likes of American Barrick, Placer Dome, Homestake Mining and Newmont Mining.


Sports of The Times; Many Called, But Who'll Be Chosen?
"I SAW the most beautiful girl on television," David Lassiter was saying with a sigh.
"Tall, elegant. She's like an angel."
The 22-year-old amateur boxer from Queens put down the "Tyson" script alluding to the former heavyweight champion and his ex-wife, Robin Givens, then glanced across the shiny wooden table at Ellen Parks.


Germans Gain Insight By Aiding Elderly Jews
Rose Welsch slowly pushed her family photos across the tiny dinner table, each one accompanied by a sigh, then silence.
A distinguished-looking brother, elegant relatives at a spa, a child stuck in time with a frilly dress and faint grin.
Each square offered faded proof that her family knew happiness before they knew Nazi Germany.
"This is my brother's wife: Killed," she said, adding another face to the table-top gallery of loved ones she left behind in Eastern Europe when she immigrated here as a teen-ager in 1928.
"Here are more. Not enough. Killed."


Blue Chips Continue to Rise; Dow Up 13.92
Stocks were higher yesterday, with gains posted by many big industrial companies, which are particularly sensitive to strengthening economic growth.
Market analysts said the second-quarter profits of many industrial companies that have been cutting costs might be larger than expected.
Stocks of several retailers gained after strong store sales were reported for June.
Dayton Hudson, which rose 1, to 81 7/8, said sales in its stores that were open more than a year jumped 12.7 percent, while Wal-Mart Stores, which rose 7/8, to 24 3/4, said its same-store sales rose 9.3 percent last month.
Caldor rose 7/8, to 29 3/4, and Sears, Roebuck was ahead, 3/8, to 47 7/8.


Men Who Love Boys Explain Themselves
Adi Sideman's crude documentary "Chicken Hawk: Men Who Love Boys," has an inflammatory title that belies its even-handed portrait of the North American Man/Boy Love Association, the notorious pedophile organization better known as Nambla.
The film, which opens today at Cinema Village, is built around interviews with several men whose professed objects of desire are youths under the legal age of consent.
One after another, they defend themselves against the view of Nambla as an organization of sadistic child molesters and pornographers, arguing that Nambla is a civil rights organization opposed to the age-of-consent laws.
The more outspoken among them talk of child liberation in a "sexophobic" society.


U.S. Troops on the Golan? It Worked in Sinai; Let's Know the Risks
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal makes a persuasive case for Congressional debate before commitment to place American military personnel on the Golan Heights as part of a peace agreement between Israel and Syria (column, June 28).
As proponents of the view that Congress must be a partner with the President in United States foreign policy, we at the American Israel Public Affairs Committee agree.


Ralph C. Rinzler, 59, Smithsonian Official And Folk-Life Expert
Ralph C. Rinzler, an authority on American folk music who was an assistant secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, died on Saturday at his home in Washington.
He was 59.
He had been ill for a long time, said his wife, Kate.
During his 27 years at the Smithsonian, Mr.
Rinzler became the founding director of the institution's Festival of American Folklife and also the director of its office of folk-life programs.


At the Summit: New Leaders and Old, With New Agendas and Old
BRITAIN
Prime Minister John Major arrives in Naples in a curious position: Britain's economy is growing at a healthy clip, unemployment is falling and inflation remains subdued, yet his standing in the polls is the worst of any British leader since World War II.
Furthermore, his Conservative Party is deeply split after 15 years in power.


Beginning A Tour Of Verdi
The notion of a painstaking grand tour through a composer's entire output seems to have originated with the Germans, with their cultivation of the Gesamtausgabe (complete edition).
Now we are accustomed to experiencing completeness not only on paper but in performance and on recordings as well.
The coming centennial of the death of Verdi, in 2001, has inspired at least two surveys of Verdi's operatic canon, one by Covent Garden and one by the more modestly proportioned New York Grand Opera.
The New York series began on Wednesday night with a performance of Verdi's "Oberto" in Central Park.
The value of this sort of endeavor depends on the case at hand.
With a composer like Brahms, who edited his own work severely and maintained an astonishing consistency of inspiration, a complete-works survey is revelatory.
A volcanically prolific figure like Schubert, on the other hand, makes a rather overwhelming and wearying effect in concentrated chronological doses. (I've experienced both in radio presentations.) Verdi falls somewhere in between; some of his operas are unquestionably better than others, the last operas tower majestically above the first, and yet even the most obscure works have something singular and satisfying about them.


At Summit, Little to Fix
As far as summit talks go, the meeting here of the leaders of seven major industrial democracies is a rather strange gathering for one simple reason: It has very little potential to do good, in large part because all seven countries already have economies growing faster than at any time in years.
They really are not that broke and don't need much fixing.
But this meeting has significant potential to do bad, given the nervous state of world financial markets.
The dollar's recent plunge against the yen and the German mark has roiled the currency markets, and uncertainty about the future of exchange and interest rates has global bond and stock markets on edge.


Joseph Gay; Executive, 86
Joseph Gay, a former executive of Wright Investors Service in Bridgeport, Conn., died on Saturday at his home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He was 86.
Born in Austria, Mr.
Gay attended the University of Vienna and immigrated to New York in 1940.
He served with the Office of Strategic Services in World War II.


Mosquito Tracking in Flood Led to Large Savings by U.S.
In a development that may have relevance to the flooding in the South, health officials report that an emergency surveillance program allowed them to forgo expensive contingency plans for widespread mosquito control after last year's floods in the Midwest.
Although the mosquito population increased after those floods, the surveillance program detected only a low risk of mosquito-borne illness, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said today.


Yes, It Was Hot Enough For Me, Thank You
Stop complaining.
It was cooler yesterday than on the same day last year.
That was hot!
July 7, 1993, set the record for the date in Central Park: 98 degrees.
Yesterday's high, by contrast, was a balmy 97 degrees, according to the National Weather Service, which has been taking readings there since 1869.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.38
5.02
3.09
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.23
4.24
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.70
4.69
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.29
7.28
5.74
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.60
7.59
6.65
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.36
8.39
7.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.44
6.46
5.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Seaway Food Town Inc.(SEWY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


CHRONICLE
The committee that organized the annual fireworks display and picnic in East Hampton, L.I., a benefit for Boys Harbor, didn't want to raise the price of tickets for the July 16 event: $20 for general admission to watch the show from the Boys Harbor camp grounds; $200 for the show and picnic beforehand at the home of ANTHONY DREXEL DUKE.
So to make more money, the organization, which runs a camp for poor city children, decided to emulate other charities and offer donors the chance to put their names on a structure.
Contributors of $10,000 will have their names affixed to cabins at the camp for the entire summer; donors of $5,000 and $7,500 will get their names on a cabin for shorter periods.


Market Place; New York savings bank mergers may not see many windfalls.
THE announcement on Wednesday that Dime Bancorp and Anchor Bancorp plan to merge into the largest savings bank on the East Coast confirmed that banks in the New York area are now in a certifiable merger boom.
But the sharp drop in Dime's stock price is a warning that this takeover frenzy may not create easy riches for investors.
Dime's shares, which reached a high of $10.75 last Friday, were down to $9.25 by Wednesday and lost 12.5 cents, to $9.125, yesterday.
Anchor shares fell slightly, to $15.50 on Wednesday, but rose to $15.75 yesterday.


Refugees Pack Camps in Rwanda
Two weeks ago, some 40,000 refugees had jammed themselves into this hilltop village.
Today there are at least 60,000, and peasant families continue to stream in, arriving after days of walking, in rags, dirty, exhausted, suffering from malaria and dysentery.
The International Committee of the Red Cross estimates that at least 1.8 million Rwandans have been forced to flee their villages and are living in makeshift camps like this one.


The New Measure of Man
There are good reasons for suggesting that the modern age has ended.
Many things indicate that we are going through a transitional period, when it seems that something is on the way out and something else is painfully being born.
It is as if something were crumbling, decaying and exhausting itself, while something else, still indistinct, were arising from the rubble.
The distinguishing features of transitional periods are a mixing and blending of cultures and a plurality or parallelism of intellectual and spiritual worlds.
These are periods when all consistent value systems collapse, when cultures distant in time and space are discovered or rediscovered.
New meaning is gradually born from the encounter, or the intersection, of many different elements.


Abroad at Home; Reversal -- Of Fortune?
For a onetime observer of British politics to examine the scene today is an eye-rubbing experience.
Many of the old truisms have been turned upside down.
The Labor Party used to be the home of Little Englanders opposed to British membership in the European Community and generally suspicious of foreigners.
Today a powerful group of Conservatives are Euroskeptics and sound the trumpet of xenophobia.
Labor is committed to Europe.


'Dream' Contraceptive's Nightmare
When Norplant went on the market in 1991, it was hailed as a "dream contraceptive," a breakthrough for women who could have a simple, 10-minute insertion procedure and then not worry about getting pregnant for five years.
But now that nearly a million American women have chosen to have the hormone-releasing capsules implanted in their arms, some users charge that removing a Norplant can be a painful and complicated matter.


Georgia Floods Reflect a Global Pattern
Tropical storms sometimes bring more rainfall and deadlier floods to a given place than their bigger and more violent brothers and sisters, hurricanes.
Tropical Storm Alberto, whose remnants unloosed record rains and raging floodwaters on parts of Georgia in the last few days, is a classic case.
But there has also been another important contributor to Georgia's weather problems, a big high-pressure system over the Atlantic Ocean, the same "Bermuda high" responsible for this week's heat and humidity in New York and much of the East.


Younger Lindros Joins Isles' Minicamp
He has the same build, the same piercing blue eyes and the same presence of his older brother.
But the comparisons should stop there.
Brett Lindros, first-round draft pick of the New York Islanders, joined a dozen other prospective players for the first day of minicamp yesterday at the Rinx in Hidden Pond Park.
At 6 feet 4 inches and 215 pounds, Lindros has all the size and bulk the Islanders say they need most.
But that does not mean he will make the roster this season.


Reporter's Notebook; For the U.S. in Poland, the Cheering Has Stopped
President Clinton's 26-hour visit to Poland did not exactly extend the love affair that Poles had with Presidents Bush and Reagan.
Perhaps this is because Poland is becoming a more normal nation, a place where people have to work on a weekday morning and where Western presidents come and go.
But the muted response by the emotive Poles also seemed to suggest that they feel spurned.
Having won its freedom, Poland senses that it is no longer so alluring.


Clinton Offers Poland Hope, but Little Aid
President Clinton offered a message of reassurance to this capital in the heart of Central Europe today, with words, gestures and a token gift of aid intended to display his hope that all of Europe might soon be knit with economic and security ties.
But Mr.
Clinton's overture, made in private meetings and an eloquent address to the Polish Assembly, appeared to have gone only a small way toward soothing the uneasiness so prevalent among Poles, who fear that their effort to strengthen their links to the West could fall victim to Western fickleness.


In New Jersey, a Permanent Japonisme Display
New Jersey art museums within easy striking distance of Manhattan offer a number of low-key rewards this summer.
The Newark Museum is host to a cluster of offbeat mini-shows, from contemporary American to South Asian art.
Jersey City Museum's airy space on the top floor of the city's public library is filled with the vital work of six young sculptors.
And the Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum at Rutgers University in New Brunswick has recently inaugurated the first-ever permanent display devoted to the international esthetic movement known as Japonisme.
New Brunswick
The Kusakabe-Griffis Japonisme Gallery documents a formative though still little-explored chapter in modern art history, the period from the mid-19th to early-20th century when Japan and the West were first engaged in fertile cultural exchange.


National Bancorp of Alaska reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Movement in Nature And Nature in Movement
To walk through the gates of Wave Hill, the environmental center in Riverdale, the Bronx, is to enter a magical green kingdom of lush rolling hills and woods.
Dance has been a part of the kingdom for a decade or so, first under the direction of Earl Tucker, whose programs tended to use the park as a set for finished dances.
Dancing in the Streets, which produces the summer series now, encourages choreographers to make pieces for the setting.
There are good and bad things to be said for each approach.
Movement and set came together in inspired new ways during "Journey," a suite of eight pieces presented by the Prowess Dancearts Collective on Wednesday afternoon, in the opening program of the Dances for Wave Hill series.
In one such moment, a woman bathed in a shower of leaves that clung to downward-reaching boughs.
Dancers whistling softly in the dusk seemed to provoke a chorus of birdcalls from the surrounding trees.


Laidlaw (LDWA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Scenes From a Marriage Of Tolstoyan Complexity
Love and Hatred The Stormy Marriage of Leo and Sonya Tolstoy By William L. Shirer 400 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
Thanks to Leo and Sonya Tolstoy's shared compulsion for chronicling their own lives, their marriage remains one of the most documented relationships in literary history, minutely chronicled in their own diaries and letters as well as in the writings of their children and assorted hangers-on.


Lloyd Price And the Joy Of the Past Updated
The most obvious anachronism at Lloyd Price's opening show at the Ballroom on Wednesday night was the singer's embarrassment about the past.
Mr.
Price was an important star, based in New Orleans, in early rock-and-roll days.
He wrote "Lawdy Miss Clawdy," a hit for himself and also for Elvis Presley.
He was a solid singer, and his career ranged from rock ("Stagger Lee," "I'm Gonna Get Married," "Personality") to a swing version of "Misty," arranged by Slide Hampton.
For his show on Wednesday, Mr.
Price glued together most of his early rock-and-roll hits as medleys, tossing them off with just a hint of the ebullience and joy that his music, laden with New Orleans inanity, can impart.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ERICSSON, Stockholm, has been awarded a turnkey contract in Oman valued at $25 million by the General Telecommunication Organization, the telecommunications administration in Oman, for the expansion of the country's rural network.


Knicks' Top Picks Have Much In Common
At a news conference yesterday, the Knicks unveiled Tavares Montgomery (Monty) Williams and Charlie Ward Jr., the two quarterback-point guards they chose last week in the first round of the National Basketball Association draft.
Quarterbacks? Point guards?


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"101 HUMILIATING STORIES," New York Theater Workshop, 79 East Fourth Street, East Village.
A one-woman show by Lisa Kron; directed by John Robert Hoffman.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 302-6989.
"THE NAKED TRUTH," WPA Theater, 519 West 23d Street, Chelsea.
A comedy about art and censorship by Paul Rudnick, who also stars; directed by Christopher Ashley.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 206-0523.
Closing Next Weekend
"THE SISTERS ROSENSWEIG," Ethel Barrymore Theater, 243 West 47th Street, Manhattan.
A comedy-drama by Wendy Wasserstein about an American banker in London and her two younger sisters, who gather to celebrate her birthday; starring Michael Learned, Linda Lavin and Tony Roberts; directed by Daniel Sullivan.
Through July 16.
Performances: Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"BLOWN SIDEWAYS THROUGH LIFE," Cherry Lane Theater, 38 Commerce Street, Greenwich Village.
Claudia Shear's one-woman show about her 40-some jobs; directed by Christopher Ashley.
Through July 17.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M; Saturday at 5 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $32.50 and $35.
Information: (212) 989-2285.
"MERRILY WE ROLL ALONG," Theater at St.
Peter's Church, 619 Lexington Avenue, at 54th Street, Manhattan.
A revised production of the 1981 musical based on the play by George S. Kaufman and Moss Hart; music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim; directed by Susan H. Schulman.
Through July 17.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
All performances are sold out, but a waiting list for returned tickets is begun two hours before each performances.
Information: (212) 534-5366.
"STONEWALL, NIGHT VARIATIONS," En Garde Arts, Pier 25, West Street between Chambers and Laight Streets, Lower Manhattan.
A theater piece with music, about homosexuals who defied the police during the 1969 raid at the Stonewall Inn, by Lisa Landau.
Through July 17.
Performances: Tuesday through Sunday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 779-9777.
"SANCTIFYING GRACE," Irish Arts Center, 553 West 51st Street, Manhattan.
A one-man show about a Brooklyn Irish neighborhood in the 1970's, by Colin Quinn and Lou DiMaggio; starring Mr.
Quinn; directed by Robert Moresco.
Through July 17.
Performances: Wednesday through Saturday at 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20 and $25.
Information: (212) 757-3318.
TOUHAMI ENNADRE AND PAUL ROSIN, Exit Art/The First World, 548 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
Black-and-white photographs by Mr.
Ennadre and Mr.
Rosin that explore the human body, sexuality, death and the environment.
Through July 15.
Hours: Tuesday to Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Suggested donation: $2.
Information: (212) 966-7745.


Error Conceded in Not Crediting Arranger
The record company that released Natalie Cole's smash hit "Unforgettable" in 1991 has conceded that it made a mistake when it failed to credit the late Nelson Riddle as the arranger for the record, which won six Grammy awards in 1992.
In a settlement with Naomi Riddle, the widow of the big-band arranger of the 1950's and 1960's, Elektra Records said that all future manufacturing runs, promotions and advertising of the record would credit Mr.
Riddle's arrangement.


Sounds Around Town
Double Shot of Be-Bop
Phil Woods Quintet and the Jackie McLean Quintet, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
Two of the great second-generation be-bop saxophonists share a bill.
Phil Woods can be melancholic; when he's not being mechanical, his inventions are given to a kind of melodicism.
Jackie McLean is simply one of the great musicians to come out of the 1950's and 60's, with an exploratory sensibility and one of the nastiest tones in jazz, acidic and burned.
Sets are tonight through Sunday are at 9 and 11:30.
There is a $27.50 cover with a $5 minimum at the tables and a $15 cover and a one-drink minimum at the bar.
PETER WATROUS Modern Meets Ancient
Marce et Tumpak, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
Marce et Tumpak, one of the Caribbean's better bands, mixes syntheziers with wooden drums and flute, the modern and the ancient.
Like so many other Caribbean groups, the band, from Martinique, is trying to balance the rush of technology with the older, original synthesis.
Above all, though, it's a dance band, with bright rolling rhythms and fine singing.
Shows are tonight are at 11 P.M. and 1 A.M.; the cover is $16.
P.
W.
Blues the Hard Way
Son Seals, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Son Seals is a brutal blues guitarist, with a rough, almost rock tone.
He's also a hoarse singer, and percussive in his singing and guitar playing as befits an ex-drummer.
He's powerful, and his solos build intensity not by the spewing of notes but by their placement.
He's as good as modern urban blues gets.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $12.50 cover and a $8 minimum at the tables and a $12.50 cover only at the bar.
P.
W.


Evan's 'Trouble' May Have a Physical Origin
To the Editor:
Millions of children are affected by depression, autism and other mental illnesses.
"The Trouble With Evan" was a documentary of a troubled family shown on public television (review, June 21).
Although it was a good portrayal of a disturbed child, its focus was solely on family dynamics, neglecting to address issues that account for Evan's "trouble."


Corrections
An article on June 29 about new Federal guidelines for treating congestive heart failure misstated the toll-free telephone number for obtaining copies of the guidelines.
The correct number is (800) 358-9295.


Support for Warm-Blooded-Dinosaur Theory
If oxygen trapped in the bones of a well-preserved tyrannosaur skeleton tells a true tale, the king of Cretaceous dinosaurs was almost certainly warm-blooded, capable of maintaining its body temperature by adjusting its metabolism, two scientists at North Carolina State University report.
The paper is the latest volley in a long-standing debate among scientists as to whether dinosaurs were warm-blooded or not.
Dr.
William J. Showers, the paper's co-author, said in a recent interview that although new evidence strengthens the case for warm-bloodedness he does not expect his report to settle the question.
His article, written with Dr.
Reese E. Barrick, is to be published today in the journal Science.


Bengals Sign McGhee, a Former Giant
The Cincinnati Bengals yesterday signed the free agent KANAVIS McGHEE, formerly a defensive end with the Giants.


U.S. Urged to Reflect Wider Diversity In Racial and Ethnic Classifications
Teja Arboleda's maternal grandparents are European.
His father's mother is African-American.
His father's father is the product of a marriage between a Filipino and a Chinese.
Although listed as white on his birth certificate, Mr.
Arboleda refused to state his ethnic or racial identity on the 1990 census form.
And so an employee of the Census Bureau noted his name, olive-toned skin and dark hair, and marked him down as Hispanic.


For 125 Years, Mohonk Has Been a Summer Respite


New Bosnia Map: A Problem for Serbs Who Oppose Fragmentation
The latest map advanced by international diplomats to settle the Bosnian war offers the Muslim-led Government a more extensive and viable territory than any previous proposal, but appears to pose critical problems to the Bosnian Serbs.
Throughout the 27-month war, the Bosnian Serbs have made two basic demands: that their territory be contiguous rather than fragmented, and that their claim to separate statehood or eventual integration with Serbia be accepted.


Test Scores Show Gaps By Ethnicity
The proportion of black and Hispanic students in New York City public schools who read and do math at the level expected for their grade is far below that of white and Asian students, new test results show.
This is the first year that the school system has broken down results of the annual math and reading exams by ethnicity, and the results, released yesterday, confirmed what some school officials have long suspected: minority students, many from the city's poorest neighborhoods, are at a huge disadvantage in the schools.


Henry Hill; Gallery Owner, 94
Henry Hill, a founder and former president of Berry-Hill Galleries in New York City, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 94.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Angela Plowden-Wardlaw.


Appeals Court Rules Against Reynolds
An appeals court in Cincinnati yesterday refused to reconsider a ruling that denied the track star BUTCH REYNOLDS a $27 million damage award against the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
The decision from the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit means that Reynolds will have to take his case to the Supreme Court if he chooses to continue his fight with the federation, world track's governing body.
Reynolds has until Oct. 5 to file such an appeal, which the runner said he would do.


Anti-Gay Resolution Draws Louganis Protest
Greg Louganis, who last month openly declared that he was gay, this afternoon stunned an audience that included United States Olympic officials when he said the 1996 Olympic volleyball competition should be taken away from Cobb County in Georgia because of a controversial resolution condemning the gay life style.
The resolution, passed last August by the Cobb County Commission, said among other things "that the life style advocated by the gay community should not be endorsed by government policy makers because they are incompatible with the standards to which this community subscribes."


INSIDE
No, It Was Worse Last Year
It may have seemed a bit steamy, but yesterday's Central Park high of 97 was a full degree lower than a year ago.
Today: More of same.
Page B4.
Disparities in School Tests
Black and Hispanic students in New York public schools scored far lower in reading and math than whites and Asians, new tests show.
Page B1.
Yemen Says War Is Won
After toppling the southern capital of Aden, Government forces in Yemen said they have vanquished the south in the two-month civil war.
Page A3.
Norplant's Painful Undoing
Some of the 1 million American women who got the contraceptive implants say that removing them can be painful and complicated.
Page A10.
The Human Organ Market
An effort is under way among some legal scholars and doctors to provide some form of compensation for the families of organ donors.
Page B7.


Clinton Packs Promises
The President came to Poland with generous words of support, but little in the way of substantive assistance, to the dismay of some Poles.
Page A9.


Seven Italian Seamen Are Found Slain on Vessel Docked in Algeria
In what seemed to be an attack by Islamic militants who have vowed to kill foreigners, seven Italian seamen were found killed with their throats slit aboard a ship in an Algerian port today, Italian officials said.
The men had apparently been slain while they slept, bringing to 42 the number of foreigners killed in terrorist attacks in Algeria since the militant Algerian Armed Islamic Group told foreigners last October to leave the country within a month or face retribution.


Secretive Property Empires Made Public by Stock Sales
The country's $3 trillion commercial real estate industry is being transformed from a collection of often secretive family-dominated fiefs into public companies beholden to thousands of shareholders.
Many investors and property managers say the change heralds an era in which real estate companies will have to answer to Wall Street, like public companies in other industries.
That means opening their books, devising plans to make their businesses grow, and living up to them -- or suffering the market's wrath.


Phoebe Helman; Artist and Teacher, 65
Phoebe Helman, an artist and professor at Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, died on Sunday at Eastern Maine Medical Center in Bangor.
She was 65 and had homes in Manhattan and Deer Isle, Me.
The cause was cancer, a statement from the public-affairs department at Pratt said.


Big Retailers' Sales Posted Gain in June
The nation's leading retailers yesterday reported generally stronger sales in June, as warm weather heated up demand for seasonal merchandise like air-conditioners, barbecue grills and casual clothing.
"It was a decent month," said Robert F. Buchanan, a retail analyst at the NatWest Securities Corporation.
"June was a little bit better than expected."


Baggio Gives Away Shirt Off His Back in Grand Gesture
To a devoted soccer fan, nothing is more precious than the jersey of an international player, especially if that player is the captain of a national team and is considered the best in the world.
Roberto Baggio of Italy is considered by many to be the top player in the sport, and it is a jersey he gave to Charlie Stillitano that is serving as a yardstick for the ups and downs of the Italian team in the World Cup.


It Takes $17.1 Million, but Stevens Will Remain With the Devils
Scott Stevens will continue to be the spiritual leader of the Devils, but this time as the highest-paid defenseman in the National Hockey League.
As promised, Lou Lamoriello, the president and general manager of the Devils, yesterday matched the four-year, $17.1 million offer that Stevens signed with St.
Louis this week, keeping the 30-year-old All-Star in New Jersey.


Holy Bull's Top Brass Ignoring Breeders' Cup
Whose fault is it that Holy Bull, the hottest horse in America, was never nominated to run in the Breeders' Cup?
Here he is, the great gray colt who has won 9 of his 11 races leading almost every step of the way, one of the leading candidates for the title Horse of the Year.
And yet he will have to keep streaking toward his titles without racing in the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic, the richest race in America.


At the Bar; The prospect of another quiet Court confirmation hearing puts the recent loud ones in perspective.
When Judge Stephen G. Breyer takes his seat on Tuesday before the Senate Judiciary Committee, which is considering his nomination to the Supreme Court, there will be the usual trappings of television lights, distinguished supporters and dark-suited senators pronouncing on the importance of the event.
In the ensuing four days there will be serious, sometimes intelligent discussions to accompany the spectacle, invoking comparisons with the high-profile confirmation fights of the recent past over Supreme Court nominees.


Irish Fans Are Great To 'Losers'
Ireland stuck to its tradition of joyous wakes for the dead today as an estimated 100,000 singing, cheering people welcomed back the national soccer team, which had been knocked out of the World Cup by the Netherlands on Monday.
In spite of the second-round loss, the atmosphere was one of victory with rock bands and traditional musicians performing and thousands of green, white and gold Irish flags waving.
It was a young crowd -- with more canned soda in sight than Guinness stout -- that gathered at Phoenix Park for a welcome that was first scheduled, canceled and then re-scheduled.


Connecticut Tightens Restrictions on Gun Owners
Through hours of debate on a bill restricting the sale of handguns, one legislator after another rose in the Capitol here to say that more gun control will not stop the violence in Connecticut's cities that has become a huge concern among voters and politicians.
The poverty and social problems in the cities were too deep, they said, the hold of the drug trade and street gangs too tight, for the General Assembly to legislate guns out of the shooters' hands.
It was a familiar argument from gun-control opponents, another angle on their "Guns Don't Kill, People Do" bumper stickers.
And this time, even many of the bill's supporters agreed.


For Children
Storytelling Ezra Jack Keats Storytelling Festival
Lefferts Homestead Children's Museum
Prospect Park
Entrance at Ocean Avenue and Lincoln Road
Brooklyn
(718) 965-8999
Recommended ages: 3 to 10
Hans Christian Andersen Statue
Central Park
Conservatory Water
Entrance at 74th Street and Fifth Avenue
(800) 201-7275
Recommended ages: 5 and up
Ten years ago, Cooper-Moore adopted the maiden names of his mother and his paternal grandmother, two formidable influences in the life of this storyteller and musician.
"They ran the show," he said.
He has been running his own show as Prospect Park's resident storyteller for the last two summers.
He was discovered, he said, by Betsy Gotbaum, the former Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation, and Tupper Thomas, the president of the Prospect Park Alliance.
He said they saw him informally performing in the park and wanted to sign him up, but they didn't know for what.
Then the storytelling job, sponsored by the Ezra Jack Keats Foundation, turned up, and he was hired as a raconteur. (Keats was a children's book author and illustrator in the 1960's and 70's whose settings were mostly urban.)
Cooper-Moore's storytelling sessions begin with parables or riddles, move to a medium-length tale and finish with a longish tale, all folk stories he has mostly heard from others.
There were the Polish and Czech workers in the building where he lives in East Harlem who told him stories.
Tales repeated by African neighbors have also enhanced his repertory.
Then there's the baby a friend of his has recently adopted from China, who may come on Sunday, and for whom he will dig up stories.
"I've been reading Chinese meditations and the country's history," he said in his ribbon-smooth accent from the Piedmont region of Virginia.
His storytelling turns eclectic when accompanied by his songs, which he writes and plays on his hand-made instruments.
"This year, I'll be writing songs for each program," he says.
What more could a child ask for on a Sunday afternoon? (Ice cream.)
The free storytelling is on Sundays at 1 and 2 P.M. through Aug. 28.
The D train, stopping at Prospect Park, is the closest subway.
Another free storytelling program is held on Mondays and Thursdays at the Third Street Playground (entrance at Prospect Park West and Third Street; Park Slope side) at 4 P.M. daily except Mondays through Aug. 1.
In Central Park, storytellers have been congregating at the Hans Christian Andersen statue for 37 years; Diane Wolkstein, the director, is in her 27th year.
The stories told there on Saturdays from 11 A.M. to noon are not just those of Andersen, but also tales from the Grimm brothers, along with stories from Borneo, Haiti and China.
Tomorrow, Marcia Lane and Ulf Arnstrom are to be telling Scandinavian stories.
Ms.
Lane is to start with Hans Christian Andersen's story "The Collar," in which a man's shirt collar seeks a wife.
He romances a comb, an iron and scissors, but is turned down flat.
He ends up being made into paper, upon which his story is written.
"Isn't that like life?" Ms.
Lane added.
Mr.
Arnstrom, an editor of a Swedish storytelling journal, is flying in from Stockholm to tell Swedish folk tales in his soft, gentle voice.
His program, in English, is to center on "The Pearl," in which three women claim ownership of a lustrous sea gem.
Whoever makes the biggest fool of her husband gets the pearl. (What a sense of humor Scandinavians can have.)
The free programs, held rain or shine, run through Sept. 24.
Adults are asked to remain with their children. 'A Lady Named Jo'
Queens Children's Theater
256-21 Union Turnpike, at 257th Street
Glen Oaks
(718) 343-1052
Recommended ages: 7 and up
Through Sunday
Jo and her sisters, from Louisa May Alcott's novel "Little Women," all appear in this musical for children, only they're less agreeable.
"The ultrasweetness in the book has been removed," said Ben Finn, who wrote the play's book with Peter John Stephens.
That may come as a relief to some potential audience members, although children, especially girls, fall in love with the March sorority no matter what.
The story is told from Jo's perspective as a middle-aged woman looking back.
This play has 23 songs on a recorded track, making the production seem almost operatic.
The two-hour show (with an intermission), is tonight at 7 and tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets are $10; $6 for children.
From July 20 to 24, it is to be performed at Inner-Space Theater, 134 West 26th Street, Chelsea; information: (212) 989-2969.
Model Ship Sailing
Chess and Backgammon
Bryant Park
Avenue of the Americas, at 40th Street
(212) 983-4142
Recommended ages: 3 and up
Through October
Three years ago, Robbie Biederman had an enterprising idea, and his father, Dan Biederman, the executive director of the Bryant Park Restoration Corporation, took action.
Inspiration blew in when Robbie, who is now 7, was visiting the Luxembourg Gardens and the Tuileries during a family vacation in Paris.
Why couldn't children race model sailboats in the Bryant Park fountain back home in New York City?
"I thought it was too small," Mr.
Biederman said of the Josephine Shaw Lowell fountain, "but we tested some boats and it turned out to be a perfect size." Patina Milon, an 8-year-old from New York City, spent a half hour one day last week circling the pink-granite fountain with her rented model Henley, the jib luffing uncontrollably.
The model sailboats, which may be rented for $2 an hour, are attached with strings for navigating.
The boats were made and lent by Fred Hutchins, the owner of Jan's Hobby Shop on the Upper East Side.
Two boats were stolen a few weeks ago, leaving only three.
Bryant Park is also offering chess and backgammon lessons and sets to rent for games at the Parisian cafe-style chairs and tables. (The park really does have a Gallic air, even though the fountain is Italian Renaissance style and is named after an American suffragist.) The New York Chess and Backgammon club is the sponsor.
A free lesson is arranged for first-time players; thereafter, you may pay from $30 to $100 for an hour's lesson with masters, senior masters and grandmasters.
If you simply wish to play, the fees are 50 cents a game for each player for speed chess (10 minutes or less); $4 an hour for each player for slow chess (more than 20 minutes); 50 cents a game for each player for backgammon, and $4 an hour for each player for checkers.
The sailing, lessons and games are daily from 11:30 A.M. to sundown, weather permitting.
They are at the 41st Street entrance.
Lessons may be scheduled by calling the club at (212) 302-5874.
Little West Street Path
West Street at West Thames Street
Battery Park City
Lower Manhattan
(212) 416-5300
Recommended for all ages
A new pathway for in-line skaters, bicyclists (with and without training wheels), tricyclists, runners, dogs, roller skaters and skateboarders has been created along the West Side Highway, almost along the waterfront.
Crickets can be heard at dusk in the shrubs behind the wrought-iron fence; a breeze slips in from the Hudson.
The straightaway, as flat as a mesa top and illuminated at night, allows no cars.
It is four blocks long and has sidewalks on both sides; a cul-de-sac has benches.
The pathway will ultimately be a service road for buildings going up on adjacent empty lots, so enjoy it while it lasts.
Not far away, at the Vesey Street entrance to Hudson River Park, the New York City Police Department's Troop A mounted unit exercises its horses in a new ring, usually every morning or afternoon. (There is no set schedule.) If you're lucky, you can see the horses doing serpentines and figure eights, but not chasing bad guys.
And have you checked out the new 27-foot-wide pathway in the West Village, running from Little West 12th Street to Harrison Street off the West Side Highway?
One TriBeCa mother said it had changed her life, as she can now glide safely on her in-line skates to retrieve her car at a parking lot.
For now, the pathway, part of the Hudson River Park Conservancy's urban boulevard plan, ends at the northern end of Hudson River Park, at Stuyvesant High School.
Other skaters have already discovered the path, but there's room for everyone.
An attractive fence keeps you from stumbling into the river, although the fence is completed only down to Hubert Street; a concrete wall separates the path from the highway.
A lot of people use the route at sunset.


Pakistan Doesn't Flog
To the Editor:
"Beyond Singapore: Corporal Punishment, A to Z" (The Week in Review, June 26) unjustly mentions Pakistan as a country where "sentences of flogging continue to be imposed and carried out."


Poll on Doubt Of Holocaust Is Corrected
Only a small segment of Americans deny that the Holocaust happened, according to a new Roper poll for the American Jewish Committee.
The new poll was conducted to correct a flawed question in an earlier survey that had suggested higher levels of Holocaust denial and, both the researchers and sponsors say, to set the polling record straight.


Shy of the Record, but Blistering Nonetheless


Anheuser-Busch Gives Gyro Work
Anheuser-Busch Inc. said yesterday that it had asked a small Philadelphia agency, Gyro Advertising, to work on a project for its flagship Budweiser brand.
The brewer said in a statement, issued after a report this week in Adweek about the assignment, that Gyro would "assist the Budweiser brand on a very limited geographic basis." The statement said the project "does not affect our national advertising strategy or our relationship with our existing agencies." D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis is the longtime Budweiser brand agency.


Police Announce Breakup Of Pirate Videotape Ring
Westchester County authorities said today that they had broken up a ring of video pirates who took hand-held recorders into movie theaters, taped such popular summer hits as "The Lion King," "Speed" and "The Shadow" and distributed thousands of what appeared to be professionally packaged copies throughout the New York metropolitan area.
Though the packaging was slick, the quality of the tapes shown at a news conference by the Westchester County District Attorney, Jeanine Pirro, was amateurish.
At times, the tapes recorded the sound of audience laughter, and at other times the cameras caught the on-screen shadows of movie patrons as they stood up, walked to the lobby and later returned.


U.N.L.V. Must Pay Tarkanian's Fees
The Nevada Supreme Court ruled yesterday that the University of Nevada-Las Vegas must pay $150,726 plus interest to cover the former basketball coach JERRY TARKANIAN's costs in a long legal fight against U.N.L.V.


U.S. Judge to Impose Plan For the Nassau Legislature
Frustrated by the failure of the Nassau County Board of Supervisors to comply with a year-old court order to adopt an equitable districting plan for a new county legislature, a Federal judge prepared reluctantly today to impose a plan of his own.
The judge, Arthur D. Spatt of the Eastern District, met with the supervisors for nearly six hours on Wednesday night in his chambers at the Federal courthouse here in a last-ditch effort at a settlement.
But he fell short of breaking the political logjam between Republicans and Democrats.


Trump Plans Revitalization Of Empire State Building
Donald J. Trump said yesterday that he had become a part owner of the Empire State Building and would "take those actions necessary to restore" the 63-year-old skyscraper "to its rightful position as a world-class real-estate asset."
It remains to be seen, however, just how much action he can take and whether ideas like converting the upper floors to condominium apartments can ever materialize.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The U.S. commercial real estate industry is being transformed from a collection of family-dominated fiefs into publicly owned companies.
Experts say the change means new companies will be more responsive to tenants, have more money to maintain and buy properties and probably will not overbuild.  [ Page A1. ]
The nation's leading retailers reported stronger sales in June, as warm weather increased demand for seasonal merchandise like air-conditioners, grills and casual clothing.  [ D1. ]


Inside Art
Historical Society Chooses Sotheby's
If G. Oliver Koppell, the New York State Attorney General, gives his approval, the New-York Historical Society will sell $20 million worth of art and objects from its collection.
Miner H. Warner, the society's chairman, said the income from the proceeds would go toward the museum's endowment, which covers some of its operating costs as well as the care of the society's art holdings and library.


Collaborative Choreography About Social Interaction
Margaret Jenkins knows that poverty and corruption may be causing cities around the world to fall apart.
She envisions urban social decay in "The Gates (Far Away Near)," which the Margaret Jenkins Dance Company presented on Wednesday night at Alice Tully Hall.
But particularly striking about this imaginative 75-minute piece, which was having its New York premiere to open the Serious Fun series at Lincoln Center, is Ms.
Jenkins's apparent faith in cooperation.
The entire production is a collaborative effort.
Created last year in honor of the San Francisco-based troupe's 20th anniversary, it brings together theatrical artists with whom Ms.
Jenkins has often worked, including Alexander V. Nichols, who designed the scenery and lighting; Sandra Woodall, the costume designer; Paul Dresher, who composed the live and electronic score, and Michael Palmer and Rinde Eckert, who wrote the accompanying text.


A REBUFF FOR U.S.
Two days after the Administration announced that Panama would serve as a "safe haven" for 10,000 Haitian refugees, Panama withdrew from the plan, leaving Washington struggling to cope with a new flood of boat people.
The decision, announced by the Panamanian President, Guillermo Endara, led to a round of finger-pointing between Panama and Washington and overshadowed President Clinton's arrival in Italy for an economic summit meeting.


Sounds Around Town
Introspection in Concert
Sarah McLachlan and the Story, Central Park Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, midpark at 72d Street, (212) 360-2777.
Sensitivity reigns in this double bill of up-and-coming singers and songwriters.
Ms.
McLachlan, a Canadian performer with a sweet sobbing voice, writes intriguing but largely private reflections on the loss of innocence.
The best songs by the Story, the New England duo led by Jonatha Brooke, bring the sensibility and ideas of Virginia Woolf into a contemporary pop setting in acoustic arrangements that show off their tricky close-harmony singing.
Show time is tomorrow at 3 P.M.
Admission is free.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Musical Tour by Luka Bloom
Luka Bloom, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6300.
Mr.
Bloom, an Irish folk singer and songwriter with more than his share of stage charisma, mixes probing confessional songs with political statements.
Without putting down his acoustic guitar, he even reaches into soul and hip-hop territory, and his folk version of LL Cool J's "I Need Love" is a small revelation.
Everything he does is stamped with personality and punch.
Shows are on Sunday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets are $17.50.
S.
H.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Mississippi Power and Light Co., Jackson, Miss., is selling $25 million of 8.25 percent guaranteed and refunding bonds due in 2004 at 99.207 to yield 8.368 percent through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Callable in five years, the issue is rated Baa-3 by Moody's Investor's Service Inc. and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps. *
National Fuel Gas Co., New York, is selling $50 million of medium-term notes due in 2024 at 100 to yield 8.48 percent through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Callable in five years, the issue is rated A-3 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P.


U.S. Troops on the Golan? It Worked in Sinai; Not Trusting Arafat
To the Editor:
Israel's right-wing Likud Party and its American backers wish to demolish the peace process that has so far granted the Palestinians self-rule in Gaza and Jericho.
They argue you can't trust Yasir Arafat.


Paychex Inc.(PAYX,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Surging Floods Bring Death and Misery to Georgia
Rampaging floodwaters continued to roll through Georgia today, leaving behind a three-day toll of at least 17 people dead, towns under water, more than 100 small dams washed out and destruction to road and rail service likely to wreak havoc for months.
In the Atlanta area, service was restored today for some of the 500,000 Georgians without water, but many communities, like Americus and Macon, are without any safe water.


U.S. Business and the Russian Mob
After many years in which the hydra-headed Russian mafia has openly penetrated virtually every level of local business, American companies operating here -- big and small, famous and unknown -- have begun to feel increasing pressure from criminal organizations that never before seemed to bother with them.
The situation for American business is still nothing like it is for Russians, for whom threats, intimidation, extortion and violence have become routine.


A Sour Note on Concert Prices
Pearl Jam, a "grunge" rock band out of Seattle, wanted to please its largely teen-age audience by setting ticket prices for a summer tour under $20 -- far below the usual prices of $50 to $60.
The band planned to lower its own take to $18 a ticket and limit ticket distribution costs to under $2.
But Ticketmaster, the only national distributor of concert tickets, refused to go along with the puny distribution fee.
So Pearl Jam canceled the tour and brought a complaint of monopolistic practices before the Justice Department.


Elite Crew Mourns Deaths of 12 In a Wildfire Blast in Colorado
In the history of forest fires in the American West, no unit is held in higher regard than the Smokejumpers, an elite Federal crew used as a quick strike squad against the most overpowering of fires.
Today, the day after at least 12 firefighters from a crew of 52 were trapped and then killed in a wildfire that "blew up" on a steep slope in Western Colorado, the Smokejumpers are mourning one of their worst disasters in modern times.
Two firefighters are still missing.


On the Beat, Questions Are Raised About Mollen Rules
While the Mayor and the Police Commissioner were grappling yesterday with the Mollen Commission's broadest recommendation on fighting police corruption -- an independent monitor for the Police Department -- many officers in the streets objected to some of the panel's more nuts-and-bolts suggestions: for example, that officers be periodically transferred to different precincts and that they work rotating schedules.
The proposals to change where and when the city's 31,000 officers work were among more than 100 recommendations made by the commission as it concluded a two-year investigation into corruption in the Police Department.
Tighter Controls
The proposed changes range widely over the field of police work, but generally seek to tighten controls on a force in which gangs of officers have been discovered working as thieves and drug dealers in a few precincts.
Random drug testing would be done more frequently, the department would be given more time in which to investigate officers and more undercover officers would be sent out to spy on others in uniform.


Excerpts From Judge's Ruling on Admissibility of Evidence in Simpson Case
The key issue for the court's determination is whether the warrantless entry into the property on Rockingham and the recovery of certain items of physical evidence was justified in light of exigent circumstances.
And this is really a gray area of the law.
I mean there's no set formula to establish when or where an exigent circumstance does exist and when it doesn't.
And it's really something that has to be decided on a case by case basis.
Based upon the evidence as actually presented in the hearing, there were numerous cases cited by the prosecution as well as by the defense.
The court has reviewed all of those cases.


Interpublic Selling Assets of TV Unit
The Interpublic Group of Companies, the giant ad agency holding company, said yesterday that it would sell the programming rights and other assets of its television production and distribution subsidiary, Fremantle International Inc., to All American Communications Inc. for $63 million in cash and stock.
All American, which produces and distributes series like "Baywatch" and "Sirens," as well as "Family Feud" in the United States, will pay Interpublic half in cash and half in stock, giving Interpublic a 20 percent stake in All American, of Santa Monica, Calif.
All American gains the international programming rights and assets of Fremantle, which produces show like "Family Feud," "The Price Is Right," "The Newlywed Game" and "The $25,000 Pyramid" for overseas markets.


American Air Proposal On Pilots' Pay
Representatives of American Airlines and the Allied Pilots Association opened contract negotiations today with a radical plan from the airline to change the pilots' pay system.
Under the American proposal, which was sent to the union on June 30 in preparation for today's opening session, pilots would be paid flat salaries rather than hourly wages, according to local newspaper reports.
The carrier's current contract can be amended as of Aug. 31.


CHRONICLE
JAMES BROWN meet Tipper Gore.
The Godfather of Soul has asked rap artists not to mix his songs with recordings containing X-rated lyrics, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
For years, Mr.
Brown's music has been a popular target for a process known as sampling, in which snippets from one recording are blended into another.
In a statement released by Lee Solters, his publicist, Mr.
Brown did not cite any specific artists, but said that recordings with profanity should be kept off the airwaves.


Parting Snapshots for the Supreme Court Yearbook
The Supreme Court's 1994 term, which ended last week, was one of impressions rather than grand themes.
The caseload was light but the going was tough.
The Justices emerged somewhat the worse for wear and departed on a much-needed summer break, leaving behind the following array of snapshots.
HOTTEST NEW TOPIC: Garbage and what to do with it, the subject of three decisions, reflecting its growing role in the interstate economy.


ART REVIEWS3 Hudson Valley Shows Are Widely Divergent
The Hudson Valley has three very different shows this summer.
At the Bard College Center for Curatorial Studies is an exhibition about exhibiting art.
The Katonah Museum has organized a show of three prominent American modernists, Milton Avery, Mark Rothko and Adolph Gottlieb, before they became prominent.
And at Storm King is a retrospective of the New York sculptor Mia Westerlund Roosen.
Mountainville
Most artists who have been given a chance to install sculpture at the Storm King Art Center have chosen commanding spots at the crest of a hill or in the middle of a vast lawn, and they have placed big works there to match the scale of the landscape.
The ground is being prepared for the installation of several such works by Magdalena Abakanowicz and Mark di Suvero. (They should be installed by September.)


Gay in World War II: Abuse by the Military
At the core of "Coming Out Under Fire," Arthur Dong's quietly devastating documentary film about homosexuality in the military during World War II, are interviews with 10 gay men and women who served in the armed forces.
Some, like Phillis Abry, a radio technician in the Women's Army Corps, were able to carry on homosexual relationships without being detected and received honorable discharges.
Others, like Marvin Liebman, who was in the special services of the United States Army Air Corps, were identified as gay, having "psychopathic" personalities, and were discharged as undesirable.


Bruises and All, Stanley Reports for Duty
With the left side of his face swollen and discolored, with a purple bruise beneath his left eye and with his blue hospital garments still in hand, Mike Stanley went directly from Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center to Yankee Stadium yesterday morning.
Somehow, he was prepared for another day of work.
Fifteen hours after Rickey Henderson treated him like a tackling dummy, the Yankee catcher sorted through his gear and wondered if he was in the lineup.


Bad Apple Shake-Ups: A 20-Year Police Cycle
"Will history repeat itself?" the Knapp Commission asked in its 1972 report on corruption in the New York Police Department.
"Or does society finally realize that police corruption is a problem that must be dealt with and not just talked about every 20 years?"
Twenty-two years later those questions are as pertinent as ever.
The challenge to the Mollen Commission, formed in 1992, was to permanently break the recurring cycle of corruption that has plagued New York City's police for a century.
That is a tall order, not only because corruption is so deeply ingrained in the Police Department, but also because it develops in unforeseeable ways from one generation to the next.


Britons Still Love LeMond (145th)
They love Greg LeMond in Britain, celebrating him as the first native English-speaker to win the Tour de France, and this morning he won louder cheers from fans at the riders' introductions than anybody else in the pack.
His victory in 1986 remains green, as green as the rolling fields around Portsmouth.
But the two Tour stages in southern England have shown just how long ago 1986 was.
Even LeMond's Tour victories in 1989 and 1990 seem ancient now as he continues to struggle to regain winning form.


'L'Amour Fou' Schedule
"L'Amour Fou: French Films of Passion, Romance and Obsession," a five-week series, runs through Aug. 11 at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, at Lincoln Center.
All programs are double features except where marked; tickets to single or double bills are $7.50; $5 for members of the Film Society of Lincoln Center; $4 for the elderly (weekdays before 6 P.M.) Information: (212) 875-5600.
Here is a schedule:
Today
"POT BOUILLE" ("House of Lovers") (1957), directed by Julien Duvivier, 2 and 6:20 P.M.
"GUEULE D'AMOUR" (1937), Jean Gremillon, 4:15 and 8:45 P.M.
Tomorrow
"POT BOUILLE," 4 and 8:45 P.M.
"GUEULE D'AMOUR," 6:20 P.M.
Sunday
"THAT OBSCURE OBJECT OF DESIRE" (1977), Luis Bunuel, 4 and 8:20 P.M.
"CLAIRE'S KNEE" (1971), Eric Rohmer, 6:15 P.M.
Monday
"THAT OBSCURE OBJECT OF DESIRE," 2 and 6:15 P.M.
"CLAIRE'S KNEE," 4 and 8:20 P.M.
Tuesday
"LES DAMES DU BOIS DE BOULOGNE" (1945), Robert Bresson, 2, 6 and 9:40 P.M.
"BEAUTIES OF THE NIGHT" (1952), 3:45 and 7:50 P.M.
Wednesday
"THE SEASHELL AND THE CLERGYMAN" (1928), Germaine Dulac, and "L'AGE D'OR" (1930), Luis Bunuel, 2, 6 and 9:45 P.M.
"L'ATALANTE," (1934), Jean Vigo, 4 and 7:50 P.M.
Thursday
"LES ENFANTS DU PARADIS" ("Children of Paradise") (1945), Marcel Carne, 2 P.M.
"SIREN OF THE TROPICS" (1927), Henri Etievant and Mario Nalpas, 6:30 and 9:15 P.M.
Single feature. (Tickets: $12; $10 for Film Society members.)
Next Friday
"THE LOVERS" (1958), Louis Malle, 2 P.M.
"PIERROT LE FOU" (1965), Jean-Luc Godard, 3:50 P.M.
"L'AMOUR FOU" (1968) Jacques Rivette, 6:15 P.M. Single feature.
July 16
"L'AMOUR FOU," 4 P.M. Single feature.
"PIERROT LE FOU," 9 P.M.
July 17
"THE LOVERS," 4 and 8 P.M.
"PIERROT LE FOU," 5:50 and 9:50 P.M.
July 18
"LES ENFANTS DU PARADIS," 2 and 6:15 P.M.
July 19
"THE EARRINGS OF MADAME DE . . ." (1953), Max Ophuls, 2 P.M.
"THE THIRD LOVER" (1962), Claude Chabrol, 4 P.M.
July 20
"THE THIRD LOVER," 2, 6 and 9:50 P.M.
"THE EARRINGS OF MADAME DE . . ." 3:45 and 7:45 P.M.
July 21
"LES VISITEURS DU SOIR" ("The Devil's Envoys") (1942), Marcel Carne, 2 and 9 P.M.
"LES ENFANTS TERRIBLES" (1949), Jean-Pierre Melville, 4:15 P.M.
July 22
"LES ENFANTS TERRIBLES," 2 and 6:30 P.M.
"LES VISITEURS DU SOIR," 4 and 8:30 P.M
July 23
"MENAGE" (1991), directed Bertrand Blier, 4 and 8 P.M.
"MAITRESSE" (1986), Barbet Schroeder, 6:15 and 9:50 P.M.
July 24
"LA BEAUTE DU DIABLE" (1949), Rene Clair, 4 and 8 P.M.
"EYES WITHOUT A FACE" (1959), Georges Franju, 6 and 10 P.M.
July 25
"LA BEAUTE DU DIABLE," 2, 6 and 10 P.M.
"EYES WITHOUT A FACE," 4 and 8 P.M.
July 26
"ELENA ET LES HOMMES" (1955), Jean Renoir, 2 P.M.
"LE BLE EN HERBE" (1953), Claude Autant-Lara, 4 P.M.
July 27
"LE BLE EN HERBE," 2, 6 and 10 P.M.
"ELENA ET LES HOMMES," 4:05 and 8:05 P.M.
July 28
"ALL BOYS ARE CALLED PATRICK" (1957), Jean-Luc Godard, "HAPPY ANNIVERSARY" (1961), Pierre Etaix, and "MOVING IN" (1993), Chantal Akerman, 2, 6:10 and 10 P.M.
"PATTES BLANCHES" (1949), Jean Gremillon, 3:45 and 7:50 P.M.
July 29
"THE SOFT SKIN" (1964), Francois Truffaut, 2 and 6:15 P.M.
"MAX MON AMOUR" (1986), Nagisha Oshima, 4:15 and 8:40 P.M.
July 30
"MAX MON AMOUR," 4:15 and 8:40 P.M.
"THE SOFT SKIN," 6:15 P.M.
July 31
"MELO" (1987), Alain Resnais, 4 and 8:30 P.M.
"THE BAKER'S WIFE" (1938), Marcel Pagnol, 6:15 P.M.
Aug. 1
"MELO," 4 and 8:40 P.M.
"THE BAKER'S WIFE," 6:15 P.M.
Aug. 3
"DEVIL IN THE FLESH" (1947), Claude Autant-Lara, 3:45 and 8 P.M.
"LES GRANDES MANOEUVRES" (1955), Rene Clair, 6 and 10:10 P.M.
Aug. 4
"AND GOD CREATED WOMAN" (1956), Roger Vadim, 4 and 7:50 P.M.
"THE GIRL WITH THE GOLDEN EYES" (1961), Jean-Gabriel Albicocco, 5:50 and 9:45 P.M.
Aug. 5
"LA MARIE DU PORT" (1949), Marcel Carne, 4 and 7:50 P.M.
"THE WALLS OF MALAPAGA" (1949), Rene Clement, 6 and 9:50 PM.
Aug. 6
"LA MARIE DU PORT," 4 and 7:50 P.M.
"THE WALLS OF MALAPAGA," 6 and 9:50 P.M.
Aug. 7
"LES BICHES" (1968), Claude Chabrol, 4 and 8 P.M.
"THE STORY OF ADELE H." (1975), Francois Truffaut, 6 and 10 P.M.
Aug. 8
"THE STORY OF ADELE H.," 4 and 8 P.M.
"LES BICHES," 6 and 10 P.M.
Aug. 9
"LOVER'S NET" (1954), Henri Verneuil, 4 and 8:05 P.M.
"QUAI DES BRUMES" (1938), Marcel Carne, 6:20 and 10:20 PM.
Aug. 10
"LES BONNES FEMMES" (1960), Claude Chabrol, 4 and 7:50 P.M.
"LE BEAU MARIAGE" (1981), Eric Rohmer, 6 and 10 P.M.
Aug. 11
"LA PIRATE" (1984), Jacques Doillon, 4 and 7:40 P.M.
"NOIR ET BLANC" (1986), Claire Devers, 6 and 9:40 P.M.


Charles Hamilton, Newspaper Editor And Executive, 90
Charles Henry Hamilton, a retired executive of Media General Inc. who was long active in the Associated Press Managing Editors Association and other press organizations, died yesterday at the Stratford Hall Nursing Center in Richmond, where he lived.
He was 90.
He had been in declining health for several months, said a granddaughter, Anne Hamilton.


Dole Food Co. (DOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 18


A 'Beauty' That's Designed To Awake
THE unannounced guest was Princess Margaret, who presided from the center box at the Metropolitan Opera House when the Royal Ballet opened on Wednesday night with a spectacular new production of "The Sleeping Beauty."
New Yorkers will be in for a different surprise with this "Beauty," so long the Royal's signature ballet.
The choreography may be traditional, but the sets and costumes are bizarre enough to guarantee instant and hot debate.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  ABOUT-FACE REGARDING HAITI  Panama, which volunteered to shelter 10,000 Haitian refugees, withdrew its offer today, leaving Washington dangling and more than a little surprised.
A1


Latvia's Barrier to Partnership
Latvians cheered President Clinton in Riga on Wednesday when he pledged partnership with the Baltic republics to keep them forever free.
But there was stony silence when he appealed to them not to "deny to others the justice and equality you fought so hard for and earned for yourselves, for freedom without tolerance is freedom unfulfilled."
The others he referred to are ethnic Russians, left behind by a receding empire, who are the objects of Latvian intolerance.
Latvia, understandably resentful about its past, is right to want all Russian troops out.
But it is wrong to avenge the past by discriminating against Russian residents.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Mollen Commission's report on police corruption in New York City misidentified in some copies the Police Commissioner who the report said had refused to approve corruption investigations out of fear that disclosures would hurt the department.
He was Benjamin Ward, not his successor, Lee P. Brown.





Cuomo Proposes a Referendum on Death Penalty
In an election year, when his staunch opposition to the death penalty has become a major issue, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed today that voters be allowed to decide the maximum sentence for murder.
The proposal comes four days after the State Legislature adjourned without passing most of Mr.
Cuomo's crime agenda, including bills that would have required life sentences without parole for three-time violent offenders.


Is Seikaly-Pippen Deal in the Works?
Miami Heat center RONY SEIKALY says team management wants to rework his contract in an effort to trade him for the Chicago Bulls star SCOTTIE PIPPEN.
Seikaly said he had been contacted by the Heat because his contract must be revised to make a trade for Pippen possible under rules of the National Basketball Association salary cap.
"I had a talk with my agent about it," Seikaly said from Europe in an interview yesterday with The Sun-Sentinel of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
"Obviously it hasn't gone through yet, and it's still the Heat's final decision."
BILLY CUNNINGHAM, a partner in the Heat organization, denied negotiating for Pippen, an All-Star forward.
"There is nothing at all pending," he said.
Seikaly is to earn $3.3 million next season with Miami, while Pippen is to make $2.8 million with Chicago.


No Choice but to Withdraw Offer, Panamanian Says
Complaining of "misunderstandings" and "a complete lack of communication" with the United States, President Guillermo Endara said today that he had no choice but to withdraw his Government's offer of a safe haven here for up to 10,000 Haitian refugees.
The Panamanian President, who took office after the United States invasion in 1989 that overthrew Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, also cited domestic political opposition to what he described as a humanitarian action taken solely on the basis of "moral principles and international solidarity." He said that he was sorry the plan had collapsed, but that his Government could not be blamed.


It's All Over for the Village Gate But Its Ex-Owner Looks Ahead
The Village Gate, the barnlike Greenwich Village nightclub where great comics and jazzmen held court for decades, has permanently gone out of business.
But the impresario who made the Gate a Village scene for 37 years is already looking ahead to his next gig.


In Tiny Haitian Port, Even Grief Is a Political Act
Gladys Paul lay on a bed in her two-room home groaning softly, grieving for her two children, who died on Monday when the rickety boat they were aboard capsized, killing at least 150 people.
"Oh! It hurts," she said to no one in particular, surrounded by a handful of friends and relatives.
"My babies are gone."


Sharp Rise Seen in Smokers' Health Care Costs
Health care for smoking-related illnesses cost at least $50 billion in 1993, twice as much as has been estimated for previous years, according to a new Federal survey.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Atlanta-based agency of the Department of Health and Human Services, released the data today, saying that the estimate was based on a survey of 35,000 people, the most extensive to date.
It is the only survey that has counted only actual medical bills, making it the most reliable estimate ever done, said Dr.
Thomas E. Novotny, a leader of the study.


DDB Needham Sells Public Relations Unit
The DDB Needham Worldwide Dallas Group said yesterday that it had sold the assets of a unit, Tracy-Locke Public Relations, to Greg Bustin, a Dallas public relations executive who will open a new agency called Bustin &amp; Company.
Terms were not disclosed.


Bogota Journal; A Captain in the Drug War Wants to Call If Off
The Colombian official in charge of prosecuting cocaine traffickers is also the country's most prominent advocate of ending the drug war by legalizing drugs.
The official, Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff, is a pipe-smoking grandfather with the demeanor of an owl and the spirit of a mockingbird.


A 'Night Against AIDS': Mixing Acts and Advice
Network prime time's reluctance to deal with AIDS was notorious in the 1980's.
Even disease movies, a staple of the medium, shunned the subject.
Things have changed.
The situation is hardly great, mind you, but it is better.
The latest case in point: "In a New Light '94" on ABC, tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Two earlier "In a New Light" specials were remarkably successful in recruiting volunteers for an array of AIDS organizations around the country.
This time, in what it has designated a "National Night Against AIDS," ABC has joined the Centers for Disease Control and, through affiliates, local AIDS organizations to organize viewing parties and discussion follow-ups.
President Clinton appears on the program to encourage young people to "think carefully about the choices that lie ahead."


The Spoken Word
POETRY COMPETITION, Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center.
"Nuyorican Poets Cafe Live: Aloud." A mock competition between two teams of poets who will read their work; the audience will select the winning team.
Tomorrow at 7:30 P.M.
Part of the Serious Fun series at Lincoln center.
Tickets, at $22, may be purchased through CenterCharge: (212) 721-6500.
Information: (212) 875-5050.
GALLERY TALK, New Museum of Contemporary Art, 583 Broadway, at Houston Street, SoHo.
A talk by John Kuo Wei Tchen, a historian, about the exhibitions on view: "Chinese Hand Laundry," by Huan Yong Ping, and "Field of Waste," by Chen Zhen.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $3.50; $2.50 for students and the elderly; free under age 12.
Information: (212) 219-1355.
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street.
Today: "The Arts of Indonesia, Thailand and Cambodia," by Marie-Helene Weill, 11 A.M.; "A Closer Look: Rubens, His Wife Helena Fourment and Their Son Peter Paul," by Lisa Rotmil, 12:30 P.M.; "The Medieval Treasury," by Esther Morales, 3 P.M.; "The Three Faces of Shiva," by Rochelle Kessler, 5 P.M.; "American Painting: The 1950's," by Stacy Tenenbaum, 6 P.M.; "Hatshepsut's Funerary Temple: The Sculpture From Deir el Bahari," by John McDonald, at 7 P.M.
Tomorrow: "Picasso and the Weeping Women: The Years of Marie-Therese Walter and Dora Maar," by Gail Stavistky, 11 A.M.; "Florentine Art of the 15th Century," by Frank Dabell, 11 A.M.; "American Impressionism and Realism: A New View," by Thayer Tolles, 2:30 P.M.; "Contemporary Art at the Metropolitan Museum," by Ms.
Stavitsky, 7 P.M.
Sunday: "American Architecture at the Metropolitan Museum of Art," by Matthew Kennedy, 11 A.M.; "Dali: The Early Years," by Ellen Handy, 11 A.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Edward Hopper and Jack Pierson: American Dreaming," tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "Joseph Stella," tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.; "Ideas and Objects: Selected Drawings and Sculptures From the Permanent Collection," Sunday at 2 P.M.
All by Vivian Bobka.
Free with museum admission: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.


Arafat Promising to Repeal Call for Israel's Destruction
Yasir Arafat pledged today to convene the Palestinian parliament-in-exile to eliminate sections of the Palestinian charter that call for the destruction of Israel.
Mr.
Arafat said in a communique issued here that the meeting would be held "in the very near future" in Gaza, lending weight to the predictions that Gaza will be his base.


The Wives Are Merry but Far From Windsor
There has been no shortage of concern over the years about developing an American style of performing Shakespeare.
Simply to imitate British ways is a creative dead end and a little demeaning.
Shouldn't we, the theorists wonder, be bringing something distinctive, something ours alone, to the world's most popular plays?
Just what that might be is less evident, although vitality, an emphasis on inner truth and a lack of historical inhibitions are sometimes advanced as possible assets.
In practice, however, the talk usually boils down to putting Shakespeare into an American setting -- "Othello," say, in the antebellum South, or "Romeo and Juliet" in South Central Los Angeles.
Instead of real innovation, we end up with novelty for novelty's sake.


A Summer Of Art Shows With Ambition
THE recent art season was quieter than most, so it's a pleasant surprise to find that the summer is as busy as usual.
Ambitious shows of new or recent work are around, from a 30th-anniversary survey at the Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art in Ridgefield, Conn., to a selection of mostly 1980's paintings, sculptures, photographs and drawings at the Center for Curatorial Studies at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The Storm King Art Center in Mountainville, N.Y., has the abstracted, biomorphic sculptures of Mia Westerlund Roosen.
And a selection of John Baldessari's clever, funny, light-as-air photo collages are in Newark.


Disney-CBS Talks Denied
Executives close to both QVC Inc. and CBS Inc., yesterday denied published reports that the chairman of the Walt Disney Company, Michael D. Eisner, had approached them about becoming involved in their merger.
An article in Variety yesterday said that Mr.
Eisner had no interest in derailing the merger but hoped to work out some type of joint venture with CBS and QVC.


Results Plus
GOLF Lohr's 61 PGA's Third Lowest Score  There have only been two scores better than the 10-under-par 61 Bob Lohr posted in yesterday's opening round of the Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic.
Lohr, a 10-year PGA Tour veteran with just one victory, offset a three-putt bogey with 11 birdies at Kingsmill Golf Club.
"Just a great round," Lohr said.
"I've never made 11 birdies in a round before."
"I don't think I'd even know how to pencil in a 61," said Nike Tour regular John Wilson, whose 64 put him in a second-place tie with PGA Tour rookie Glen Day.
The only tour scores better than the 61 were the 59s of Al Geiberger at Memphis in 1977 and Chip Beck at Las Vegas in 1991 and nine rounds of 60, the latest by Davis Love III at Hawaii in January.
TENNIS Bruguera in Quarterfinals of Swiss Open  The top-seeded, two-time defending champion Sergi Bruguera defeated a Spanish compatriot, Alex Corretja, 7-5, 6-0, yesterday to advance to the quarterfinals of the Swiss Open in Gstaad. (AP) Chesnokov Advances: Andrei Chesnokov led a march of seeded players into the quarterfinals of the Swedish Open in Bastad.
Chesnokov, promoted to the No. 1 spot when the ailing Magnus Larsson withdrew, defeated Lars Jonsson, 6-1, 7-5. (AP)


Around the Campfire In an Alternative Way
On Wednesday night at the Mercury Lounge in the East Village, Steve Wynn and friends -- the former Long Ryders guitarist Stephen McCarthy, the former Love Tractor bassist Armistead Wellford and the drummer Johnny Hott and the guitarist Bryan Harvey of House of Freaks -- didn't believe that the three hours they were allotted to perform would be enough time to get through all the material they had planned.
Throughout the evening, as every permutation of these alternative rock mainstays played solo songs, House of Freaks duets, Steve Wynn Quartet songs and songs by all five of them under the name Gutterball, they joked and grumbled about how limiting three hours was. (The concert wound up lasting three and a half hours.)
Mr.
Wynn and friends seemed to have a bottomless coffer of rock songs about traveling America's lonely highways, escaping from the daily pressures of life and falling out of love.
When, before performing "Lucky Day," Mr.
Harvey announced, "This is a song I wrote while I was out walking my dog," it became clear just how little inspiration these musicians needed to write a song.


Fidelity Acquires Macy Debt
The Fidelity Management and Research Company, the giant mutual fund company that has played a pivotal role in R. H. Macy &amp; Company's bankruptcy-law case, has added another powerful weapon to its arsenal -- about $80 million of the retailer's bonds.
By purchasing the bonds, Fidelity has begun to acquire the tools it needs to begin dismantling the biggest obstacle to a merger between Macy and Federated Department Stores: the opposition of the creditors' committee representing Macy's bondholders.
The committee has stymied Federated's bid for Macy, throwing its support behind a proposal that would get Macy out of bankruptcy protection as a stand-alone company.


Family Dollar Stores (FDO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Top Spot Remains Yankee Domain
The Yankees were getting more tense, more nervous and more paranoid than normal as their losses escalated, their division lead disintegrated and their lack of fans at Yankee Stadium received increased exposure.
But with their 59-day grasp on first place in jeopardy yesterday against California, and their clubhouse growing emptier and emptier after games and their training room growing more populated, the Yankees restored luster to their still-glowing ledger in a stylish manner by defeating Mark Langston and the Angels, 5-2.


Where to View the Art
Here are the names, sites and hours of the museum exhibitions reviewed.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted.
Long Island
"NORMANDY AND ITS ARTISTS REMEMBERED" and "THE AVANT GARDE OF FRANCE: THE 1940'S and 1950'S" (through Sept. 11).
Nassau County Museum of Art, 1 Museum Drive, Roslyn Harbor. (516) 484-9338.
Tuesdays through Sundays, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3; $2 for students and the elderly; free on Fridays.
"AMERICAN NAIVE PAINTINGS FROM THE NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART" (through Aug. 28).
Heckscher Museum, Prime Avenue, Huntington. (516) 351-3250.
Tuesdays to Fridays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M; Saturdays and Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested donation: $2; $1 for children.
"ROBERT RICHENBURG: ABSTRACT EXPRESSIONIST" (through July 30).
Staller Center for the Arts, University Art Gallery, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Nicolls Road, Stony Brook. (516) 632-7240.
Tuesdays through Fridays, noon to 4; Saturdays, 5 to 8 P.M.
Pollock-Krasner House and Study Center, 830 Fireplace Road, East Hampton. (516) 324-4929.
Hours by appointment.
"CELEBRATING WILLEM DE KOONING: SELECTED PAINTINGS AND SCULPTURE" (through July 31).
Guild Hall Art Museum, 158 Main Street, East Hampton. (516) 324-0806.
Daily, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $5; free for Guild Hall members.
Hudson Valley
"MIA WESTERLUND ROOSEN: SCULPTURE AND DRAWINGS" (through Oct. 31).
Storm King Art Center, Old Pleasant Hill Road, Mountainville. (914) 534-3190 or 534-3115.
Hours: Daily, 11 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Admission; $5; $3 for students, the elderly and children; free for children under 5.
Karen Wilkin, a critic, will discuss the artist's work tomorrow at 3 P.M.
"AGAINST THE STREAM: MILTON AVERY, ADOLPH GOTTLIEB AND MARK ROTHKO IN THE 1930's," (through Sept. 4).
Katonah Museum of Art, Route 22 at Jay Street, Katonah. (914) 232-9555.
Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays and Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.; Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
"EXHIBITED" (through Sept. 1).
Bard College's Center for Curatorial Studies, Annandale-on-Hudson. (914) 758-2424.
Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.
New Jersey
"FELICE NUDELMAN: RECENT PHOTOGRAPHS" and "PASSAGES IN SCULPTURE: SIX SCULPTORS" (through Aug. 20).
Jersey City Museum, 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey City. (201) 547-4514.
Hours: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Wednesdays, 10:30 A.M. to 8 P.M.; closed Saturdays through Mondays.
"GODS AND GODDESSES IN INDIAN ART" (through June 1995) and "PROJECT TWO: JOHN BALDESSARI, FOUR DIRECTIONAL PIECES" (through Aug. 28).
Newark Museum, 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.
"KUSAKABE-GRIFFIS JAPONISME GALLERY," Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum, Rutgers, State University of New Jersey, George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays and Saturdays in summer.
Connecticut
"30 YEARS: ART IN THE PRESENT TENSE: THE ALDRICH'S CURATORIAL HISTORY 1964-1994" (through Sept. 18).
Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art, 258 Main Street, Ridgefield. (203) 438-4519.
Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3; $2 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12.
"ARTISTS WHO WORKED IN PARIS, NEW YORK AND CONNECTICUT" (through July 31).
Paris-New York-Kent Gallery, Kent Station Square, Kent. (203) 927-4152 or 927-3357.
Hours: Fridays through Mondays, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. and by appointment.
"THE JADE STUDIO: MASTERPIECES OF MING AND QING PAINTING AND CALLIGRAPHY FROM THE WONG NANPING COLLECTION" (through July 31).
Yale University Art Gallery, Chapel and York Streets, New Haven., (203) 432-0600.
Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays, 2 to 5 P.M.
"RESTORING A FRENCH MASTERPIECE: POUSSIN'S 'CRUCIFIXION' " (through July 31).
"PEGGY DIGGS: FROM PRIVATE TO PUBLIC" (through Sept. 18).
"RIDING THE WIND: PHOTOGRAPHS BY WILLIAM ANDERSON" (through Sept. 30).
"EIKO AND EDJOHNETTA: BEYOND FASHION" (through Aug. 28).
Wadsworth Atheneum, 600 Main Street, Hartford. (203) 247-9111.
Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; on the first Thursday of every month, the museum is open until 8 P.M.
Admission: $5; $4 for students and the elderly; free for museum members and children under 13.
On Thursdays and on Saturdays from 11 A.M. to 1 P.M., admission is free.


Home Video; Dealers are searching for new titles, the sooner the better, and preferably not (yawn) sequels.
Dealers say the late-summer rental lineup needs a boost.
"Help! Early August should be a peak rental period, but so far the studios aren't cooperating," Rich Thorward wrote last month in his tip sheet, The Movie Monitor, which rates films for video dealers.
"We need some more strong releases, especially for the week of Aug. 3. Somebody jump in!"
For the week of Aug. 3, The Monitor lists only two entries: "Angie," with Geena Davis, which Mr.
Thorward described as a wide-ranging comedy-drama that will appeal to women, and "Major League II," with Charlie Sheen ("a poor sequel, but the PG rating appeals to parents," he commented).


Space Shuttle to Explore Low-Gravity Effects
The space shuttle Columbia and its crew of seven are set for a busy two-week scientific mission in space beginning Friday if persistently bad worldwide weather cooperates.
Flight controllers at the Kennedy Space Center said today that the shuttle, its launching equipment and a bus-sized laboratory in its cargo bay all checked out normally.
But Air Force forecasters said weather at the center and at two emergency landing sites overseas could keep the mission grounded during a two-and-a-half-hour period when launching is possible, beginning at 12:43 P.M., Eastern daylight time, on Friday.


Ward Rejects Accusation That He Tolerated Graft
Benjamin Ward, the New York City Police Commissioner from 1984 to 1989, yesterday rejected the contention of the Mollen Commission that by his action -- or inaction -- he had "created an unmistakable policy to avoid corruption scandals."
He said he had not refused to approve investigations that had been requested by the state's special prosecutor for police corruption, as the commission charged in a report it issued after a two-year investigation into corruption in the New York Police Department.


Diner's Journal
Regional Indian Food
"Do we have to eat here?" groaned my guest. "I hate empty restaurants."
There was something vaguely unnerving about finding ourselves alone in the vast, cool, elegant new Shaan.


Getting Through Summer Is Now a Little Easier


Sheriff's Defection to the Republican Party Roils Politics in Camden
For the last year or so, the fighting in the Camden County Democratic Party was only a local tussle between the new pols and an old pol.
It pitted the party's new young managers with their money-raising magic and media campaigns against Sheriff William Simon and his old politics of patronage and personal ties.
But when Mr.
Simon fled his tormentors last winter and joined the Republican Party, he opened a crack in a solidly Democratic, industrial county.
The state's Republicans, and their Governor, Christine Todd Whitman, seem bent on doing all they can to enlarge the opening, including spending $1 million in state money.


U.S. Troops on the Golan? It Worked in Sinai
To the Editor:
Re "Americans on the Golan" by A. M. Rosenthal (column, June 28): Should American troops be stationed on the Golan plateau?
The short answer is an emphatic yes!
It is the essential condition of an Israeli-Syrian peace agreement.


This Clean Air Looks Dirty
The Environmental Protection Agency has effectively ordered refiners to add corn-based ethanol to make gasoline environmentally friendly.
But the added ethanol will not clean the air beyond what the 1990 Clean Air Act would already require; nor will it, as advocates claim, raise farm income very much or significantly cut oil imports.
What the E.P.A.'s rule will do is take money from consumers and taxpayers and hand it over to Archer Daniels Midland, which produces about 60 percent of the nation's supply of ethanol.
It is certainly no coincidence that A.D.M.'s chief executive, Dwayne Andreas, is a major political contributor; he donated $100,000 to a recent Democratic fund-raising dinner.


GIULIANI PROMISES FIGHT TO ROOT OUT POLICE CORRUPTION
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday promised a thoroughgoing effort to root out corruption in the New York City Police Department.
But he stopped well short of endorsing a special panel's call for creation of a permanent, independent Police Commission with broad powers to investigate the nation's largest police force.
Mr.
Giuliani, a former prosecutor who has made the reduction of crime the centerpiece of his mayoralty, spoke after the Mollen Commission formally released the results of a two-year study of the Police Department -- a report that painted a devastating account of corrupt networks of rogue officers and of a police culture that "exalts loyalty over integrity."


60 Join Protest at 2 Arkansas Abortion Clinics
About 60 protesters sponsored by three national anti-abortion groups picketed two abortion clinics today in the start of what had been billed as a major show of force after a series of recent court rulings and a new Federal law barring demonstrators from obstructing access to clinics.
But the protesters were outnumbered by police officers and local and national abortion-rights groups.
Anti-abortion leaders had predicted that about 300 demonstrators would gather here, but even they acknowledged that they had faced more opposition and resistance in organizing their efforts here in President Clinton's home state than they had expected.


Streisand Puts Money Where Mouth Is
To the Editor:
Although a June 29 news article criticizes Barbra Streisand, the Gay Men's Health Crisis would like to go on record as wholeheartedly grateful for her generosity.
The singer's willingness to make 1,000 tickets to her Madison Square Garden concert available to our organization has enabled us to clear $650,000 without administrative or promotional costs.
That money will advance our efforts to provide AIDS education, offer services to men, women and children with AIDS, and work to influence public policy for everyone affected by the human immunodeficiency virus and AIDS.


A JUDGE UPHOLDS EVIDENCE SEIZED AT SIMPSON HOME
The judge in the O. J. Simpson case ruled today that detectives who arrived at Mr.
Simpson's estate hours after his former wife and a friend of hers were slain acted properly in entering the estate and recovering evidence before they obtained a search warrant.
The judge, Kathleen Kennedy-Powell of Los Angeles Municipal Court, said the four detectives had acted with justification, given circumstances that she agreed were uncertain and potentially alarming after their arrival at Mr.
Simpson's home about 5 o'clock on the morning of June 13.


Seeing something to mine in the venerable Bromo Seltzer brand.
AN entrepreneur who specializes in reviving flagging products is hoping to put the fizz back into the moribund Bromo Seltzer brand.
Jeffrey S. Himmel, who with his father, Martin, rejuvenated neglected "ghost" brands like Doan's Pills, Porcelana fade cream and Lavoris mouthwash, and is now working to resurrect Ovaltine and Gold Bond medicated powder, is acquiring the rights to Bromo Seltzer from Warner Wellcome Consumer Healthcare.


Gupta
Shares of the Gupta Corporation, one of the hottest initial public offerings of 1993, plunged as much as 31 percent to a new trading low yesterday after the computer software company, based in Menlo Park, Calif., said it expected to report a loss for the second quarter.
The revenues that would have offset the high cost of aggressive marketing for a new software product did not materialize, the company said.


CHRONICLE
There is a lesson for MARTIN CHARNIN in "Loose Lips," the show he is currently directing.
"I think I'll make sure that I talk only in the middle of Central Park," he said yesterday as he prepared for the opening Monday at Eighty-Eight's, a cabaret in Greenwich Village.
The show is a compilation of words uttered by celebrities in public statements or private conversations, and they were collected by KURT ANDERSEN, the editor in chief of New York magazine; LISA BIRNBACH, a writer and editor, and JAMIE MALANOWSKI, a senior editor at Esquire magazine.


OrNda HealthCorp (ORND,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Panama's People Don't Want Haitians, or 'Gringos'
In the neighborhood known as El Chorrillo, destroyed but only partly rebuilt after the American invasion of Panama in 1989, Orlando Gil and his neighbors were in a celebratory mood today, delighted that their Government had decided not to allow the United States to bring Haitian refugees here.
"It's about time somebody in this country said no to the gringos," the unemployed laborer said.
To Washington's great dismay, the Western Hemisphere country most recently invaded by the United States proved unwilling this week to ease the pressure of a crisis that may well result in America's next military adventure.
And to a large extent, Panamanians agree, it was the legacy of that invasion and 90 years of American involvement here that forced President Guillermo Endara to rescind Panama's offers of a temporary safe haven for up to 10,000 Haitian boat people.


Bridgeport Housing Project To Close, a Victim of Crime
When it opened in 1940 as Connecticut's first public housing project, the Father Panik Village was hailed as a shining example of how cities could provide decent affordable housing to poor and middle-income families.
Many of the early tenants recall sitting on green lawns, where they watched children playing in sunshine-filled courtyards among the 46 buildings in the project.


A Collection To Astonish The World
We had heard that Dr. John K. Lattimer was quite a collector of unusual things.
"So, what's new?" we asked at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center where the 80-year-old Dr.
Lattimer had been chairman of the urology department and where he still tends to his patients.


Mountain Fire Pushed Back as 2 More Bodies Are Found
Meteorologists predicted that winds would shift on Wednesday, but no one expected that 50-mile-an-hour gusts would turn a small brush fire into a deadly 2,000-acre inferno, officials and a survivor said today.
Fourteen firefighters died, including two whose bodies were found this afternoon.
At a news conference at a hospital, Eric Hipke, 32, a veteran firefighter from Bellevue, Wash., described how he and several others escaped the fire by racing along a fire line they had built on a steep slope above Glenwood Springs, about 60 miles west of Aspen.


Thinking It's Adultery And It's Not
The rollicking new klezmer musical, "Shlemiel the First," at the John Jay Theater, is a reminder that the most inspired low comedy offers a lot more than pratfalls, buffoonery and custard pies.
When attached to a potent fable and staged in the airy surreal style that the director and choreographer David Gordon has brought to the production, it can be profound in a wonderfully offhanded way.
The show, which originated at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass., and had the first of four New York performances on Thursday as part of the Serious Fun festival at Lincoln Center, is based on a play by Isaac Bashevis Singer that was taken from several of his children's folk tales.
As conceived and adapted by Robert Brustein, it has propulsively tuneful music by Hankus Netsky that is played with a lilting zest by the eight-member Klezmer Conservatory Band under the direction of Zalmen Mlotek.


Giuliani Starts Interviewing Candidates for Governor
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani began formally interviewing the Republican candidates for Governor of New York yesterday, holding out his support as the coveted prize of an unusual, politically delicate dance.
For months the Mayor has annoyed state Republican leaders because of his reluctance to endorse the party's nominee, George E. Pataki -- a stance the leaders fear may play into the hands of the man they are trying to defeat this fall, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


Editorial Noteboo; A Few Days in Court Jury Duty Isn't Always a Trial
O.K., O.K.
Jury duty can be tedious, the courthouse is in deplorable condition, and who wants to take time away from real life to go be a good citizen anyway?
Well, it turns out there is another reason to journey down to 100 Centre Street in lower Manhattan, beyond duty: Serving on a jury can be fascinating.
It can actually make you feel good about judges and D.A.'s.
It can reinforce a New Yorker's oft-challenged belief in the common sense of her fellow citizens.
It can give you a sense of pride in a criminal justice system that, however flawed, remains society's noble measure of right and wrong.


A Good Time to Turn Paper Losses Into Tax Benefits
The first half of the year has left investors sitting on paper losses in bonds, stocks and mutual funds of all types.
Many are justifiably proud that they have not panicked and sold in the declining market.
But a short-term maneuver is worth consideration: selling an investment that has declined in value to lock in a loss for tax purposes.
In many cases, this can be done without disturbing long-term goals by turning around and buying the same securities or something comparable.
And in the case of the increasingly popular no-load mutual funds, there are no transaction costs.


A SURGE IN HIRING ADDS TO CONCERNS ON U.S. INFLATION
A Labor Department report showing a sharp and unexpected surge in the number of jobs created in June gave financial markets jitters about inflation today.
Traders' concerns were only magnified as the Clinton Administration tried later to allay their fears about the economy and the dollar.
While the unemployment rate held steady at 6 percent, the increase in business payrolls of 379,000 jobs was considerably stronger than analysts had anticipated.
Coming on top of sizable upward revisions in the number of jobs created in April and May, the report seemed likely to push the Federal Reserve closer to another increase in short-term interest rates to prevent a surge in inflation -- a move it opted not to take at a policy-setting meeting this week.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Waived Craig Lefferts, pitcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Activated Scott Lewis, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.


Nils W. Berg; Restaurateur, 79
Nils W. Berg, a former senior art director of the McCann-Erickson advertising agency in New York who later was a restaurateur in Provincetown, Mass., died on Wednesday at the Cape End Manor Nursing Home in Provincetown.
He was 79.
Mr. Berg had a long illness, said his wife, Eva.


U.S. Judge Accepts a Guilty Plea From Chief Executive of B.C.C.I.
Over the strenuous objection of the Manhattan District Attorney, a Federal judge in Washington today accepted the guilty plea of the chief executive of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International on sweeping charges of fraud, racketeering and conspiracy.
The executive, Swaleh Naqvi, admitted responsibility for $255 million in losses in the United States, and faces a sentence of six to nine years in Federal prison as a result of his role in B.C.C.I.


Selling a Longtime Residence Without Incurring a Tax Bite
John B. Crosby, 74, recently moved into a smaller home.
In the process, he had sold the house he had lived in for 25 years, a house that had appreciated in value considerably.


407 Haitians Are Returned In Just 1
The United States Coast Guard cutter Vindicator took 407 Haitians home today, the largest group since the Administration began processing refugee applications at sea, but Haitians kept arriving faster than ships could pick them up.
To keep up with the flow -- since Monday, more than 10,000 have poured out of Haiti -- American officials said today that thay they plan to add staff and speed up operations so that next week they can send back 1,000 asylum-seekers a day.


Beliefs
"How many divisions has the Pope?" Stalin is supposed to have asked, but it is not hard to imagine Franklin D. Roosevelt or Henry A. Kissinger saying much the same thing.
They too, at times, were exasperated by the idea that in world of politics, religious ideals could outweigh military might or material interests.
It is also not hard to imagine such dismissive sentiments issuing from the corridors of the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington research institution with a reputation for harboring tough-minded scholars and diplomats.


COMPANY IS PLANNING MORE EMPLOYEE CUTBACKS
As part of its continuing efforts to cut costs and return to profitability, the Digital Equipment Corporation yesterday told more than 1,000 employees in its manufacturing plants in Albuquerque, N.M., and Chihuahua, Mexico, that it would be phasing out both in the next six months.
The disclosure comes a week after Digital, a once-powerful multinational computer company that has fallen out of profitability, announced the closing of its plant in Westfield, Mass., which will cost 340 jobs.
Nikki Richardson, a Digital spokeswoman, said the cutbacks were part of the company's latest round of layoffs, which are intended to cut the work force from the current 85,000 to fewer than 65,000.


Don't Look for Flash Or Dash From Spain
If there is any justification to the theory that a team must have a star to succeed in the World Cup, Spain must be considered the underdog in the quarterfinals.
When Spain plays Italy at Foxboro Stadium near Boston today, it will have no one of the stature of Italy's Roberto Baggio, or of any of the six other quarterfinalists' stars: Romario of Brazil, Hristo Stoichkov of Bulgaria, Lothar Matthaus and Jurgen Klinsmann of Germany, Dennis Bergkamp of the Netherlands, Gheorghe Hagi of Romania and Tomas Brolin of Sweden.


No Headline
"Keeping in mind that the proof in this matter is not proof beyond a reasonable doubt, the court feels there is ample evidence evidence to establish a strong suspicion of guilt of the accused." -- KATHLEEN KENNEDY-POWELL, the judge in the Simpson case.  [ A1:1. ]


Florida Ruling Voids New Domestic Court
Foiling a judge's attempt to combat domestic violence, a Florida appeals court has ruled that the creation of Dade County's Domestic Violence Court violated the state Constitution.
In a 2-to-1 vote, Florida's Third District Court of Appeals ruled on Tuesday that a new court division can be created only by the Florida Supreme Court, and not by a judge's administrative order.


Death Adds a Dangerous Uncertainty to the Warming With U.S.
The death of North Korea's aged President, Kim Il Sung, has been awaited for years, with analysts debating the possibilities for his succession and speculating on a battle for power.
But the suddenness of Mr.
Kim's death, and the fact that it came in the middle of extremely sensitive negotiations with the United States, has added a dangerous element of uncertainty to what was already one of the tensest world confrontations in recent years -- the dispute with the United States and a United Nations agency over North Korea's suspected nuclear weapons program.


Nagle Finds a Home in Indianapolis
The Indianapolis Colts yesterday signed the former Jets quarterback BROWNING NAGLE.
Terms of the contract were not disclosed.
Nagle is expected to join the Colts at the start of training camp in Anderson, Ind., on Wednesday.
"This gives us four quarterbacks going into training camp," Coach TED MARCHIBRODA said.
"JIM HARBAUGH and DON MAJKOWSKI have an obvious advantage because of experience with the system.


Dow Gains 20.72 as Fed Doesn't Move on Rates
Stocks rose yesterday as the Government reported that the nation's unemployment rate remained steady in June, while the economy created a stronger-than-expected number of jobs during the month.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 20.72 points on the day to finish at 3,709.14.
The Dow was up 62.49 points for the week.


Next for the New South Africa: Potholes and Taxes
This motor city on the Indian Ocean seems, at first, an uncanny miniature of the new South Africa.
It has the country's first black mayor, Nceba Faku, a lanky, younger version of Nelson Mandela.
Like Mr.
Mandela, the new Mayor spent a third of his life in Robben Island Prison for treason against the apartheid state, and now spends his time assuring the anxious white minority that they are not about to be driven into the sea.


What the Teen-Age Adoption Study Left Out; Average Healthy Lives
To the Editor:
Buried deep in your paper on June 23 was a news article with a headline I have been waiting to see since last summer: "Adopted Youths Are Normal in Self-Esteem, Study Finds."


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday with a review of a dance by Nayo Takasaki, "Urban Planning I," misidentified one of the dancers.
Heather Lyle was at center, not Clare Byrne.


Hills Force LeMond to Quit Tour
Greg LeMond reached the end of the road today in the Tour de France and possibly in his glorious career, too.
LeMond, the finest American bicycle road racer ever, dropped out of the Tour exhausted on a small hill, the Cote des Loges-Marchis, during the sixth stage of the three-week race.
His finish came at Kilometer 183 (Mile 113) of the 270.5-kilometer (168-mile) ride from Cherbourg to Rennes.


A Leading British Tory Faces an Insider Inquiry
As Jeffrey Archer, he is the author of best-selling pulp novels like "Kane and Abel," "First Among Equals" and "Honor Among Thieves." As Lord Archer, he is a close friend to Prime Minister John Major and tireless campaigner for Britain's governing Conservative Party.
But he is no stranger to controversy in either guise, and now, just as he seemed ready to take a more prominent role in politics here, Mr.
Archer is under investigation by British authorities for insider trading.


Next Question: If Employers Don't Pay Health Bill, Who Will?
President Clinton's goal of health insurance for all Americans is often described as a moral imperative or a political objective, but it is also a pocketbook issue.
In one sense, there is no mystery about how to reduce the number of uninsured: it just takes money.
The question is who should pay.


Excerpts From Closing Arguments by Simpson's Lawyer and the Prosecutor
The following are excerpts from the closing arguments of Robert L. Shapiro, the defense lawyer, and Marcia Clark, the lead prosecutor, in a preliminary hearing on the murder charges against O. J. Simpson, as recorded by The New York Times.
The Defense
Your honor, I would ask the court to consider the jury instruction that would be given in a case like this regarding circumstantial evidence, and that is if the evidence presented relies solely on circumstantial evidence, there can be no conviction unless the circumstances point to guilt and are not reconcilable with any other reasonable theory.
If, on the other hand, the circumstances may point to guilt or may point to innocence, the jury, or finder of fact, must adopt that theory which points to innocence and reject that which points to guilt.


Sports of The Times; Moving Sports to Center Stage
THE power is off.
Half our hotel has gone dark, the result of a storm, helped along by a barrage of heat, humidity and 1,300 journalists consuming rivers of kilowatts at the same time.


COMPANY NEWS
APS HOLDING CORP., Houston, an auto parts distributor, acquired Archer Supply Inc., Salt Lake City, and Red Rock Auto Supply, Colorado Springs, two chain stores, and Undercar Parts and Equipment Co., St.
Louis, an under-car operation for an undisclosed amount.
PRAXAIR INC., Danbury, Conn., a supplier of industrial gases, announced that its Rio de Janeiro affiliate had bought 51 percent of Oxigenos de Colombia for an undisclosed amount and would invest $10 million in the company during a two-year period.


Man Is Sought After His Wife Is Found Dead
The authorities were searching yesterday for a Jordanian man who they said had killed his estranged wife in her New Jersey home, then apparently fled with the couple's two small children -- perhaps trying to return to Jordan.
The victim, Nihal Abequa, had filed for divorce from her husband, Mohammad Abequa, last April, charging him with "acts of extreme cruelty" and violent outbursts toward her and their children during their eight-year marriage.
In February 1993, she charged, Mr.
Abequa had threatened to kill her during an argument, said W. Michael Murphy, the Morris County Prosecutor.


Cracking Down In a Drinking Town; Hoboken Battles Public Urination
In this once-creaky port city where most every corner is now lighted by a neon beer sign, where the local cottage industry mass-produces drunkenness, there lurks a menace.
Not the murderers or drug dealers who prey upon the good citizens of so many communities.
In Hoboken, the nemesis of the police and many residents is the overindulgent young men (and, often enough, young women) who violate, in droves, ordinance 145-22: that is, they urinate in public.


Valentin Pulls Off Unassisted Triple Play
Red Sox 4, Mariners 3
John Valentin made the 10th unassisted triple play in major league history and then touched off a three-homer outburst by Boston in the sixth inning as the Red Sox defeated the Seattle Mariners, 4-3, last night at Fenway Park.


George Watt, 80, Hospital Executive
George Watt, the retired administrator of the Community Mental Health Center at Maimonides Hospital in Brooklyn, died on Thursday at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital.
Mr.
Watt, who lived in Northport, L.I., was 80.
The cause of death was cancer, said his son, Steven Watt.


The Price for O'Neill Is Going Way Up
Last winter, Paul O'Neill's agent asked the Yankees if they wanted to discuss a contract extension.
The Yankees told the agent, Joe Bick, that they would get back to him.
Last spring, Bick broached the subject again.
The Yankees ignored him.
Now, the Yankees probably wish they had chatted.
O'Neill has gotten the attention of the Yankees and 27 other teams by becoming one of the most productive players in the major leagues.
After hitting above .400 until June 17, O'Neill is batting .387 with 15 homers and 60 runs batted in.
He has obviously boosted his value.


INSIDE
Few Takers for Haiti
American allies have been slow to make commitments for a peacekeeping unit that would serve Haiti if its military leaders left power.
Page 6.
South African Premonition
The first black mayor in a South African city is making tough budget decisions, a sign of things to come nationwide under integration.
Page 3.
A Shift by Macy's Creditors
A crucial group of R. H. Macy creditors moved closer to striking a deal to clear the way for a merger with Federated Department Stores.
Page 35.
Lesbian Officer Reinstated
A National Guard colonel discharged two years ago because she is a lesbian has been reinstated and is to return to her old job today.
Page 9.


Needed: Steady Hands on Haiti
By abruptly reneging on the plan to provide safe haven to 10,000 Haitian refugees, Panama embarrasses the Clinton Administration.
But it raises no substantive roadblock to America's latest policy of providing sanctuary for Haitian refugees while excluding them from the United States.
Washington is already hard at work replacing the 10,000 slots lost in Panama with commitments from other countries, some as far afield as West Africa.
This frantic search helps meet a desperate humanitarian need, but there can be no mistaking that a policy that diverts black Haitians while welcoming mostly white refugees from other troubled nations reeks of racial discrimination.


No Headline
No-Load Directories
Q.
Is there a directory of no-load stock mutual funds that shows the minimum initial investment required by each and whether an automatic regular investment plan is available? -- WILLIAM NILES, Boynton Beach, Fla.


9th-Inning Dramatics Rescue Yankees
The ninth inning was riveting and dramatic at Yankee Stadium last night, more riveting and dramatic than the Yankees could have imagined.
Melido Perez had a one-hitter against the California Angels with one out to go, and the fans acted as if it were a no-hitter.
They stood, smiled and screamed.
For them, it seemed like a wonderful night to be in the Bronx.
But then, slowly, methodically and agonizingly, the gorgeous picture that Perez had created came apart.
One out from securing his first career one-hitter, Perez was not quick enough to snare a bullet hit off his glove by Chili Davis.
The single started a rally that put California ahead by 3-2.


2 Beauties, 2 Princes And One Royal Ballet
One of the Royal Ballet's most distinctive features has been its ensemble style; so much so that its greatest dancers, including Margot Fonteyn, Rudolf Nureyev and Anthony Dowell, its present artistic director, were always seen as part of that ensemble.
They were never stars who used the Royal as a backdrop.
Mr.
Dowell's new staging of "The Sleeping Beauty" continues the same successful formula, as was demonstrated during two performances at the Metropolitan Opera House on Thursday that featured major debuts.


Some Breathing Room To Change Trustees
TRUSTS have become increasingly popular in recent years with middle-class people and the affluent as a way to exert control over how their assets will be used and as a detour around onerous estate taxes.
Many people, for example, want to be sure their grandchildren get a good education, so rather than leave money outright to a youth who might spend it for a sports car, they set up a trust, naming a responsible trustee to pay the college bills.
Or a life insurance trust may hold a policy to keep the policy's payout out of the decedent's taxable estate.


Success With a Satellite Leads to a Space Network
Six years ago, Rene V. Anselmo parlayed nearly $80 million from the sale of television stations into what seemed like a sure bet for bankruptcy: launching the world's first privately owned international communications satellite.
Despite having no customers until after the satellite reached its orbit, Mr.
Anselmo's Panamsat Corporation is now reaping a nice profit.
Beaming television programming between the United States, Latin America and Europe for customers like CNN and Home Box Office, the company earned nearly $17 million in profits in 1993 on $50 million in sales.


Key Ally Pulls Away From Macy
A crucial group of R. H. Macy &amp; Company's creditors moved closer yesterday to striking a deal that would clear the way for Federated Department Stores to merge with Macy, even though the Macy board postponed a decision on whether to support a combination of the two retailers.
Macy's directors put off their decision after a letter from the lawyer representing Macy's bondholders arrived at their meeting yesterday morning.
The letter stated that the bondholders no longer supported Macy's own reorganization plan, which would keep the retailer independent.


Players' Salary-Cap Fears Confirmed by Management Explanations
Negotiators for the Players Association spent the better part of a three-hour meeting yesterday asking questions of their management counterparts to make sure they understood the owners' salary cap proposal.
"Our views of how certain things would work were certainly confirmed," Donald Fehr, head of the players' union, said.
"We were afraid our views were going to be confirmed."


Excerpts From Judge's Ruling on Simpson
Following are excerpts from the statement by Municipal Court Judge Kathleen Kennedy-Powell ruling that O. J. Simpson would stand trial for murder, as recorded by The New York Times:
The court has carefully considered the evidence in this case and the arguments of counsel.
In keeping in mind that the proof in this matter is not proof beyond a reasonable doubt, the court feels that there is ample evidence to establish strong suspicion of the guilt of the accused, and therefore the motion to dismiss is denied at this time.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD Record-Setting Burrell Winds Up Winner Two days after setting a world record of 9.85 seconds in the 100 meters, Leroy Burrell won the event yesterday in a modest 10.12 seconds at the B.N.P.
Grand Prix meet in Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.
Burrell had a poor start and was fourth midway through the race before beating a fellow American sprinter, Andre Cason (10.19), and Nigeria's Davidson Ezinwa (10.19). (AP)


METRO DIGEST
WELFARE FINGERPRINTING GAINS APPROVAL The Cuomo administration gave the green light to New York City and two suburban counties to take electronic fingerprints of some welfare recipients in an effort to fight fraud, as long as local governments pay a share of the cost and follow state regulations.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who has made the process known as finger imaging a centerpiece of his welfare policy, said he would proceed with plans to set up a system in all five boroughs by May.
Page 1.
POLICE COMMISSIONER'S POWER ATTACKED State Senate bill 8014A gained final legislative approval on the evening of July 1, one of the last days of business in Albany.
The bill, to create an independent disciplinary hearing process for city employees, would strip New York City's police commissioner of the power to dismiss officers for misconduct on the job.
The legislation had one major lobbyist: the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, the main police union.
Page 1.


Deaths of 2 Israelis Lead to Army Crackdown in West Bank
Israeli forces poured into this Jewish settlement outside Hebron today, scuffling at times with residents enraged by the killings of a local teen-ager and of a young soldier.
To forestall trouble, the army also imposed an air-tight curfew on the 100,000 Arabs in Hebron, emptying the streets of that flashpoint West Bank town except for military patrols and strolls through the center by some of the 450 Jews living there.


Corrections
A chart on Thursday showing the ratings of the television networks for the week of June 27-July 3 reversed two labels.
It was CBS that led the period, with a rating of 8.5 and a share of 17, and ABC that was second, with a rating of 8.4 and a share of 19.


Executive Changes
BOEHRINGER MANNHEIM CORP., Indianapolis, named David Giddings, its chief operating officer, to the additional position of president.
CHECKERS DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS INC., Clearwater, Fla., named Richard Postle president and chief operating officer.
GUINNESS BREWING WORLDWIDE LTD., Stamford, Conn., named Shaun Holliday president of the Americas and Caribbean region and said he would join the company's executive board.
KEMPER FINANCIAL SERVICES INC., Chicago, promoted Jim Greenawalt, senior vice president in charge of sales support, to executive vice president and director of sales, succeeding Robert Ash.
MCI COMMUNICATIONS CORP., Washington, appointed Gerald H. Taylor president and chief operating officer, in addition to his current responsibilities as president and chief operating officer of MCI's worldwide operating subsidiary, MCI Telecommunications Corp.


Cameron Mitchell, 75, Actor; Created Role in 'Salesman'
Cameron Mitchell, a theater, film and television actor who played one of Willy Loman's sons in the original Broadway production of "Death of a Salesman" and the hard-drinking, two-fisted Buck Cannon in the television series "The High Chaparral," died on Wednesday at his home in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
He was 75.
The Associated Press reported that the cause was lung cancer.


COMPANY NEWSWang Appoints Finance Officer
Wang Laboratories Inc. has named Franklyn A. Caine executive vice president and chief financial officer.
Mr.
Caine, 44, most recently was senior vice president, planning and corporate development at the United Technologies Corporation.
Mr.
Caine, who joined United Technologies in 1986, was named to his current job in 1993.


Giants' Thompson Through for Year
Second baseman ROBBY THOMPSON of the San Francisco Giants, a .312 hitter with 19 home runs last season, will be out for the year after undergoing surgery yesterday on his right shoulder.
Thompson, 32, underwent 1 1/2 hours of surgery to repair a tendon in the rotator cuff and remove damaged tissue and cartilage from the shoulder.
The Giants were 18-17 with Thompson in the lineup and are 18-33 without him. (AP)


CHRONICLE
What becomes a retired Chief Justice?
How about an endowed chair in his name at New York University School of Law.
Former Chief Justice WARREN E. BURGER, 86, is to be honored tomorrow by more than 80 of his former law clerks with the establishment of a professorship in constitutional law and the courts "in the hope of perpetuating the values embodied in his judicial career," according to a statement of the organizing committee.


LED NORTH KOREA 5 DECADES; WAS NEAR TALKS WITH SOUTH
Kim Il Sung, the North Korean leader since 1945 and the man who led the invasion of the South and beganthe Korean War, died at 2 a.m. on Friday at the age of 82, Pyongyang Radio said today.
At shortly after noon, the Korean Central News Agency, the country's official news organization, issued a seven-page announcement of Mr.
Kim's death, which said that he would be remembered as a man capable of "creating something from nothing."


No Relief for 2 Relief Aces
Two of baseball's premier relief pitchers in 1993 are unable to salvage their 1994 seasons because of injuries.
DUANE WARD of the Toronto Blue Jays, who led the American League with 45 saves last season, underwent an arthroscopic procedure yesterday in Birmingham, Ala., and is finished for the season.
BRYAN HARVEY, who had 45 saves for the Florida Marlins last season, will undergo groin surgery next week and may miss the rest of the season.
Ward, who has been on the disabled list all season, received a diagnosis of a partial tear of the rotator cuff as well as some deterioration in the upper lip of the cuff.
Dr.
JAMES ANDREWS directed the surgery on the 30-year-old pitcher, who has the longest tenure of any member of the world champion Blue Jays.


Playing Field Is Altered But U.S. Is Still a Player
President Clinton's trip to Europe and the conference of seven major industrial democracies that began here today show European leaders how far they still have to go, five years after the cold war ended, to solve the security and economic problems that followed it.
From the European point of view, the President's role is crucial.
Without clear American leadership and commitment, the West can neither redefine relations with Russia and the Eastern European countries the Soviet Union used to dominate, nor redefine the institutions needed to insure lasting stability from the Atlantic to the Urals in the new era.


Jamesway Files Plan to Give Creditors Control
The Jamesway Corporation said yesterday that it had filed a bankruptcy reorganization plan that would give its creditors at least 90 percent of the stock in the retailing company but would pay them only about half of what they are owed.
But the Jamesway plan faces severe obstacles.
A committee of Jamesway's creditors, who are owed $237 million, unanimously opposes the plan, and on Wednesday it outlined a rival proposal in court papers.
A hearing has been set in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan for July 21.


Georgia Tries to Make Sense of Flood That Comes Once in 500 Years
The boats gathered on Harding Street today.
There was Michael Thompson standing on his front porch in chocolate-colored water up to his waist, loading what he had salvaged -- a microwave, some golf clubs, a box of Raisin Bran -- into a 15 1/2-foot-long speedboat.
There was Steve Urtchok, floating over in a modest fishing boat from his submerged house across the street.
There was Travis Kierce, who moved out of the neighborhood last week but came over in his weathered fishing boat to help out.


Japan's Premier Is Hospitalized
Japan's newly installed Prime Minister, Tomiichi Murayama, became ill tonight and was taken to the hospital during a formal dinner marking the opening of the summit meeting of the heads of the seven leading industrialized nations, Japanese officials said.
Mr.
Murayama, who took office only last week, had joined other world leaders, including President Bill Clinton, at the Castell dell'Ova for a dinner that included lobster, pasta, fish and lemon ice cream, according to the Italian news agency ANSA.


Corrections
A picture on Sunday with an obituary of U Maung Maung, who was briefly President of Burma, was published in error.
It showed U Maung Maung Kha, a former Prime Minister, not the former President.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Ralph C. Rinzler, an assistant secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, misstated his race.
Mr.
Rinzler was white, not black.
The obituary also omitted two survivors, his mother, Beatrice Rinzler of Passaic, N.J., and his sister, Judy Werman of Boynton Beach, Fla.


As Dams Fail, Officials Say Most Go Unregulated
Although more than 100 dams in Georgia have given way in the record storms this week, all but two are private structures that do not come under Federal or state jurisdiction.
Georgia has been the scene of dam failures in the past, most notably one in 1977 at Toccoa Falls in the northeastern corner of the state.
Thirty-nine students and staff members from a small Bible college near the town drowned.


Simpson Ordered to Stand Trial In Slaying of Ex-Wife and Friend
O.
J.
Simpson was ordered today by a Municipal Court judge to stand trial for murder, just hours after an expert testified that Mr.
Simpson's blood matches a drop of blood found where his former wife and a friend were slashed to death.
The judge, Kathleen Kennedy-Powell, said the prosecution had satisfied her that Mr.
Simpson should answer charges in Superior Court that he murdered Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman on the night of June 12.
The ruling concluded a six-day hearing to determine whether the evidence was strong enough to send Mr.
Simpson to trial.


Regional Data on Jobs May Hide Some Gains
The numbers may not tell the whole story about the regional economy.
The Government's latest unemployment statistics, released yesterday, showed that the jobless rates for New York City, New York State and New Jersey remained higher than the national rate.
But Samuel M. Ehrenhalt, the regional commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor, said, "Fundamentally, the region is coming around after a long time in the wilderness."


Holocaust Rescuers Were Rare Exceptions
To the Editor:
Stories about Christian rescuers of Jews during the Holocaust threaten to erase from our collective memory the epidemic outbreak of gross cruelty that accompanied the advance of the Nazi terror machine and that remained behind after the Third Reich had been defeated.


Warning: Brazilians Also Excel At Defense
Until Leonardo threw a vicious elbow at the head of an American midfielder, Tab Ramos, and was suspended from the World Cup, Brazil's defense had gone virtually unnoticed, if also virtually unscored upon.
As it enters today's quarterfinal match against the Netherlands in Dallas, Brazil has surrendered one goal in four games against Russia, Cameroon, Sweden and the United States.
More impressively, the goalkeeper, Taffarel, has been required to make a grand total of five saves.


Lou Gehrig's Disease
To the Editor:
Your June 21 Science Times article on a new genetically altered mouse for use in research on amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease, omits important facts.


Thirty Abortion Opponents Arrested at Arkansas Clinic
Thirty abortion opponents, including two teen-age girls, were arrested here today after blocking the entrance to a clinic, and a Federal prosecutor said she would consider charging them with violating the very law they were protesting.
The 30 were charged with criminal trespass, a misdemeanor that could result in jail terms of as long as 90 days and fines of $500.


Harry S. Sellers; Navy Captain and Businessman, 70
Harry S. Sellers, a retired Navy captain and the founder and chief executive of a self-service storage operation, died on Wednesday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 70.
His family said he had died of cancer.
He was born in Glendora, Calif., and joined the Navy in World War II, spending much of his career as an aviator.
He served in the Korean War and commanded the aircraft carrier Franklin D. Roosevelt off Vietnam in 1969.
Captain Sellers retired in 1972 after serving on the staff of the Chief of Naval Operations.


Dyson Has Promoted Racial Equality
To the Editor:
Re Bob Herbert's "Dyson the Disdainful" (column, July 6): I met John Dyson in 1972, when we worked together to support the New York State Democratic Party, then on hard financial times.
He labored to revive the party, and then and later he supported candidates of all ethnicities.
I know firsthand that the accusations of racism are without merit.


Cangelosi Leaves the Mets With Questions and Anger
John Cangelosi knew for three days that this moment was coming, but when he left the Mets' hotel early this afternoon, he was still searching for a rational explanation.
Despite conversations with management and a careful scrutiny of the team roster, Cangelosi still could not understand why the Mets were letting him go.
In a move that seemed difficult to justify, particularly to Cangelosi, the Mets assigned their reserve outfielder to their Class AAA franchise in Norfolk, Va., and activated starting outfielder Kevin McReynolds immediately after Cangelosi cleared waivers at 2 P.M.
The Mets made the move well aware that Cangelosi would exercise his right to refuse the assignment and they would be forced to release him.


Essex County Vote Will Be Investigated
The civil war among Essex County Democrats took on a new dimension today when the New Jersey Attorney General announced an investigation into possible vote fraud in the June 7 Democratic primary for county executive.
James C. Ciancia, First Assistant Attorney General, said that the Essex County Prosecutor, Clifford J. Minor, had requested the investigation after officials found signs of tampering with voting machines stored in a secured warehouse.


The Mayor and the Union: New Complexity in Relations
The image was enduring: Rudolph W. Giuliani, at the center of a rowdy rally organized by the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association outside City Hall in 1992, shouting an obscenity about Dinkins administration policy.
It was pretty clear that Mr.
Giuliani supported the P.B.A., and the police union, with its money and its more than 20,000 members, went on to do much to help Mr.
Giuliani's ascent to office.


Allies Wax Unenthusiastic About Peace Force for Haiti
As the Clinton Administration tried to salvage its Haitian refugee policy, officials said today that Washington faced another major problem -- the reluctance of America's allies to commit troops, police and civilian contractors for a peacekeeping force that would move in if Haiti's military leaders left power.
William H. Gray 3d, the Administration's special envoy to Haiti, told the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros-Boutros Ghali, on Wednesday that the United States had so far obtained only agreements in principle -- and no formal commitments -- from other countries to provide 2,000 to 3,000 people, senior Administration and United Nations officials said.


Newts and Metal Projects Ride Columbia Into Space
Rising on a golden tail of billowing flame, the space shuttle Columbia carried a crew of seven into space today for a two-week mission to study both the subtle and the grand effects of gravity on materials and living things.
The experiments involve work with exotic furnaces that can produce unusual alloys and with a rotating centrifuge that can simulate different levels of gravity.
The equipment also includes aquariums teeming with thousands of animals, including goldfish, killifish, jellyfish, sea urchins and Japanese red-bellied newts.


Observer; New White Hats
Some tongue-in-cheek cajolery of the legal profession recently in this space drew the usual sprinkle of humorless and vaguely menacing letters from lawyers which inevitably falls upon all who make light of the ancient profession.
The art of writing humorless and vaguely menacing letters must surely be taught in law school.
It is an indispensable skill for putting the fear of blind Lady Justice's occasionally asinine whimsies into that great portion of the citizenry that doesn't know habeas corpus from duces tecum.


Bridge
In a few year's time, the World Bridge Federation may stage an electronic knockout team championship, with players scattered around the world.
On an unofficial level, this has already happened.
About four months ago, 32 teams began play on OKbridge, a program developed for use on the Internet, the worldwide computer network.
Some 3,000 players from more than 20 countries make use of OKbridge, and there may be 100 playing at any time.
The knockout event attracted entries from eight countries: Australia, Britain, Canada, France, Finland, Sweden, Taiwan and the United States.


CHRONICLE
ROSEANNE ARNOLD, the star of the ABC television series "Roseanne," wants to drop her last name and be known from now on as just Roseanne.
The comedian, who achieved stardom as Roseanne Barr, filed for divorce from her husband, the actor TOM ARNOLD, in May, citing irreconcilable differences.


The Next Step for Gun Control
With two big Congressional victories behind them, gun control advocates are asking themselves what the next step will be.
A clearly rattled gun lobby has just committed a paranoiac faux pas -- circulating a bogus internal memo, purportedly from the lobbying group Handgun Control, on the Internet and in pro-gun publications like the National Rifle Association's American Rifleman.
The fake document alleges that the gun control group's aims include the banning of camouflage clothing and the outlawing of shooting ranges.
Still, the latest accomplishment -- passage by the House of a ban on assault weapons -- came by the narrowest possible margin.
The supporters of gun control need to keep moving.


Record Temperatures Avoided as Storms Quench the Heat
Morning sunshine dissolved into thunderstorms yesterday afternoon, forcing sunbathers to flee shade for shelter, people in shorts to throw up umbrellas and forecasters to radically modify their predictions of record heat.
Within a few hours, the temperature at Central Park dropped 21 degrees, and a funnel cloud was spotted over Woodbury, N.Y., in northeastern Orange County.
In Secaucus, N.J., three inches of rain fell in 45 minutes.


New Student Loans, With 30 Years to Pay
In a tacit acknowledgment that many student loans are approaching the size of a mortgage, the Government has decided to let students stretch out payments over 30 years.
The change is part of the Clinton Administration's effort to make education more accessible and to reduce loan default rates.
In one shift, the Government is to begin making some student loans directly, cutting out banks and other private lenders and their fees.
The direct-lending program will be available through 104 schools this fall.
Initially, borrowers in this program will be able to choose the 30-year term and other extended payment options, but all student borrowers may have such choices in the near future.


Bella Napoli's New Gown: Seams Are a Bit Loose
Neapolitans like to say their city is divided: the rich live up on the hill, the poor live down by the docks, and the only strand that links them is chaos.
Now, though, there's a new and unfamiliar part, a bubble of order and serenity where 5,000 police officers and miles of barricades have created a Naples without Neapolitans to insulate a summit from a city.


Clinton Speaks, and It's a Tricky Day for the Dollar
President Clinton set out today to convince the leaders of the other big industrial nations that the United States economy is back in the groove, growing steadily, and that they had best heed his advice.
But in the process, the luckless President stumbled in an embarrassingly public way.


South African Is to Prosecute Balkan War Crimes
After a frustrating yearlong search, the Security Council today approved the appointment of a high-profile South African Supreme Court judge to lead the prosecution at the Balkan war-crimes tribunal in The Hague.
The judge, Richard J. Goldstone, led an investigation of violence before the South African elections in April.
The Council's unanimous choice of Judge Goldstone means the machinery is finally in place for the first international war-crimes prosecutions since the Nuremberg and Tokyo trials after World War II.


New Offerings Include One for Children
The Stein Roe Young Investors Fund aims to teach children about investing in mutual funds.
It seeks long-term results by buying shares of companies relevant to children's lives; holdings include Coca-Cola, Disney and Toys "R" Us.
Investors receive educational materials, a parents' guide, an activity book, quarterly newsletters and investors' hot line.
The Pioneer India Fund is a joint venture between Pioneer Mutual Funds and the Investment Trust of India.
At least two-thirds of the fund will be in Indian equities with the rest in stocks that may benefit from the country's growing economy, and in debt, government and corporate.
The fund says India is poised for rapid and sustainable growth but is an emerging market, which carries risk.


Testing the Blood 3 Ways
Several types of proteins appear on red blood cells in a range of variants that can be tested by serology laboratories.
Three different types of proteins were tested from the blood found at Nicole Brown Simpson's townhouse.
One test determines blood type by examining the ABO blood proteins: the drop of blood at the townhouse was Type A blood, the same type shared by O. J. Simpson and his former wife.
Ronald L. Goldman, who was killed along with Mrs.
Simpson, was Type O. These results mean that the drop could not have come from Mr.
Goldman.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.36
2.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.35
4.23
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.81
4.70
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.41
7.29
5.73
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.69
7.60
6.63
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.47
8.36
7.37
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.48
6.44
5.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Clinton's Director Of Policy on AIDS Resigns Under Fire
President Clinton's chief AIDS policy officer, Kristine M. Gebbie, submitted her resignation today after a rocky 11-month tenure.
Her resignation had been rumored here for weeks.
Advocates for people with AIDS had been unhappy with Ms.
Gebbie ever since she was named and it became clear that she would not be the sort of high-profile AIDS "czar" that the Clinton campaign had promised.


New Money No Novelty in Brazil
With six different currencies having passed through their hands in the last decade, Brazilian comics are comparing the July 1 introduction of Brazil's new money unit, the real, to Elizabeth Taylor's latest marriage.
The Unified Workers Federation, Brazil's most powerful trade union, has already coined its protest slogan: "It looks like a nightmare, but it's real." (The Portuguese word for "real" is the same as the English.)


Butler's Long Reach Leaves the Mets Short
Pete Smith wanted to erase the memory of his last ugly outing, one that stands apart as the only bad start by a Met on this West Coast road trip.
The Mets wanted to extend their winning streak to five games and their record to 7-2 on this 11-game journey, thus guaranteeing that it would be their best road trip thus far this year.


An Unlicensed Driver Is Held In Death of a Child in the Bronx
A 21-month-old girl, who moved from Puerto Rico only weeks ago, was killed Thursday evening when an unlicensed driver backed into her outside a supermarket in the Soundview section of the Bronx, the police said.
The girl, Yelitza Castillo, suddenly broke free from her 17-year-old cousin as they were about to enter the Fine Fare Supermarket on Fetley Avenue shortly before 8 P.M., relatives said.
She ran a few feet, stumbled and was struck by the left rear wheel of the driver's Ford Bronco.


Corrections
A caption yesterday with a picture by Agence France-Presse showing President Clinton visiting the Warsaw Ghetto misidentified one of the people who joined him at a wreath-laying ceremony.
The man standing next to the President was Benjamin Meed, president of the Warsaw Ghetto Resistance Organization in America, not Marek Edelmann.


Thomas B. Crowley, 79, Shipping Executive
Thomas B. Crowley Sr., the head of a conglomerate of shipping companies based on the West Coast and operating worldwide, died on Thursday at the University of California Medical Center Hospital in San Francisco.
Mr.
Crowley, who lived in Piedmont, Calif., was 79.
He died of prostate cancer, said his son, Thomas B. Crowley Jr., also of Piedmont.


Bankers' Gold Won't Feed African Babies
To the Editor:
Does it really matter that Africa's share of world trade has fallen to 2 percent?
Or that per capita income is declining at 2 percent a year?


AT&amp;T Wins A License In Britain
Britain opened its telecommunications market to greater competition today, awarding licenses to the AT&amp;T Corporation and a number of other companies for operating long-distance services anywhere in the country.
The decision is strategically important to AT&amp;T because it will allow the company to compete against a package of global communication services that will soon be marketed by an alliance between MCI Communications Inc. and British Telecommunications P.L.C.


The O.K. Generation
To the Editor:
Your June 29 front-page article on the exploding popularity of meditation books raises the question, Why are Americans choosing such light reading over traditional books?
It seems such ethereal little books provide easy comfort to many for whom, in this supposedly multicultural society, personal difference presents a problem.
Instead of digging to the core that lies in the depths of our common experience, these instruction books avert the challenge by reassuring us that we're all O.K., at least for today.
JOHN K. URDA  New York, June 30, 1994


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  KIM IL SUNG DIES  Kim Il Sung, the North Korean leader since 1945 and the man who launched the Korean War, died at the age of 82, Pyongyang Radio said.  1  The suddenness of Kim's death added dangerous uncertainty to the nuclear dispute with Pyongyang.  5


30-Year Bond Rate Is Highest Since Clinton Was Elected
Long-term interest rates rose yesterday to their highest level since just after President Clinton was elected, as the bond market sold off in the wake of a June employment report that was much stronger than expected.
The Labor Department said the 379,000 rise in payroll employment reported for June might have overstated the growth by as many as 100,000 jobs.
But analysts said the figures, coupled with upward revisions in the number of jobs created in April and May, were consistent with an economy showing considerable momentum.


What the Teen-Age Adoption Study Left Out
To the Editor:
Your June 23 news article on a study of adopted adolescents conducted by the Search Institute of Minneapolis swallowed the good news whole -- adopted teen-agers are no more likely than other adolescents to suffer from problems of mental health or identity -- without investigating the project or its methodology.


Grissom Replaces Dykstra on N.L. Squad
MARQUIS GRISSOM of the Montreal Expos was selected yesterday to replace a starting outfielder, LENNY DYKSTRA of the Philadelphia Phillies, on the National League All-Star team.
Although Dykstra hoped to be reinstated from the disabled list before the All-Star Game at Pittsburgh Tuesday, he has not fully recovered from an appendectomy and will be unable to play.


Downpours Cool Summer's Heat


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the debate over selling a Mount Vernon stadium to Westchester County misstated the age of Steve Mitchell, an opponent of the sale.
He is 51.


Town of Firefighters Weeps for 9 of Them
They are the elite of this remote mill town in central Oregon, handsome, proud young men and women who like to talk of their dangerous work with the Prineville Hot Shots, a daredevil squad that battles some of the nation's most threatening wildfires for the Government.
They can be seen around town in their blue Hot Shot shirts, training and partying together and, when they are summoned by their team leaders with the United States Forest Service, racing for the small local airport to board planes for destinations like California, Arizona, Montana and Alaska.


No Headline
The Economy  A Labor Department report showed a sharp and unexpected surge in the number of jobs created during June, giving financial markets jitters about inflation.
Traders' concerns were magnified as the Clinton Administration tried later to allay their fears about the economy and the dollar.
While the unemployment rate held steady at 6 percent, the increase in business payrolls of 379,000 jobs was stronger than expected.  [ Page 1. ]  The jobless rates in New York City, New York State and New Jersey remained higher than the national rate, the Government reported.  [ 47. ]


Raveling and Seton Hall a Match?
George Raveling, head coach at the University of Southern California for the last eight seasons, has been offered the basketball coaching job at Seton Hall left vacant by the departure of P. J. Carlesimo, according to reports published yesterday.
The Los Angeles Times reported that the 57-year-old Raveling, who has two years left on his U.S.C. contract, met with Seton Hall's athletic director, Larry Keating, on Wednesday and then with U.S.C.'s athletic director, Mike Garrett, on Thursday.


Another Killing in the Haitian Capital


Tanglewood, Changed but the Same
By the time the audience rose to its feet on Thursday night to be led by Seiji Ozawa in the singing of Randall Thompson's "Alleluia," there was no longer any doubt.
The new $9.7 million concert hall at Tanglewood, named for Mr.
Ozawa, is precisely what a concert hall should be: a resonant, warm space that comes to life with sound.
There are refinements to be made, but it is rare for a new hall to begin its career with such a mature, seasoned character and such respect for the tasks of the musicians and the privileges of the audience.
Moreover, as the audience's participation at this gala inaugural concert showed, the hall also fosters a sense of informality and communality in keeping with the traditions of the Boston Symphony Orchestra's summer home.


Bare-Bones Shakespeare Intended for a Hot Night
Heat waves are nearly as inimical to al fresco performances as rain is.
The images of suffocation that abound in "Macbeth" took on uncomfortably literal significance on Wednesday night at the Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival production, which has been staged in a tent on the exquisite grounds of the Boscobel Restoration here.
But if the grass stage was copiously watered with the sweat of actors, there wasn't a trace of listlessness in the performance of this briefest and bloodiest of the major Shakespearean tragedies.
Now in its seventh year, the festival is devoted to presenting Shakespeare in bare-bones productions that put the emphasis on illustrative action.
And Terrence O'Brien, the company's artistic director, has provided a sort of "Road Warrior" version of "Macbeth" that gallops vigorously toward its grisly denouement.


Viacom Completes Merger With Paramount


Douglas Shows Marked Improvement
The former heavyweight champion JAMES (BUSTER) DOUGLAS was moved out of intensive care yesterday, and his condition was upgraded to fair.
Douglas, 34, is being treated at a Columbus, Ohio, hospital for diabetic keto-acidosis, which is common among those unable to produce insulin.


CUOMO SANCTIONS FINGERPRINT SCANS
The Cuomo administration today gave the green light to New York City and two suburban counties to take electronic fingerprints of some welfare recipients in an effort to fight fraud, as long as local governments pay a share of the cost and follow state regulations.
Today's decision, which was announced in a letter sent to local officials by the State Social Services Commissioner, Michael J. Dowling, will almost certainly be challenged in court on the grounds that it changes the rules for eligibility.
But Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who has made the process known as finger imaging a centerpiece of his welfare policy, said in an interview that he would proceed with plans to set up a system in all five boroughs by May.


Leon Rafalowicz; Jewelry Wholesaler, 74
Leon Rafalowicz, a New York jewelry wholesaler and benefactor of Jewish causes, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 74 and lived on the Upper East Side.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Public &amp; Private; A Break In the Action
The protesters are across the street from the Aware Woman clinic, on the lawn of the house they purchased last year, reportedly for cash.
Across the street is still plenty close, so that if you're lying on the table having an abortion you can hear the voices clearly, "Mommy, don't kill your baby," carried on the thick and muggy air.
"They're bellowing big time out there," said Patricia Baird Windle, "no matter what Justice Rehnquist said."


Political Power of Police Union Could Slow Fight Against Graft
State Senate bill 8014A gained final legislative approval on the evening of July 1, one of the last days of business in Albany.
The bill, to create an independent disciplinary hearing process for New York City employees, would strip the city's Police Commissioner of the power to dismiss officers for misconduct on the job.
The legislation had a handful of sponsors.
And it had one major lobbyist: the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, the main police union.


Robert E. Lee, 75, Playwright; 'Inherit the Wind' Co-Author
Robert E. Lee, a prolific playwright and adapter of material for radio and the stage and a co-author of the historical courtroom drama "Inherit the Wind," died yesterday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 75 and lived in Encino, Calif.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Lucy.


Fiscal Board Chief Takes Harvard Post
Allen J. Proctor, the head of the state agency that oversees New York City's finances, announced his resignation yesterday after more than four years in the post.
Mr.
Proctor, 42, is leaving the State Financial Control Board to teach at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.
As executive director, Mr.
Proctor was a frequent critic of New York City's budget plans, and he prodded state and local politicians to bring the city's long-term spending projections more into balance with its underlying economic and fiscal situation.


City Dwellers Still Set Foot on Paving Blocks
To the Editor:
As a history buff, I found your June 20 news article on the comeback of bluestone and other stone sidewalks in the New York City area most interesting; but I was surprised that you omitted a popular sidewalk material that has been around for more than 100 years: Hastings paving blocks.


Lollapalooza '94 Opens in Las Vegas
The Smashing Pumpkins had a perfect arena-rock moment in the finale of their set on Thursday night at Lollapalooza 1994, the alternative-rock extravaganza, which began its summer tour here at the Sam Boyd Silver Bowl.
As D'Arcy Westrey's bass tolled octaves, Billy Corgan sang "I gave my life away/And I feel no pain," followed by sustained wordless notes.
The video screen behind the band showed a ballroom full of waltzing couples; a rippling guitar motif seemed to suspend time, holding the audience rapt.
The effect was inseparable from the magnitude of the sound and image.
It was rock for a big audience in a huge space.
Alternative rock and its forebear, punk, were once hostile to arena-rock, which was seen as an impersonal, commodified version of the real thing.
But that was before Nirvana and before Lollapalooza itself, which made alternative-rockers realize that their audience was far larger than they expected.
Lollapalooza, packaged as a daylong excursion into the underground, has been a consistent concert draw every summer since 1991.
Since then, it has scrambled to retain some element of abrasive surprise, even as it booked Top 10 groups to fill arenas.


CHRONICLE
Former President GEORGE BUSH, who is planning his Presidential archives, toured the Jimmy Carter Library and Museum in Atlanta on Thursday, The Associated Press reported.
Mr.
Carter, who was in Japan at the time of the visit, had written a note inviting Mr.
Bush to visit the complex, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Carter said.


Port Authority Officer Hurt in Airport Scuffle
A Port Authority police officer was shoved in front of a moving car and injured at Kennedy International Airport yesterday during a scuffle with supporters of Louis Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam, a spokesman for the authority said.
The incident ignited a verbal confrontation between about 40 police officers and at least 20 Black Muslims who had come to the airport to see Mr.
Farrakhan as he changed planes during a short layover.


John S. R. Shad Dies at 71; S.E.C. Chairman in the 80's
John S. R. Shad, a former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission who had previously been a powerful figure on Wall Street, died on Thursday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Shad died after heart surgery, said his daughter, Leslie.


Spotlight on Harburg's Lyrics
I could while away the hours
Conferrin' with the flowers


Primal Curiosity
"With everything else that's going on in the world," as one New Yorker put it recently, "wouldn't you think people would have more to do than pay all this attention to the O. J. Simpson case?"
Of course, they have more to do.
They had more to do 40 years ago when the wife of one Dr.
Sam Sheppard was bludgeoned (he claimed) by "a bushy-haired stranger." But they read the miles of newsprint that accompanied that crime as avidly as America is now reading the miles of newsprint accompanying two deaths in California.


Germany's 'Perfect Player' Lets Acclaim Go Elsewhere
The Germans had just finished launching soccer balls at Bodo Illgner and his two backup goalkeepers, at the end of a light practice in this afternoon's on-again, off-again drizzle at Drew University here.
Now they were ambling back to their bus.
Behind the Day-Glo orange webbing that kept back 100 or so onlookers, a boy of about 10 stood and called out, politely, "Mr. Matthaus! Mr. Matthaus!"
If he was hoping for an autograph, he was out of luck.
The boy didn't even get a smile, not even a nod, not even a look in his general direction.


Man Pleads Guilty to Theft From College
A former assistant vice president at Brooklyn College pleaded guilty Friday to charges that he stole more than $400,000 from the college, a spokeswoman for the Brooklyn District Attorney's Office said yesterday.
Michael Rivkin, 60, of Pomona, N.Y., the college's former assistant vice president for business operations, entered the plea to a second-degree grand larceny charge before Justice Francis X. Egitto of State Supreme Court, said the spokeswoman, Kathleen Willcox.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Food on the Run
JIM FASSINO, a chef from Woodbury, figures his summer patrons like haute cuisine as well as anyone.
But with Mr.
Fassino's restaurant being a hot-dog truck parked next to exit 48 of the Long Island Expressway, the accouterments of fine dining are hard to come by.
So Mr.
Fassino imports them.
Set up next to his silver Grumman truck is an outdoor dining room.
First there is the tent, a makeshift blue canopy attached to four stakes.
It allows truck drivers to be medically correct.
To avoid skin cancer, they can sit in the shade as they dine on Philly cheese steaks, french fries and hot dogs. (What they are doing to their arteries is another story.)
Under the tent are four chairs and a card table.
The table is covered with a lovely pink-and-blue-flowered tablecloth.
"I got it at Kmart," Mr.
Fassino announced proudly.


Baby at a Crawl, Bombs Away II And Evil Lurking
I Love Trouble Nick Nolte, Julia Roberts Directed by Charles Shyer PG 123 minutes


POSTINGS: An Optimistic Harvard Study; Home Ownership Rises
After a decade-long decline, home-ownership rates are on the rise and are expected to increase for the rest of the decade, according to a study conducted by the Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard University.
H.
James Brown, director of the center, said that demographic trends, particularly the aging of the baby-boom generation and the movement of immigrants into the economic mainstream, should spark home buying.


Save Water, and Spend Some, Too
Continue to mulch in the hot weather, to conserve moisture and keep the soil as cool as possible.
Install a drip irrigation system, if you can, to save water.
Water deeply any shrubs and trees planted earlier in the year, so they can establish extensive root systems.


A Moderate Democrat From Omaha Caught in the Middle on Health Care
It scarcely had the feel of radical politics: church bells pealed in the distance and a soft breeze fluttered an American flag as some 40 Nebraskans, most of them elderly, sat in lawn chairs on a sultry evening, sipping lemonade and talking with Representative Peter Hoagland about health care.
But on the sidewalk, a grimacing man in a baseball cap and T-shirt paced back and forth with a cardboard sign that declared, "Give me liberty, not socialism!"


Business Diary: July 3-8
THE ECONOMY This Many Statistics Can't Lie: Joblessness Is On the Wane Unless the statistics lie, the job picture keeps on improving.
Last week came word of a surprise surge in payrolls in June -- 379,000 jobs added -- as the unemployment rate held steady at 6 percent.
On top of that, new claims for unemployment benefits fell by 21,000, to 332,000, the largest drop since April and the lowest level since March.
Of course, as always, statistics can fib a little.
After a winter laden with snow days, for example, schools had to stay open longer, keeping school workers on the payroll.
But, mainly, more jobs are appearing.
And, yes, more jobs equals inflation scare equals rising interest rates.
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond jumped to its highest level since Nov. 9, 1992, the week of the Presidential election.
But for President Clinton, the point was this: "We have still Americans who need jobs, we have still Americans who are working part time who wish to work full time." News From the Fed: No News One on important front, nothing happened last week -- and that nonevent was big news.
Whenever Federal Reserve policy makers sit down to meet, the financial markets hold their collective breath, waiting to see if the central bank will tighten the screws a bit more by raising short-term rates.
But after this meeting, the Fed said nothing, which observers took to mean the Fed had not acted.
Of course, just because after recent meetings the Fed has gone public with its decisions doesn't mean it's still doing so.
Many people still expect the Fed to act sometime this summer, and the latest job numbers could give them the final nudge.
Bretton Woods It's Not  When, exactly 50 years ago, world leaders met in Bretton Woods, N.H., they faced grand challenges: a world to rebuild, a global monetary system to reinvent.
But as this weekend's summit meeting began in Naples, world leaders tiptoed around the currency question.
The big industrial economies are doing just fine, but global bond and currency markets are already on edge -- so don't rock the boat.
When President Clinton tried his own brand of tiptoeing, though -- saying he opposed propping up the dollar, not wanting to "choke off growth" worldwide -- currency traders, sure enough, took the cue and sent the dollar near its all-time low.
Tally of Smoking's Health Costs  There are numerous ways of measuring the health costs of smoking -- with the tobacco industry, of course, at one extreme, often saying there's no cost at all because smoking isn't dangerous.
And last week a study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention came out with a novel statistic: for each pack of cigarettes smoked, the taxpayer pays an 89-cent medical bill.
Here's how that works out, according to its survey: health care for smoking-related illnesses cost at least $50 billion in 1993 (that represents fully 7 percent of the nation's total health costs), and Federal and state Governments pay 43 percent of that.
So of a total health cost of $2.06 a pack, the taxpayer pays 89 cents.
Trump Tower South?
Once again, Donald Trump is out to spiff up the neighborhood.
Last week he said he'd become part owner of a certain Midtown office tower and immediately vowed to restore it to "its rightful position as a world-class real estate asset." That surely noble sentiment, though, was not greeted warmly by Peter Malkin, who's had partial control of the building and who was quick to voice his feeling that "it is a world-class real estate asset." Granted, it's no Trump Tower, but you still may have heard of it: it's called the Empire State Building.
And Mr.
Trump, it seems, now owns half of it -- without having spent a penny.
He managed that by helping the buyers -- European and Asian investors -- arrange financing.
Now, Where Were Those Bonds?
In the beginning there was cash -- well, O.K., beads or shells or even salt.
But then came all this high-tech stuff, with banks zinging money mysteriously through the ether.
What keeps them from losing a million here, a million there, through a hole in some electronic pocket?
The answer: sometimes they do.
Seattle First National Bank just settled with the S.E.C. and the Comptroller's office, paying a $75,000 penalty, after it simply lost track of $3 million in bonds.
After the bank switched to a computerized system of handling bonds, the S.E.C. said, inadequately trained workers from a temp agency were handling things, and the bonds fell through the cracks.
And who found them?
The F.B.I., which bought them after they'd been stolen in transit.
"This was a glitch in the extreme," said one official.
COMPANIES New York, on the Savings Map  When you think savings giants, you think California, a land with two mortgages in every garage.
The biggest guns are there -- Ahmanson, Great Western, Golden West.
In New York, mega-banking generally means catering to the affluent, who want to move money at the flick of a computer.
But suddenly, rising in the East, is a savings giant.
Last week Dime and Anchor, two pillars of traditional mortgage lending, said they'd merge, with the combined company vaulting to No. 4 among savings banks.
The new name: Dime Bancorp (a survey showed that Dime, born in 1852, is better known).
At its head: Richard Parsons, Dime's chairman and a rising industry star.
Bond Shopping at Macy's  Macy's owes bondholders $1.3 billion it can't pay, and that gives bondholders a big say in Macy's fate as it tries to climb out of bankruptcy.
So far bondholders have stymied an attempt by Federated to merge with Macy's, but that could change soon.
Fidelity, the mutual fund powerhouse, which backs the merger, decided that if it couldn't fight the bondholders, it would join them -- in a big way.
Last week Fidelity bought $80 million worth of the bonds -- not enough to dictate Macy's fate, but enough to make itself heard.
Texaco Pulls Up Some Stakes  American oil companies have had it with America.
Environmental concerns put many areas off limits, and many oil fields are past their glory days, so they're increasingly looking abroad.
And of course, like all good corporate citizens these days, they're trying to be stingy with costs.
Texaco fit right in with both trends last week when it said it would sell half its 600 producing domestic fields and cut 2,500 jobs.
Soon, it says, its balance will tilt, putting more of its spending abroad.
And Texaco says it plans to keep cutting overhead.
A Crowded Exit at Fox  As Fox moves steadily toward television's big leagues, it's endured some highly visible growing pains -- perhaps because Rupert Murdoch, whose News Corporation owns Fox, has been taking a special interest in it lately.
Two years ago Barry Diller left as head of Fox Inc., beginning his detour in home-shopping land at QVC en route to CBS.
More departures followed, with the latest coming last week, when Lucie Salhany, network television's highest-ranking woman, resigned from Fox Broadcasting after a reshuffling wiped out her position as chairwoman.
Her tenure was marked by ups and downs, with one memorable down being her bet on Chevy Chase as Fox's great late-night hope.
INTERNATIONAL French Business on Trial  These haven't been good times for French business, with accusations flying about corruption at the very top and fraud charges against various executives.
Last week brought a vivid episode in this drama, as Pierre Suard, head of Alcatel, the telecommunications and engineering giant, was arrested for questioning about possible misuse of company funds -- investigators say he used $740,000 of shareholders' money on a security system for his apartment.
Alcatel has just agreed to pay France Telecom $11 million to settle charges of overbilling and two Alcatel managers were convicted of fraud.
An Argentine Miracle (for Some)  Latin America is a volatile economic laboratory, its nations lunging from system to system.
A world-minded capitalism has won many a recent tug-of-war, but the cost is often high.
In Argentina, President Menem's Government has wrestled inflation down from a numbing 5,000 percent in 1989 to under 5 percent, becoming a model economy-in-training.
But left behind, critics say, are the rural poor.
And last week, with unemployment rising and rich and poor drifting further apart, tens of thousands of out-of-town Argentines descended on Buenos Aires to protest economic policies.
Said one member of Congress: "The Government cannot ignore this."


Pit Vipers Hold Hope for Stroke Victims
NEUROLOGISTS at New York Medical College are working with an unlikely new weapon to minimize the debilitating effects of stroke on the human brain -- snake venom.
The Malayan pit viper (known formally as Agkistrodon rhodostoma) is better known for dropping out of trees and wrapping itself around the neck of its victim -- usually a rodent but sometimes an unfortunate human.
A snake bite from a pit viper can be fatal, particularly in the neck or shoulder, because it causes extensive bleeding and -- if the blood fills the wind pipe or the lungs -- can cause the victim to die of suffocation.


Journal; Peace And Love, '94 Style
Peace and love -- surely you remember peace and love -- may make a major comeback next month when "Woodstock '94," a weekend-long rock concert in Saugerties, N.Y., tries to make lightning strike as it did 25 Augusts ago.
There will be much nostalgic wailing about the beautiful countercultural revolution that failed -- where have all the flowers gone? -- and much boomer griping about the decline and fall of rock music from Sly and the Family Stone (Woodstock '69) to Porno for Pyros (class of '94).
Then there's the ticket price.
The first Woodstock cost $18 for three days of peace and love, and even so a couple of hundred thousand people barged in for free.
"Woodstock '94" costs $135 (plus an inevitable $30 Ticketmaster service charge) for only two days.
And that price will not buy peace; a warring rock spectacular, "Bethel '94," is being staged 50 miles away at the site of the first Woodstock.


Correction
A table of consumer interest rates last Sunday misstated the seven-day average savings rates for the IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund, because of incorrect data provided by the Bank Rate Monitor.
The correct figures are 3.64 percent for the week ended July 1, 3.63 percent for the previous week and 2.63 percent for the comparable week a year ago.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  CONCERN OVER KOREA TRANSITION  The death of North Korea's leader cast a pall of uncertainty over the little-known country, but initial signs were that the transition of power there would be orderly.  1


Sally Johnson, Cal Whipple
Sally Schilthuis Johnson, a member of the Representative Town Meeting in Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to A. B. C. Whipple, an author and maritime historian.
The Rev.
Gilbert D'Souza officiated at St.
Catherine of Siena Roman Catholic Church in Riverside, Conn.
Mrs.
Whipple, a graduate of Sarah Lawrence College, is the chairwoman of District 2 of the Greenwich Representative Town Meeting.
She is a daughter of the late Willem and Sally Schilthuis.
The bride was a widow.


The Nation; The Fall and Amazing Rise Of Senator Bob Packwood
ONE thing about feeding frenzies: they don't last.
But those who have been fed upon often don't recover.
One who is trying, and bit by bit succeeding, is Bob Packwood.
The Republican Senator from Oregon, who was accused by numerous women of forcing himself on them, has benefited from a passage of time and from the emergence of a subject, health care, in which he is an expert.
But Mr.
Packwood also adopted a deliberate strategy to rehabilitate his image, manipulating the echo chamber of the press to regain his footing, if not his standing, on Capitol Hill.
He has been shrewdly rebuilding support so that if his Senate colleagues some day sit in judgment of him, he might survive.
Caught for so long in the nether region between scandal and redemption, the new Bob Packwood -- which is to say the old, pre-scandal Bob Packwood -- is back in view.


Wall Street; A New Concept in Fund Ads: Truth
IT'S just no fun being in the mutual fund business anymore.
Portfolio managers are being told to dust off and read the company ethics policy, and fund companies are getting rapped on the knuckles for putting volatile securities in "safe" funds.
Now, as if all that isn't bad enough, fund companies may soon be putting up with a new set of rules that will cramp their creative advertising style.
Among other things, the regulations, proposed by the National Association of Securities Dealers Inc., would require that a fund refrain from claiming "No. 1" performer status unless it is the No. 1 performer.


Q and A
To Get a Shot, or Not?
Q.
I will be visiting Kenya, India and Nepal in September and would like to know if shots for malaria, yellow fever, typhoid, hepatitis and tetanus are necessary? -- Josephine Esposito, Staten Island


Whatever Became of . . . ?
To the Editor:
Having read Anna Kisselgoff's essay on City Ballet's Diamond Project  [ "Choreographers Learn Anew: Balanchine Is Tough to Beat," June 26 ] , as well as having looked at the programs of American Ballet Theater and the Royal Ballet, I am wondering: What happened to "Scheherazade," "Rodeo," "Mademoiselle Angot," "Gaite Parisienne," "Spectre de la Rose," "Les Patineurs" and a score of other classics?


Blanket Amnesty
Most hotels are not in the habit of rewarding light-fingered guests who make off with towels, ashtrays or more substantial booty.
But the Ritz Hotel in London is doing precisely that.
To collect items for a "heritage room," the hotel is offering a swap for items removed between 1906 to 1960.
Anyone returning crockery receives afternoon tea.
A chamber pot is good for a night's stay.
And monogrammed bath towels can be traded in for dinner.
Big-ticket items, like silverware or even furniture, are assessed individually but could be worth a weekend for two in a suite.
About 40 items have been returned.
For information, write: Radha Arora, Resident Manager, The Ritz Hotel, Piccadilly, London, W1V 9DG.
For hotel reservations, call (800) 222 0939.
TERRY TRUCCO


Behind Ives's Harmonic Clashes
To the Editor:
K.
Robert Schwarz cites Charles Ives's use of epithets such as pansy and pussy-boy and his description of music as "an emasculated art" as evidence of Ives's homophobia.
Even more distressing evidence comes in "Perfect Pitch," the memoirs of the musician and writer Nicolas Slonimsky.


Why Do Catholics Stay In The Church; Because Of The Stories
If you don't like the Catholic Church," the woman in the "Donahue" audience, by her own admission not Catholic, screamed at me, "why don't you stop being a priest and leave the Church?"
I had been criticizing what I took to be the insensitivity of some Catholic leaders to the importance of sex for healing the frictions and the wounds of the married life and perhaps renewing married love.
I was taken aback by the intensity of her anger.
Why did it matter so much to her that I had offered some relatively mild criticism?
Why did such criticism seem to her to demand that I decamp from Catholicism and the priesthood?


Ideas &amp; Trends; The Face That Haunts
SINCE 1981, the start of the AIDS epidemic, more than 93,000 Americans have died of the disease.
But one stands out more than others: Kimberly Bergalis, the self-declared "innocent victim," the young woman who angrily insisted that she had done nothing wrong, nothing to contract the disease except visit her dentist, Dr.
David Acer.
When, weak and emaciated, Kimberly Bergalis testified before Congress in 1991, she set off nationwide alarm.
Her testimony, asserted George Annas, an ethicist and lawyer at Boston University School of Public Health, may have been "the most dangerous two minutes in the history of the AIDS epidemic." Although Dr.
Acer remains the only health care worker in the United States alleged to have transmitted the AIDS virus to patients, the heart-rending sight of Ms.
Bergalis, dying at 23, sparked a demand that health care workers be tested for the AIDS virus, and prohibited from practicing if they tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 10, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
2
21
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
3
3
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
4
7
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer pursues his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
5
3
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $6.50.) A model young woman is abducted by a onetime award-winning film maker.
6*
4
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
7
101
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
8*
4
DARK APPRENTICE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) Volume 2 of the "Star Wars" Jedi Academy Trilogy.
9
12
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
10
8
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A former naval officer versus a woman who heads a terrorist conspiracy.
11
3
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers and dope smugglers.
12
1
STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Warner, $6.50.) The problems, political and sexual, of a Florida congressman.
13
2
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Bantam, $6.50.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
14
2
HONOR AMONG THIEVES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Saddam Hussein plots to steal the Declaration of Independence.
15
6
HILL TOWNS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Americans on holiday in Italy learn a lot about themselves.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
26
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
10
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
3*
8
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
4
557
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
7
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
6
73
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
7
26
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
8
6
FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated in combat in Vietnam and recently committed suicide.
9*
9
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
10*
4
THE LONGEST DAY, by Cornelius Ryan. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $11.) The Allied assault on Normandy, June 6, 1944.
11
12
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans.
12
143
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
13*
36
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
14
14
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
15*
58
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
173
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
6
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
3
35
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
4
180
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 25, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


How a Wide Variety of Nails Holds Things Together
SELECTING nails is challenging, even for professionals.
One reason is the wide variety of building materials, as nearly all need nails with specific holding properties.
For an idea of how different nails function, consider their three parts, the point; the shank, or shaft, and the head.
Nails with long sharp points wedge fibers apart and are easier to drive than nails with blunt points, which simply punch through wood.
But sharper nails are more likely to cause splitting.


Civil War Mail
To the Editor:
I hope someone is going to explain why the illustration used with a review of two books about Civil War art -- an 1861 painting by James Walker of an officer reading a newspaper aloud to other officers in camp -- is entitled "Letters From Home" (June 12).
DAVID B. BRONSON  Cambridge, Mass.
The editor replies:
To the best of our knowledge, the painting was so named by the artist.
He was there, and we were not.


Karen Ramer and Lubomir Ochotnicky
Karen Novotny Ramer, the daughter of Henry and Diane Ramer of Gibbstown, N.J., was married on Friday to Lubomir Ochotnicky, the son of Eduard and Paulina Ochotnicky of Poprad, Slovakia.
Pamela Hammer, the Mayor of Voorhees, N.J., officiated at Pennypacker Park in Haddonfield, N.J.


An Italian Film That Pits North Against South
DESPITE A teutonic-sounding Swiss name, Lina Wertmuller has an unquenchable passion for the irrepressible south of Italy.
So it is not surprising that her latest film to reach American shores would probe the differences between Italy's somewhat disciplined north and the fervently other south.
Called "Ciao, Professore," the film is the tale of a dozen Neapolitan children reclaimed from lives as truants: little waiters, barbers, cigarette smugglers and drug runners.
They are hauled back to school by a proper northern Italian schoolteacher, whom they in turn loosen up.


Anthony Bufano; Organ Curator, 53
Anthony Bufano, the curator of the organ at the Riverside Church in Manhattan for more than 30 years, died on Wednesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
Mr.
Bufano, who lived in Manhattan, was 53.
The cause was lymphoma, according to the church.


Ashley Hughes, Jan-Peter Olters
Ashley Elizabeth Hughes, the daughter of Mrs.
Bruce R. Watts and the stepdaughter of Mr.
Watts of New York, was married on Friday to Jan-Peter Olters, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Olters of Lubeck, Germany.
The Rev.
Alan J. R. Neal performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Columba's-the Berkeley Memorial Chapel in Middletown, R.I.
Mrs.
Olters, 28, is a candidate for a master's degree in art history at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst.
She graduated from the University of Rhode Island.
Her stepfather is a senior vice president of S. G. Warburg &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
Her mother, Susan Watts, is the director of the maternal and child health-care project at the French-American Foundation in New York.
The bride is also the daughter of the late Lieut.
Joe P. Hughes, a Navy pilot.


Correction Officer Held in False Report
A correction officer falsely said she was a carjacking victim to protect two friends who hit and killed a homeless man as they drove her car in Brooklyn, the police said yesterday.
Friday evening, a 1987 BMW owned by the officer, Andrea Westmoreland, 27, hit the man on Nostrand Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant, the police said.
The driver lost control of the car and crashed into a building on Park Avenue, destroying much of the front.
As the victim lay critically injured, a man and woman got out of the car and fled, witnesses told the police.


Elaine Wolfe, Charles O'Regan
Elaine Mary Wolfe, the executive assistant to the head of the Sidwell Friends School in Washington, was married yesterday to Charles Robert O'Regan, the vice president for government affairs at Palumbo &amp; Cerrell Inc., a consulting concern in Washington.
The Rev.
Joseph Nangle performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in Washington at Holy Trinity Church.
Mrs.
O'Regan graduated from Georgetown Visitation College and from George Mason University.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Salerno of Eastchester, N.Y.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Spaniards Grow Disenchanted With a Once-Charismatic Leader
Time and again in recent years, in a ritual now familiar to Spaniards, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez has responded to criticism by threatening to resign, secure in the knowledge that both his Socialist Party and his loyal admirers would rally around him.
Now he would not dare play that card, for after 12 years in office, Mr.
Gonzalez's psychological grip on Spain is fading.
He now heads a minority Government and, with his popularity at an all-time low and his party in disarray, he faces a probable defeat if he seeks a fifth term.


Kerrin Kunkel, Kenneth McPhail
Kerrin Kunkel, a daughter of Marydean C. Carter of Los Angeles and Ronald J. Kunkel of Andover, Mass., was married yesterday to John Kenneth McPhail, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. McPhail of Dallas.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
James's Church in New York.
Mrs.
McPhail, who is studying for a master's degree in teaching from Columbia University, graduated magna cum laude from Boston University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Diamond Crystal, the food-service manufacturer in Wilmington, Mass.


Baby at a Crawl, Bombs Away II And Evil Lurking
Baby's Day Out  Lara Flynn Boyle, Brian Haley, Joe Mantegna Directed by Patrick Read Johnson PG 90 minutes


The Undead Stones Sing Songs of Love
THE ROLLING STONES machine, an efficient harvester of rock fans' cash and attention, heaves into motion again this week with the release of "Voodoo Lounge." With the album comes a world tour that starts on Aug. 1 in Washington, along with the inevitable questions.
After three decades of recording, what's left for the Stones to say or prove?
The bad boys have become millionaires and pillars of the music business; the rogues are now patricians.
Can the Stones, all of them over 50 except for 47-year-old Ron Wood, still rock out?
"Voodoo Lounge" (Virgin 7243 8 39782 2 9; CD, cassette and LP) toys with those questions.
The cover painting of a dancing zombie, and an inside photograph called "Satan's Play Room," with skeletons gambling, suggest that the Stones don't care if they're undead.
And three songs into the album, Mick Jagger vows, "When I finally get myself back to you, baby/ You're going to find out/ Going to scream and shout."


A Renewal Plan in the Bronx Advances
MELROSE COMMONS, the ground-breaking attempt by a South Bronx community to design its own urban renewal plan, has made it through the New York City bureaucracy.
The plan for about 1,500 housing units in a largely desolate 33-square-block area east of Yankee Stadium has in less than a year -- close to record time -- got the go-ahead from Community Boards 1 and 3, the Bronx Borough President's office, the New York City Planning Commission and the various other city agencies whose oversight is required in the city's complex land-use review process.
Last month, it received final approval from the City Council.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Japanese Yen
98.05
98.70
109.94
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5614
1.5975
1.7227
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3894
1.3820
1.2785
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5495
1.5375
1.4805
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$384.25
$386.70
$391.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


The Gleam in Pompidou's Eye
THE MAKING OF BEAUBOURG A Building Biography of the Centre Pompidou, Paris.
By Nathan Silver.
Illustrated. 206 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press. $24.95.


Honoring The Weavers
The New York Civil Liberties Union holds an awards ceremony, June 29.


The World; Arafat Greets His People And Gets an Earful
YASIR ARAFAT may have learned as much about his Palestinian people in the five days he spent here this month as in the last two and a half decades of his exile.
The Palestine Liberation Organization chairman's visit to the land he calls home defied all predictions.
Where excitement was expected there was calm, almost boredom.
Huge crowds were expected to swamp Jericho and Gaza to honor him.
They simply didn't materialize.


Lori Kahn, Mark Malkin
Lori Kahn, the director of family programming at Showtime Networks Inc., a national premium cable television network in New York, is to be married today to Dr.
Mark Malkin, a neuro-oncologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and an assistant professor of neurology at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, both in New York.
Rabbi Jay Brickman is to officiate at Brynwood Country Club in Milwaukee.


All in the Barracuda Family, a New Sitcom
"THE FAMILY OF MANN," Theresa Rebeck's new comedy at the Second Stage Theater, satirizes the morals and manners of the people who manufacture television situation comedies, in this case the producer, director and writers of a new series called "The Family of Mann." From what we see of it, the show looks like a piece of cheese, though we're told that the critics around the country are raving about it as if it were a new "All in the Family." That's one of Ms.
Rebeck's more wicked jokes, but it's subsidiary to the main business at hand: a consideration of the mythomania, greed, self-interest and all-round ruthlessness behind the stuff that most of the time portrays America as some kind of spongy, laugh-filled Planet X.
Ms.
Rebeck is not only alarmed, she also speaks with the authority of the observant outsider who has been on the inside.
Like Belinda, her alter ego in the play, Ms.
Rebeck has a Ph.D. in Victorian literature and has worked as a television writer in Los Angeles.
She's also unusual among today's comedy writers (in the theater as well as television) in that she can come up with very funny lines that erupt naturally from the situations.
Her characters aren't written to be played over the heads of the other actors to the house.
They're blessedly unaware of any audience, being far too obsessed with their own wondrously high-paying jobs and paltry goals.


More Suggestions on Using Berries as the Basis for Desserts
BERRIES are one of the things that set summer apart from other seasons.
Bushes and vines in the countryside are heavy with blueberries, raspberries and blackberries, while in produce markets and supermarkets baskets of berries are banked on display.
The season begins with strawberries, which, by mid-July, have about finished their season in this area.
Decent ones from California may still be available, but with all the other berries on the market, they are not much missed.


Cuomo's Shift On Execution
For nearly his entire political career, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has pointed to his steadfast opposition to the death penalty as clear and convincing evidence that he, unlike other politicians, is willing to sacrifice popularity for moral beliefs.
Twelve times the Legislature sent him a death penalty bill with bipartisan support.
Twelve times he vetoed it, ignoring Republicans who called him soft on crime, Democrats who fretted about his future and even his mother, who told him his stand would cost him support.
And voters didn't seem to care: in 1986 and again in 1990, they re-elected him with huge margins.


'Ambition &amp; Love'
To the Editor:
Deirdre Bair dismisses Ward Just's "Ambition &amp; Love" (June 19) by telling us that Mr.
Just "has been described as an expatriate writer whose work should be shelved 'just below Edith Wharton and Henry James.' " The review pivots on Ms.
Bair's conclusion that Mr.
Just is neither Wharton nor James.


Streetscapes/The Burden Mansion; The Soot's Coming off, but a Blemish Will Remain
WORKMEN are now scrubbing decades of soot off what the Landmarks Preservation Commission calls New York's "finest Beaux-Arts town house," the 1905 Burden mansion at 7 East 91st Street.
Now occupied by a private school, the Convent of the Sacred Heart, the Burden house is half of an unusual pair of buildings built by the families of two sisters.
Although the French-inspired walls are being restored, there is a blemish on the mansion that will be much harder to remove.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
JUDGE ON TRIAL By Ivan Klima.
Translated by A. G. Brain.
Vintage International, $14.
Selected one of the best books of 1993 by the editors of The New York Times Book Review, this novel serves as a monument to postwar Communist society, exploring the universe of a Czechoslovak judge who only belatedly realizes the moral compromises he has made.
Last year our reviewer, Malcolm Bradbury, called it "a serious and wise book, a meditation on the ideals that remain present in European democracy and justice."


For Bosnians, Melting Pot Is a Myth
To most patrons, Steinway Cafe Billiards is a place to shoot some pool and guzzle a few beers afterward.
But for one group of young men and women, it has much greater significance.
The pool hall on Steinway Street has become a gathering place for about 20 young Bosnian refugees who have been relocated in Queens by international agencies.
Here, they speak Serbo-Croatian, which they now call "Bosnian," drink coffee, listen to Bosnian music on tape cassettes, gossip and giggle.
When they have money, they even shoot pool.


BEACHED
And you call yourselves reporters!
You expect someone to hold your hand and show you where to go.
In my generation (World War II), reporters would not let bad weather stop them.
They would have sought a train or bus or hitched a ride in a car.
I thought you yuppie baby boomers had begun to grow up.
I guess not!
CATHLEEN B. BEALS Somerset, N.J.


'It Was All a Kind of Enchantment'
PINK and yellow.
And each of the fullest intensity of their hue.
As I sat on the sofa with Enez Whipple, the bright pink of her sweater was echoed by the pale pink of the tulips on the coffee table before us.
Against the white walls, and the chairs and the sofas that I would remember as white, came yellow pillows and little yellow details.
It was the time of the yellow outside.
Through the large windows of this East Hampton house built around an old water tower, came the vista of yellows of daffodils, daisies, birds singing outside.
On a table in the dining room, a distance away but connected in the wide open space, there were white china fruits, and somehow, in my memory -- although whether or not they were really there, I don't know -- I add white china flowers.
There were none of the paintings of the abstract expressionists on the expansive white walls, nor the photographs of the many trail blazers -- first showings of the photographs, for example, of the interior of the last office of Freud, nor echoes of Hans Namuth or Dorothy Norman or Arnold Genthe, the people whom Enez Whipple had repeatedly granted a safe space to show in their earlier, more volatile days, during her 40-year stint as director of East Hampton's Guild Hall.


July 3-9: Fighting the Mob; The F.B.I. Makes Friends In (Of All Places) Moscow
J.
Edgar Hoover must have rolled in his grave.
Last week, decades after his Federal Bureau of Investigation staunchly defended the American home front against the Kremlin (and dragged its feet about organized crime), his successor signed an agreement that ushers in an era of civility between the F.B.I. and the post-Communist rulers in Moscow.
In the Russian capital, the current F.B.I.
Director, Louis J. Freeh, opened a Bureau office and signed a cooperation pact with Viktor Yerin, the Russian Interior Minister.


Key Zoning Issues
The city rezoned Ninth Avenue to revive its fortunes.
Here are some key zoning and planning proposals under consideration by the city:
*
Opening light manufacturing zones to social-service agencies, thus finding sites for often unpopular programs.
This has been proposed by the Planning Commission chairman, Joseph B. Rose,


[ THE AQUIRING MIND ] ; Africa, At the Source
GROWING UP WITH A DIVORCED MOTHer in 1960's New York had a certain exotic cachet.
Home was a bachelorette duplex off Fifth, in a building of aging sophisticates.
The apartment -- a rental -- had been decorated with professional assistance a couple of years before I was born in an eclectic, haute theatrical Franco-Venetian-Baroque style: damasks and brocades in jazzy patterns and burnished colors, inlaid marble table tops, occasional tables in the form of 18th-century "blackamoors," a baby grand piano and imposing arrangements of dried wheat.
Although my mother's Italianate leanings and incongruent finances set her apart from the core cluster of matrons and official taste-makers in her crowd, there could be little doubt that 18th-century France, together with ur-Impressionism, provided the vision of hothouse femininity to which she and her ilk aspired.


Fighting Terrorism: Airport Progress Report
Airline passengers in the United States may have to wait two to five years for the implementation of proposed new systems for detecting explosives hidden in baggage at the nation's airports, according to a report by the General Accounting Office.
The report also found that while the Federal Aviation Administration has developed promising ideas for making airplanes more likely to survive an explosion, those ideas are still several years from being put into practice.


SUNDAY, July 10, 1994; Look Out Insects, the "Exterminator" Is a Woman
If you're a woman, Orkin wants you!
The large pest control company is attacking the pest-gender barrier in more than one way.
First, a recent newsletter to regular customers announced that in a new television ad campaign now being tested, the "Exterminator" is a woman.
The male version of this character already figures in ads in which a half-human-half-machine pest control person kills bugs -- Robocop meets the Terminator meets Arachnophobia.


Not One Tattoo? This Is Unreal
"Models Inc.," the new Fox television show that stars Linda Gray as the head of a modeling agency, is as authentic as Adidas sneakers bought on Canal Street.
Here are 10 of its departures from reality:
1.
None of the characters carry Prada bags or backpacks. (Where do they keep their cellular phones?)


VERA WANG, FROM AISLE TO RUNWAY
My experience at Vera Wang ("Vera Wang, From Aisle to Runway," by Alex Witchel, June 19): Before I purchased the dress, I was treated royally.
After the money was down, I became just another bride in a fancy Madison Avenue boutique.
And the boutique became another run-of-the-mill shop where gowns are ordered two sizes too large so it can charge for alterations and the staff is surly once your check is in hand.
Unfortunately, to get the personal service Wang describes, you have to be an Elisabeth Shue or a Nancy Kerrigan.
D.
RABINOVICH New York, N.Y.


Yankee Cinema, Please Go Home
SO YOU THOUGHT THE debate about the corrupting effects of the violence on film, video and television was confined to the United States?
Not at all.
It is preoccupying the British as never before, and the result will presumably be the toughening of already toughish laws.
To see why, consider the following cases.
*
In Liverpool, in what is now one of the most notorious murders in British history, 2-year-old Jamie Bulger was abducted from a shopping mall in Liverpool by two 10-year-old boys, led to a railroad line, hammered to death with an iron bar, then cut in half by a train.
There were suggestions that a horror film about a demonic doll, "Child's Play 3," helped inspire the crime..
No evidence was presented that either boy had seen it, but the father of one had rented it shortly before.


S. H. Goldman, Scott Goodman
Suzanne Hilary Goldman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Goldman of New ork, was married last evening to Scott Andrew Goodman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Goodman of Hartsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Deborah A. Hirsch performed the ceremony at the Masterview Studios in New York.
The bride is a principal dancer with the American Repertory Ballet Company in New Brunswick, N.J., and also danced with the American Ballet Theater.
She studied at the School of American Ballet.
Her father is the chairman of Financial Partners Capital Management in New York.
Her mother, Phyllis Goldman, writes about and teaches dance in New York.


North Korea, Its Chief Dead, Leaves World Guessing
The sudden death of Kim Il Sung, North Korea's Communist leader, in the midst of negotiations with the United States has cast a pall of uncertainty over one of the world's least-known and most dangerous countries.
But experts said that initial signs suggest the transition has been orderly so far.
Shortly after noon here Saturday, the official North Korean news media reported that Mr.
Kim, 82, had died at 2 A.M. on Friday after suffering a heart attack.  [ Obituary, page 13. ]


How a Wide Variety of Nails Holds Things Together
SELECTING nails is challenging, even for professionals.
One reason is the wide variety of building materials, as nearly all need nails with specific holding properties.
For an idea of how different nails function, consider their three parts, the point; the shank, or shaft, and the head.
Nails with long sharp points wedge fibers apart and are easier to drive than nails with blunt points, which simply punch through wood.
But sharper nails are more likely to cause splitting.


Shooting the Breeze On Martha's Vineyard
Save the whales! Save the rain forests! Save the general stores!
On July 2, right before dinner time, Eleanor Graves, of Manhattan and Martha's Vineyard, was standing on the porch of Alley's General Store.
She looked as bright as a bouquet in her summer pastels as she walked on the dusty wooden planks of the porch.
"The whole place is just as it was," Mrs.
Graves, a former Life magazine editor and cookbook author, said of the 160-year-old store, which is in the final phase of its renovation and is set to reopen later this month.
"We took out the funky old floor, planked it up, and now we'll have a new old floor."


Body of Homeless Woman Found in Central Park


Ibsen Country


'THE GREAT RUSSIA WILL LIVE AGAIN'
After reading your article, I sat and studied the cover photo of Vladimir Zhirinovsky.
The magazine looked out of place on our breakfast table.
Out of respect for Vladimir's privacy, I placed it in the bathroom.
He's right at home on our hamper.
Not extreme at all!
MARY A. DUFFY Red Bank, N.J.


Alicia Distler, Stephen Alvarado
Alicia Ann Distler, a daughter of Madeleine and Robert Distler of Sudbury, Mass., was married yesterday to Stephen Peter Alvarado, a son of Dr.
Cristobal and Noreen Alvarado of Manhasset Hills, L.I.
The Rev.
James Bertelli officiated at St.
Anselm Roman Catholic Church in Sudbury, Mass.
Mrs.
Alvarado, 25, is an analyst at Standard &amp; Poor's, the financial information service, in New York.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in public policy from Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, was a principal engineer at the Raytheon Company, the engineering and manufacturing concern.


7 NATIONS TO GIVE HIGHEST PRIORITY TO CREATING JOBS
Describing the toll of unemployed in their countries as an "unacceptable waste," leaders of the seven major industrial democracies agreed today to pursue policies to keep a nascent economic recovery on track, encourage growth and create jobs.
Then, joined by President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, they turned to global political problems in a session overshadowed by the death of the President of North Korea, Kim Il Sung, and uncertainty about his country's plans to develop nuclear weapons.


SUNDAY, July 10, 1994; You Be the Jury
Who invented flying toasters?
Berkeley Systems sells a popular bit of software, a computer screen saver featuring winged toasters, above.
But a once-popular rock band, the Jefferson Airplane, used similar objects in 1973 on the album cover of "Thirty Seconds Over Winterland," left.
The band is now suing the software company over use of the image.


Lisann Karmiol, Robert J. Gould
Lisann Marie Karmiol, the daughter of Carmen R. Birkner and Charles Karmiol, both of New York, was married on Monday to Robert Jay Gould, the son of Diana and Chet Gould of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Steven Harris, a Roman Catholic priest, and Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Gould, 25, is the director of development at Mindel-Shaw Productions, a film production company in West Hollywood, Calif.
She and her husband graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a vice president of Bozell Inc., a New York advertising agency.
Her mother coordinates the residency program of the department of anesthesiology at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Edward J. Birkner.


BEACHED
Maureen Dowd, you had me laughing out loud (On Washington: "Beached," June 19).
The thought of the White House press corps and a few big-shot anchorpeople getting lost, stranded, etc. just made my day!


Hackensack Police And Minorities
The article "Police Department Extends Itself to Recruit Minorities" gave the erroneous impression that Hackensack is actively seeking minorities for police and fire positions.
The facts are that in a town that has been in existence for 300 years and is the seat of Bergen County, we have never had role models for black and Latino police officers and firefighters.
In its entire history, there have been only four black police sergeants (presently there are none).


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


River That Yielded Oysters May Harvest Tourism
As a river, the Maurice doesn't look like much at first -- broad and flat, snaking in lazy oxbows through the tidal marshland and sandy uplands of southern New Jersey to the shallow, shimmering Delaware Bay.
Yet the Maurice was a river to reckon with in New Jersey long before words like "suburbs" and "split level" and "turnpike" came to define the state.
It was a highway for cotton for the mills of Millville, for bricks and hay, for sand headed for local glass factories.
Above all it was host to the once-huge fleet of oyster boats, the shallow-draft schooners that raked the river and bay bottom for oysters once so plentiful that the Central New Jersey Railroad built a spur down the river to the packing plants at Bivalve and Shellpile to haul the oysters out to the tables of the world.


Paige Dearing, Jacob M. Sclare
Terrell Paige Dearing, the daughter of Gayle Calabrese of Bogart, Ga., and the late Frederick R. Dearing, was married yesterday to Jacob Max Sclare, the son of Liisa and Donald Sclare of Port Washington, L.I.
The Rev.
David Bernthal performed the ceremony at Trinity Lutheran Church in Athens, Ga.
Mrs.
Sclare, 23, is known as Paige.
She graduated from the University of Tennessee and expects to begin studying for a master's degree in printmaking at Wayne State University in the fall.


Green Havens in London's Heart
WHEN visitors to London tour the City, the traditional square mile that was the ancient center of Britain's capital and is now its bustling financial district, they expect to see its great commercial and financial institutions, like the Bank of England and the Stock Exchange, and to tour St.
Paul's Cathedral, and perhaps the Barbican, home of the Royal Shakespeare Company.
What they usually don't see are gardens.
Hidden among new towering office blocks or preserved in out-of-the-way small parks, these range from tiny pockets of greenery to a luxuriant tropical conservatory.
Last spring my husband, James, and I spent three leisurely half-days exploring gardens in the financial district, plus three just outside the City limits.
Our first stop, just north of the boundary, was Fortune Street Garden, a small, unpretentious green rectangle, with beds of daffodils and a few roses beginning to bud below its brick walls.
It was almost deserted, as was nearby Bunhill Fields, a graveyard with tombs of William Blake, John Bunyan, Daniel Defoe, Isaac Watts, Cromwell's family and others, and also an unexpected oasis with a pleasant expanse of grass edged by flower beds.


A Moderate Democrat From Omaha Caught in the Middle on Health Care
It scarcely had the feel of radical politics: church bells pealed in the distance and a soft breeze fluttered an American flag as some 40 Nebraskans, most of them elderly, sat in lawn chairs on a sultry evening, sipping lemonade and talking with Representative Peter Hoagland about health care.
But on the sidewalk, a grimacing man in a baseball cap and T-shirt paced back and forth with a cardboard sign that declared, "Give me liberty, not socialism!"


Leadership Questions Await N.A.A.C.P.
Millions of dollars in debt, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People begins its 85th annual convention in Chicago on Sunday amid questions about the new directions its leader is choosing for the venerable civil rights organization.
Criticized for his flirtations with the Nation of Islam and for spending that helped produce a deficit of $3 million, the Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis, the N.A.A.C.P.'s executive director, is facing questions about his lobbying efforts on behalf of corporations that are trying to avoid paying for the cleanup of toxic-waste sites.


Nicole L. Priore, Frederick Gutman
Nicole Lynn Priore, the daughter of Lynda and Charles Priore of Coral Springs, Fla., was married last evening to Dr.
Frederick B. Gutman, a son of Carol and Steven Gutman of New York.
Rabbi Milton J. Gross and the Rev.
Lou Battaglia, an Orthodox Catholic priest, co-officiated at the interfaith ceremony at the Colonnade Hotel in Coral Gables.
Mrs.
Gutman, 25, was until recently a child-life specialist at Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami.
She graduated from the University of Miami.
Her parents own the First Financial Fidelity Corporation, a financial consultant in Coral Springs.


The Liberation of 'Pigeon Park'? A Neighborhood Divided
The cobblestone triangle where Fourth and Fifth Avenues merge in Bay Ridge is officially called Fort Hamilton Memorial Park, dedicated to the fallen of the First World War.
But over the years, as elderly people met there during the day and fed the local fowl, a new name came into common use -- Pigeon Park.
In the late 1980's, however, other folks began congregating in Pigeon Park at night.
And many residents were not pleased.


A Call the Dutch Won't Soon Forget
The moment took place in the early stages of a rare World Cup outburst, the shocking five-goal, 30-minute, back-and-forth barrage between Brazil and the Netherlands this afternoon that satisfied the most offensive American appetite for goals.
A possible flaw in a suddenly breathless duel between two of the three highest-ranked teams in the world helped end the Dutch hopes and sent Brazil to a semifinal game for the first time since 1970.
Once more, in a tournament that has already seen several instances of supported criticism of its officiating, a decision helped decide the outcome of a game.
One possible missed offside call against Brazil, just before Bebeto's goal gave his team a 2-0 lead on the way to a 3-2 victory, raised a question after the game.


SURFACING
REFRESHMENT  Lemon Aid: Is plain old lemonade too plain?
Restaurants like Josie's, Road to Mandalay and Brunetta's offer blueberry and raspberry lemonade, and Fairway Market sells strawberry lemonade.


Kimberly A. Beasley, Kurt Butenhoff
Kimberly Anne Beasley, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Beasley of New York, was married yesterday to Kurt Ward Butenhoff, a son of Mrs.
Gunther Butenhoff of San Francisco and the late Mr.
Butenhoff.
The Rev.
Richard Fertig performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas Church in New York.
Mrs.
Butenhoff, 28, graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
She is a project associate at Stadtmauer, Bailkin, Levine &amp; Masyr, a law firm in New York.
Her father is a surgeon and her mother, Betsy Beasley, is an art consultant, both in New York.


The Beach in Sylt
To the Editor: I enjoyed the article about Sylt ("German's Fragile North Sea Playground," June 5) and reading that it caters to a "well-heeled crowd." I always wanted to know more about Sylt, the place my great-aunt and great-uncle were photographed in 1913 while on vacation.
As you can see by the photograph, the beaches in Sylt were always a place to see and be seen, but in those days the dress was far more modest.
GEORGE FOGELSON  Redondo Beach, Calif.


A Congregation's Trial by Fire
When a three-alarm fire swept through the Church of the Heavenly Rest in the early morning hours of Aug. 7 last year, parishioners woke up to find their place of worship badly damaged.
The blaze destroyed half the chancel area and an enormous Austin organ.
Walls were blackened.
The choir pews were wrecked.
Since then, the Upper Fifth Avenue congregation has been on a spiritual journey of a different kind: trying to live with the tragedy and raise $1.4 million to restore the Gothic stone building.


Italy Soars Aboard The Baggio Express
Italy is in the semifinals of the World Cup thanks primarily to its savior, the man with the most exposed ponytail in the world right now, the man many soccer aficionados throughout the world say is the best player around.
Roberto Baggio, who bailed out his country with both goals in the triumph over Nigeria here Tuesday in the second round of the World Cup, did it again here this afternoon, sending Italy to a 2-1 victory over Spain with a goal in the closing moments of this quarterfinal.


Sports of The Times; Italy's Coach Seems Straight From Fellini
IF any team in this World Cup has the right to be an apparition out of Fellini, it is, of course, the team from Il Maestro's homeland.
The Italian team confounds and confuses and frustrates and frightens its own supporters, but in some bizarre, goofy, weird, Fellini-esque way, it keeps winning.
"E La Nave Va." And the ship sails on.
That was one of Fellini's films, a tottering cruise ship loose out on the high seas -- dying elephants, absurb sopranos, pudgy princes, the whole thing -- but somehow, through divine intervention or what, the ship did not sink.
And that's all that matters.


House Panel Is Rebuffed By Prosecutor
Robert B. Fiske Jr., the Whitewater independent prosecutor, has rebuffed a Congressional committee that asked him to testify later this month about his investigation.
In a letter dated July 7, Mr.
Fiske declined an invitation to testify before the House Banking Committee.
The committee's chairman, Henry B. Gonzalez, Democrat of Texas, released his correspondence with the prosecutor on Friday.


Rites of Nature by One of Its Guardians
ALAN GUSSOW has been on the scene for 40 years and for many of them not just as an artist but as a guardian of nature, too.
Since his 1972 book, "A Sense of Place: The Artist and the American Land," Mr.
Gussow has written and lectured extensively on ecological issues as well as participating in projects calculated to focus attention on uncomfortable subjects, for a while.
The one commemorating the 40th anniversary of Hiroshima involved the painting of shadows on sidewalks in cities all over the world.
This was Mr.
Gussow's idea, as was the similar "Mushroom Project" of 1990, in which shadow images of threatened species, from whales to insects, were used to point up the connection between the annihilation at Hiroshima and the day-to-day elimination of species in peacetime.


Don't Use 'Christian' as a Synonym for the Right-Wing Fringe
To the Editor:
I was disappointed to read a headline that began "As Christians Pull the G.O.P. to the Right" (news article, June 27).
Such broadbrush characterizations, applied so uniquely to Christians, support the contention of some on the right that political correctness is a system of dialogue designed to protect the sensibilities of favored groups only.


Behind Heavy Hitters, Offense Is Soaring Up, Up and Away
With all due respect to Ken Griffey Jr., Frank Thomas is the most remarkable player in baseball today.
Thomas, more than Griffey, epitomizes the overall offensive developments that have dominated the first half of the season.
Home runs, both the massive total and the individual feats led by Griffey, have dominated talk in the first half of the season, but the season has featured more than just home runs, and a look at Thomas's production for the Chicago White Sox provides the most comprehensive picture.


Kim Il Sung, Enigmatic 'Great Leader' of North Korea for 5 Decades, Dies at 82
By the time Kim Il Sung died on Friday at the age of 82, there was not one "Great Leader" running North Korea.
There were three.
There was the man seen around the world as a Stalinist maniac, who 44 years ago sent his troops pouring over the 38th parallel to unify the Korean Peninsula on his own terms, and who four decades later burst again onto the front pages as a man in search of a nuclear bomb to save his regime.
This was the Kim who intimidated his neighbors into silence, who used his unpredictability as a weapon.


Choir College May Get New Address
MOVING is nothing new at Westminster Choir College.
Founded in Dayton, Ohio, in 1926, the institution moved to Ithaca, N.Y., in 1929.
Three years later, the students and faculty packed up once again and relocated to Princeton, where the school still stands.
Now, Westminster, a renowned training ground for church musicians and music educators, may face the prospect of a third change of address -- this time to nearby Lawrenceville, home of the school's parent institution, Rider University.


Don't Use 'Christian' as a Synonym for the Right-Wing Fringe; False Choices
To the Editor:
Re "As Christians Pull the G.O.P. to the Right, Its Leaders Argue Over Holding the Center" (news article, June 27): Some Republicans want to fool the American public.
They say the radical right's backing of Senators Paul Coverdell of Georgia in 1992 and Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas in 1993 shows it is not dividing the Republican Party.


Disappearing in the East Village: Sidewalk Peddlers
The sidewalk markets in the East Village range from the jewelry and clothing stands on Broadway to the artsy-book tables along St.
Marks Place to the rumpled old clothes spread on blankets on Second Avenue.
But recently, all over the neighborhood, they have been doing the same thing: disappearing.
Over the last six months, as the Giuliani administration has been gearing up a broad assault on so-called quality-of-life crimes, the police have arrested an average of 40 vendors a month, said Lieut.
Frank McPartland, special operations coordinator for the Ninth Precinct, who called the offensive against unlicensed peddlers "a top priority."


Training Camp A Time To Adjust
The pro basketball and hockey playoffs ended less than a month ago.
Major league baseball reaches the All-Star break today.
World Cup soccer is down to its last six games.
Temperatures in much of the nation have been flirting with 100 degrees.
Obviously, it is time for pro football, or at least pro football training camps.
They start today when the Los Angeles Raiders open for business in Oxnard, Calif.
On Wednesday, four more teams open camp -- the Indianapolis Colts, the San Diego Chargers, the Seattle Seahawks and the Minnesota Vikings.
The Giants start work next Sunday, the Jets the following Saturday.


Miss McCormick, Mr. DiGiovanna
Patricia Ann McCormick, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. McCormick of Osterville, Mass., was married yesterday to Charles DiGiovanna, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles F. DiGiovanna of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
John A. Perry, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Our Lady of Victory Church in Centerville, Mass.
The bride, a graduate of the University of Virginia who received a master's degree in education from Lesley College, teaches the fourth grade in Natick, Mass.
Her father is the president of McCormick Broadcasting, which owns radio stations in Georgia.


More Suggestions on Using Berries as the Basis for Desserts
BERRIES are one of the things that set summer apart from other seasons.
Bushes and vines in the countryside are heavy with blueberries, raspberries and blackberries, while in produce markets and supermarkets baskets of berries are banked on display.
The season begins with strawberries, which, by mid-July, have about finished their season in this area.
Decent ones from California may still be available, but with all the other berries on the market, they are not much missed.


INSIDE
Palestinian Test Case
Palestinian authorities acknowledged that their security forces killed a prisoner, and human rights groups said that the case would be a test of self-rule leadership.
Page 10.
Life in a Deluge
A Georgia town has suddenly become a land of dazed transients, evacuees and perhaps 200 floating coffins because of flooding that has killed 23 people.
Page 14.
Perils of the Dog Days
For pets as for humans, summer in the city can be brutal.
This is the season of high-rise cat plunges and dog-on-dog violence.
Page 21.
Italy and Brazil in Semifinals
The Italians defeated Spain, and the Brazilians beat the Netherlands yesterday to advance in World Cup play.
SportsSunday, section 8.


Miraculous 'Crossing'
To the Editor:
In his review of "The Crossing," by Cormac McCarthy (June 12), Robert Hass suggests that Mr.
McCarthy's novel embodies the qualities of no fewer than 10 major writers.
Mr.
Hass calls the novel "a miracle in prose," and then begins a litany of nearly incomprehensible comparisons, beginning with Faulkner, Twain, Melville and even Shakespeare, then continuing with Hemingway, Flannery O'Connor, Cervantes, Beckett and Joseph Conrad to boot.
The range of these comparisons is remarkable, from 17th-century picaresque to absurdist drama, from the Bard himself to the inner impressions of Conrad.
The references, however, broaden even further to include such film directors as John Ford, Peckinpah and Fellini.
In the end, even Picasso is tapped.


Commercial Property/Suburban Mall Competition; Stamford Town Center Pins Hopes on New Addition
SUBURBAN mall development is reviving in Westchester and Fairfield Counties now that the economy is recovering.
But a question rising above the clang of construction is what affect these developments will have on long-term efforts to expand shopping opportunities in downtown Stamford, Conn.
One new mall in White Plains is already in construction.
Another has been proposed across the street.
In Stamford, financing is being sought for the extension of an existing mall.


Decline of a Housing Jewel
Paint and plaster fall like snowflakes from the ceiling in Richard Giovanoni's one-bedroom apartment.
Inside the tiny bathroom, the wooden doors on the vanity and the iron towel racks are barely hanging on.
The soap dish in the shower fell off a long time ago, he said.
These are a few of the problems at the Allerton Coops (pronounced KEWPS, not COE-ops) -- a landmark 50-building complex of five-story Tudor-style walkups.


Life Before Mickey
WALT IN WONDERLAND The Silent Films of Walt Disney.
By Russell Merritt and J. B. Kaufman.
Illustrated. 164 pp.
Baltimore: Le Giornate del Cinema Muto/ The Johns Hopkins University Press.


Corrupt Co-op Agents
BOARDS of co-ops and condominiums in New York City are coming under pressure to explore ways to gain compensation -- or reimbursement -- for the thousands of extra dollars they may have paid out because of corrupt managing agents.
Pressure is mounting because certain filing deadlines may have to be met.
Further, shareholders are likely to sue board members if prudent and timely action is not taken.


Desire and Therapeutics
To the Editor:
I am grateful to Richard Jenkyns for his thoughtful and generous review of my book "The Therapy of Desire" (June 19).
I wish only to make two small factual points that seem to me to have some importance.


They Wait Loudly for Bridge
Merchants in Bay Ridge are warily waiting for an early present promised by the State Department of Transportation: completion of work on the 86th Street Bridge over the Gowanus Expressway before the start of the holiday season.
"We're virtually at the state's mercy, except for our ability to make noise, and we're getting better and better at that," said John Logue, president of the Voice of Bay Ridge Business, an umbrella group for 1,300 companies whose customers and suppliers rely on the bridge.


Corrections
A listing in the Television guide today misstates the program scheduled for 8 P.M. tomorrow on Channel 13.
It is "Rough Guide," a documentary about film making and sports in Canada, not "On Top of the World."


Palestinians Admit the Death Of an Arab Prisoner in Gaza
The Palestinian authorities have acknowledged that their security forces killed an Arab prisoner, the first known case of a suspect dying in custody since Palestinian rule began two months ago in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
"It's clearly a case of maltreatment and torture, and it is a case that horrified everybody," said Hanan Ashrawi, the former Palestinian spokeswoman, who leads a new group called the Palestinian Independent Commission for Citzens Rights.


Tami L. Kushma, Hugh M. Johnston
Tami Lynne Kushma, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
B.
Michael Kushma of North Caldwell, N.J., is to be married today to Hugh Maclin Johnston, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard F. Johnston of Knoxville, Tenn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Fred Anderson is to officiate at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in Manhattan.
The bride, 28, graduated from Ithaca College.
She is an associate in the client-relations department of Paine Webber in Weehawken, N.J.
Her father is the president of Place Mart Enterprises, his management-consulting concern in North Caldwell.


Flight-Noise Issue Stirs Debate on Parks' Role
AS AERIAL tours of national parks become more and more common, the Clinton Administration is considering controls to cut down on the resulting aircraft noise.
Federal agencies are most worried about the national parks at the Grand Canyon and in Hawaii, but they are also considering a broad plan that might affect sites from Mount Rushmore to the Statue of Liberty.


For Fresh Air Host Family and Youth, a Perfect Match
Keith Oquendo tried to ride a bicycle that was about three sizes too tall, swung from the top of a backyard jungle gym and danced to music blaring on an indoor stereo system -- all within the space of five minutes.
It was the first opportunity since last summer to play in a backyard free of weeds and broken glass.
And Keith did not want to waste any time.


Michelle Miller, Richard Adams
Michelle Beth Miller, the daughter of Rachel Galperin of Encino, Calif., and Cantor Gerald L. Miller, also of Encino, is to be married today to Richard Douglas Adams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Adams of Pensacola, Fla.
The Rev.
Scott Metheney, the Protestant chaplain of Columbia University, is to officiate at the Pratt Mansions in New York.
The bride's father is to take part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Miller, 34, is the vice president for programs at the Twentieth Century Fund, a Manhattan-based public policy research foundation.
She graduated from the University of California at Santa Barbara, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia, where she is a candidate for a Ph.D. in political science.


The World; Blood in Faraway War Seems to Flow Unseen
AMERICANS often learn of distant places like this only when ancient hatreds turn them into caldrons of unbearable suffering.
In a world suddenly shorn of the threat of war on the grandest scale, regional horrors have more than filled the gap.
Perhaps nowhere has the pain of that emerging new world been more obvious than here, in Nagorno-Karabakh.
A beleaguered enclave, populated mostly by Christian Armenians, its territory lies wholly within the former Soviet republic of mostly Muslim Azerbaijan.
But is it really part of Azerbaijan?
The United Nations says it is.
The United States says so, too.
So does Russia.
The Price of Liberation
But they don't consider it part of Azerbaijan here.
They call it liberated Nagorno-Karabakh.
It has taken six years of war, at least 20,000 lives and more than a million refugees to liberate most of the stunning mountains that make up this region about the size of Delaware.


Baby at a Crawl, Bombs Away II And Evil Lurking
Blown Away  Jeff Bridges, Tommy Lee Jones Directed by Stephen Hopkins R 120 minutes


Miss McDonnell, Mr. Suddath
Karen Dorothy McDonnell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas P. McDonnell of Abington, Pa., was married there yesterday to Thomas Howle Suddath Jr., a son of Eileen Suddath of Cohasset, Mass., and the late Captain Suddath, U.S.N.
The Rev.
Thomas Brennan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady Help of Christians Church.


French Connections


How a Wide Variety of Nails Holds Things Together
SELECTING nails is challenging, even for professionals.
One reason is the wide variety of building materials, as nearly all need nails with specific holding properties.
For an idea of how different nails function, consider their three parts, the point; the shank, or shaft, and the head.
Nails with long sharp points wedge fibers apart and are easier to drive than nails with blunt points, which simply punch through wood.
But sharper nails are more likely to cause splitting.


Jodi L. Michaels, David Warshauer
Jodi L. Michaels and David Scott Warshauer, certified public accountants in New York, were married yesterday evening at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Rabbi Paul Kushner officiated.
Mrs.
Warshauer, 26, is a senior associate at Ernst &amp; Young.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Michaels of Bellmore, L.I.


Unpredictable Justice Powell
To the Editor:
Over the past two decades, academic lawyers and legal historians have made a conscious effort to address their scholarship to the educated layman as well as their usual audience of trained lawyers.
With this effort in mind, I feel that it is both necessary and proper to challenge the general thesis of what was otherwise an extremely competent review of John C. Jeffries Jr.'s "Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr." (June 19).


In Norfolk, Visitors Can Be Crew for a Day
Naval fantasies great and small can be indulged in Norfolk, Va., at Nauticus, the National Maritime Center.
Through interactive exhibits, visitors can, for instance, try to land a jet fighter on the deck of an aircraft carrier or pretend they are crew members in the command center of a Navy Aegis destroyer as it comes under attack.
They can also observe the work of a marine biology laboratory, plot ships in the harbor on live radar and learn how weather information is collected and analyzed to produce daily weather forecasts.


The Year in Albany: Results of the 217th Session of the Legislature
In an election year when the governorship and all 211 legislative seats are up for grabs, the New York State Legislature recessed its 217th session last Sunday at 11:20 A.M. with a number of major issues unaddressed.
After failing to pass a budget until 69 days after the start of the fiscal year, the session ended in such disarray that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo immediately asked the Legislature to return later this summer.
Lawmakers were unable to reach agreements on creating a sentence of life without parole for third-time violent felons, on banning assault weapons, on a constitutional amendment to allow casino gambling, on finding ways to store low-level radioactive waste and on repealing the Wicks Law, which inflates government construction costs by requiring four separate subcontracts for each project.


Gail Bernard, Tamas von Staden
Kathryn Gail Bernard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Bernard of Oxford, Md., was married on Thursday to Tamas A. E. von Staden, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Heinrich von Staden of Woodbridge, Conn.
The Rev.
Donald F. Etherton, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Inn at Perry Cabin in St.
Michaels, Md.
Mrs. von Staden, 27, is known as Gail.
She is an architectural intern at ADD Inc.
Architecture Design Development in Cambridge, Mass.
She and her husband graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her father retired as an executive vice president of Prudential Securities in New York.


Vacation Checklist: Socks, Passport, Architecture
MY OLDER BROTHER collected lead soldiers; I collected ocean liner deck plans.
It didn't occur to me that his interest in military miniatures and my fascination with tourist paraphernalia might be linked.
What could war games possibly have in common with the Veranda Grill on the great Queen Mary?
The Queen Mary herself, for one thing: in World War II, the fabled liner carried troops.
I once saw a photograph of the ship painted battleship gray and remember feeling shocked -- as if someone had taken an Art Deco cocktail shaker and turned it into a grenade.
Only later did it dawn on me that when the Queen went gray, she was showing one of her true colors.
Travel is not just a glamorous pastime.
It is also a form of invasion.


Exception To the Rule?
To the Editor:
I've had it on unimpeachable (though secondhand) authority that when the composer Ben Weber met Virgil Thomson, Thomson asked (without really asking), "I hear you are homosexual." Weber agreed that he was.
Thomson: "I hear you're a 12-tone composer." Again, Weber agreed.
"Well," said Thomson, "you can't be both. Now which is it?"


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with a report in the Long Island Journal column about ducks at Massapequa High School misidentified a man herding the flock.
He was Russell Cera, not Steve Giordano.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Waters Are Roiled in the Civil Rights Mainstream
HAKI MADHUBUTI, a middle-aged poet and pan-African nationalist, did something last month that he never thought he would do.
He wrote out a check for $500 and joined the traditionally moderate and thoroughly mainstream National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
He did so because he admires the efforts of the N.A.A.C.P.'s executive director, Benjamin F. Chavis, to reach out further than the organization ever has to the kaleidoscope of black America, from its working- and middle-class backbone to its Hip Hop and discontented young to its nationalist left and right, including Louis Farrakhan, who was invited by Mr.
Chavis to a gathering of civil rights leaders last month in Baltimore, occasioning harsh criticism of the N.A.A.C.P. head.
"Ben Chavis is a breath of fresh air," Mr.
Madhubuti said.
"He's a visionary."


BEST SELLERS: July 10, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
2
2
19
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
3
3
THE CROSSING, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) A young American comes of age traveling with a she-wolf into Mexico's mythic sierra.
4
5
13
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
5
13
2
THE WATERWORKS, by E.L.
Doctorow. (Random House, $23.) Life in the New York City of 1871 as witnessed by a jaded newspaperman.
6
7
100
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
7
4
9
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Peruvian Andes.
8
8
138
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
9
6
11
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
10
16
3
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
11
9
3
Q-SQUARED, by Peter David. (Pocket, $22.) All creation is at stake when an old enemy asks for help from "Star Trek"'s Captain Picard.
12
15
4
MISTRESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $19.95.) A former schoolteacher's efforts to unmask her aunt's blackmailer in London's high society.
13
1
DOWNTOWN, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $24.) A woman learns about life and the ways of men in Atlanta during the 1960's.
14
10
10
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $23.95.) Spies, traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf war.
15
12
7
NIGHT PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $22.95.) Lucas Davenport investigates a case involving a body found in a wildlife preserve.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the White House during the first year of the Clinton Administration.
2
2
61
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
3
29
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
4
5
5
D-DAY, JUNE 6, 1944, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) An account of the Allied invasion of Normandy 50 years ago.
5
4
8
STANDING FIRM, by Dan Quayle. (HarperCollins/Zondervan, $25.) The former Vice President recalls his life, especially during the Bush years.
6
8
18
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
7
6
8
BEYOND PEACE, by Richard Nixon. (Random House, $23.) An agenda of foreign and domestic policies for the United States to pursue in the post-cold war era.
8
12
4
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
9
14
26
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
10*
11
10
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the singer.
11
9
6
THE HALDEMAN DIARIES, by H.R.
Haldeman. (Putnam, $27.50.) Notes made by the man who was Richard Nixon's chief of staff from 1969 to 1973.
12
7
2
DAVE BARRY IS NOT MAKING THIS UP, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $20.) A collection of humor pieces.
13
15
12
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
14
10
3
ALL MY OCTOBERS, by Mickey Mantle with Mickey Herskowitz. (HarperCollins, $23.) Memoir.
15*
13
13
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Essays.
16*
94
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
11
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
59
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
11
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of designs.
4
4
25
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 25, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) CALLED OUT, by A.G.
Mojtabai. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) An abstract, intelligent novel, ostensibly about a jet crash in a small town, that renders the reactions of the witnesses to a random disaster in beautiful, somber prose.
CIGARETTES ARE SUBLIME, by Richard Klein. (Duke University, $21.95.) People smoke them because they are dangerous, and for a lot of other reasons as well, according to this polemical, analytical, lit-critical, theoretical, political ode to deathweed by an up-to-date professor of French.
COLORED PEOPLE: A Memoir, by Henry Louis Gates Jr. (Knopf, $22.) A distinguished American scholar's intricate, captivating account of the rich family and community life of black people in Piedmont, W.Va., on the eve of desegregation.
GAY NEW YORK: Gender, Urban Culture, and the Making of the Gay Male World, 1890-1940, by George Chauncey. (Basic Books, $25.) A historian's enormously informative study of 50 years during which a flourishing gay culture carved out public and private space for itself.
IN TOUCH: The Letters of Paul Bowles, edited by Jeffrey Miller. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $30.) Selections from the "out" box of the enigmatic writer, composer and Tangerine; often forthright and withdrawn at once, some of them contain passages as brilliant as any in his printed work.
A JOURNEY THROUGH ECONOMIC TIME: A Firsthand View, by John Kenneth Galbraith. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Born in 1908, the preternaturally lucid and articulate Mr.
Galbraith has kept his eyes open ever since and seen a great deal he didn't care for.
JUSTICE LEWIS F. POWELL JR., by John C. Jeffries Jr. (Scribners, $30.) An illuminating biography of a pivotal Justice of the Supreme Court whose instinctive conservatism was always tempered by his respect for the rule of law and his willingness to listen hard.
MOSES SUPPOSES, by Ellen Currie. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) A welcome first collection of Ms.
Currie's short stories, new and old; in relationships gone wrong, in everyday objects, she discerns hints of large meanings and glimmers of submerged mysteries.
A NEW WORLD: An Epic of Colonial America From the Founding of Jamestown to the Fall of Quebec, by Arthur Quinn. (Faber &amp; Faber, $35.) A Hobbesian history in which the hopes of utopian colonists are crushed by man and nature.
ROOMMATES: My Grandfather's Story, by Max Apple. (Warner, $19.95.) An enthralling novelistic memoir of the infinitely durable Herman (Rocky) Goodstein, who at 93 accompanied Mr.
Apple to college and proved, in the long run, to be worth all the trouble he caused.
THE WAGES OF GUILT: Memories of War in Germany and Japan, by Ian Buruma. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) An examination, by an impressively informed and empathetic journalist, of the ways in which the cataclysms of our century have shaped national identity.


Kristin E. Moore, Andrew B. Taylor
Kristin Elyse Moore, a daughter of Barbara B. and Robert Moore of Valley Cottage, N.Y., was married yesterday to Andrew Breckinridge Taylor, a son of Anya and Mark Taylor of Nyack, N.Y.
The Rev.
Alan L. Chisholm performed the ceremony at the Grace Episcopal Church in Nyack.
The bride, 27, is the assistant to the director at the Chase Back-Up Child Care Center in Brooklyn.
She is studying for a doctorate in school psychology at Pace University.
She graduated from Marymount University in Arlington, Va., from which she also received a master's degree in elementary school counseling.


Word for Word/The Three Stooges; Thoughts on the Social Significance Of Getting Hit With a Pie. Seriously.
THE Three Stooges never showed much respect for high-falutin' types like college professors.
Funny, then, that the world of academe today is displaying serious deference to them, this trio of manic numbskulls who ran amok before the cameras from the 1930's to the 1960's and frequently made slapstick violence so hilarious it hurt.
Foremost among academic Stooge experts -- admittedly, there are not many -- is one Donald B. Morlan, Ph.D., professor of communications and a comedy film historian at the University of Dayton in Ohio, whose insights on the wider social and political significance of Moe, Larry and Curly (and Shemp, Curly Joe and Joe Besser) are such that he is once again a featured participant at the annual Three Stooges Convention, being held this weekend at the Ramada in Trevose, Pa., outside Philadelphia.


That Other Train to the Plane
For years, residents in Queens have yearned for a way to relieve the crippling traffic tie-ups created by vehicles headed to and from the city's two airports.
Now that a plan is in place, though, local officials are not sure they like it.


London's Sunny Mediterranean Fare
ONCE upon a time Londoners' expectations of fine summer fare did not extend beyond poached salmon, new potatoes and strawberries, but the last half dozen years have added a whole range of Mediterranean-inspired treats and a clutch of restaurants geared to supplying them.
Some of the best of these tables are arrayed in outlying residential neighborhoods.
Visitors seeking sun-drenched cooking and respite from the center city in midsummer can charter taxis or hop on the Underground to follow London's cognoscenti.


Remembering Rich
To the Editor:
In his essay "Why the Jazz Festival Is Taking On a European Face"  [ June 19 ] , Peter Watrous names those among the major jazz musicians who have died since 1984.
But he seems to have forgotten Buddy Rich.
MARSHALL ZUCKER  Wantagh, N. Y.


Container Gardening: A Chance to Experiment
YOU could call it a family tradition.
Each year without fail, our porches, front and back, are lined with clay pots, each cosseting a plant -- a browallia here, a verbena there, a geranium over there.
The mail carrier has come to anticipate the seasonal show and maneuvers past the fuchsia to put bills in the porch postbox.
He's even been known to use the watering can when the pentas is wilted.
Gardens rarely look wonderful for the entire growing season.
They usually enjoy a brief, exquisite surge in early spring and then sputter out and limp along until the first frost.
But with pots and other containers, gardeners can replant when blooms fade.


Green Havens in London's Heart
WHEN visitors to London tour the City, the traditional square mile that was the ancient center of Britain's capital and is now its bustling financial district, they expect to see its great commercial and financial institutions, like the Bank of England and the Stock Exchange, and to tour St.
Paul's Cathedral, and perhaps the Barbican, home of the Royal Shakespeare Company.
What they usually don't see are gardens.
Hidden among new towering office blocks or preserved in out-of-the-way small parks, these range from tiny pockets of greenery to a luxuriant tropical conservatory.
Last spring my husband, James, and I spent three leisurely half-days exploring gardens in the financial district, plus three just outside the City limits.
Our first stop, just north of the boundary, was Fortune Street Garden, a small, unpretentious green rectangle, with beds of daffodils and a few roses beginning to bud below its brick walls.
It was almost deserted, as was nearby Bunhill Fields, a graveyard with tombs of William Blake, John Bunyan, Daniel Defoe, Isaac Watts, Cromwell's family and others, and also an unexpected oasis with a pleasant expanse of grass edged by flower beds.


It's Time to Cut The Secrecy On Muni Trades
CALL it the case of the invisible giant.
There are few markets bigger than the municipal bond market, but getting reliable information about it is extraordinarily difficult.
Even professionals have trouble finding out real prices at which bonds are trading.
And for individuals, the quest can be all but hopeless.


Reappraising Strict Gun-Control Bills
ARMED with two proposals to strengthen existing gun-control laws, county legislators last month held an open meeting to take the public's pulse on the issue.
Few lawmakers were prepared for a turnout of 1,900 citizens at the County Center here, many of whom claimed angrily that the proposed changes would jeopardize residents' constitutional rights.
"Regulate Felons, Not Us," read one of the placards carried to the meeting.
"Parole Control, Not Gun Control," another said.


In America; A Warning Shot
The Mollen Commission report on corruption in the New York City Police Department could have been subtitled "Gangsters in Blue."
We used to think of corrupt cops as rascals and rogues, an unkempt cadre of donut connoisseurs who were paid modest sums to look the other way while bookies and prostitutes did their thing.
We could imagine the officers as family men who used the money to remodel the den or help with the payments to the kids' orthodontist.


A Debate Over Executive Stock Options
To the Editor:
Your analysis of the value of stock options to corporate executives was on target, especially the comparison to the activities of savings and loans and politicians in recent years ("As Accounting Enters Politics, Watch Out," Market Watch, June 12).
Options do have value when granted, no matter when exercised, just as the Financial Accounting Standards Board argues.
An option is a kind of promissory note from the company to the executive, albeit for an ambiguous amount.
I also agree with the idea that option values should vary with the price of the stock.


U.S. Unsure If Kim's Death Will Change Foreign Policy
President Clinton and his aides said today that they had no real way of knowing how the death of Kim Il Sung would affect what remains the Administration's gravest foreign policy problem.
It was evident from their comments that the North Korean leader could not have died at a worse time for an Administration that only recently allowed itself to hope that the aging leader could prove instrumental in reducing tensions on the Korean Peninsula and ending a fierce dispute with the United States over nuclear weapons.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
BIG BANDS RECALLED
If you are "In the Mood" on Saturday, pack a picnic and perhaps a nonalcoholic "Little Brown Jug" and drive over to the John Jay Homestead in Katonah for a 7 P.M. concert of Big Band music from the 1940's.
But leave the "String of Pearls" at home.
This is strictly informal.
Take something to sit on and wear dancing shoes, because a large wooden dance floor will be available for jitterbugs, Lindy hoppers and Lambeth walkers.
A flashlight is also recommended for finding your car at the end of the evening.
For those who don't bring food from home, a concession will sell hot dogs, soda, juice, candy and ice cream.


Sharp Questions for Judge Breyer
Stephen Breyer, President Clinton's second Supreme Court nominee, is up for confirmation this week.
He faces a basically friendly Senate Judiciary Committee, where he was once chief counsel and knows most of the key members.
Indeed, admiring senators of both parties joined in the last days of the Carter Administration to move him quickly to the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Boston, where he is now Chief Judge.
Judge Breyer will be asked the usual rounds of questions designed to explore his judicial philosophy.
He will also face -- if the senators are doing their job -- some heavy questioning about his investments and what they reveal about his character and priorities.
Hearings that seemed simple until recently now require a searching inquiry into the nominee's wealth and philosophy.


Butler Goes Over the Wall
Brett Butler is 37 years old and stands 5 feet 10 inches tall, at least according to kind measurements listed in the Dodgers' media guide.
He felt 10 feet tall -- yet remarkably like a 7-year-old kid -- Friday night at Dodger Stadium.
Todd Hundley felt absolutely deflated.
The score was tied, 2-2, with two outs in the top of the seventh inning when Hundley hit what looked like a three-run homer over the wall in right-center.
But Butler leapt, crawled the wall with his cleats, then reached over and snared the ball.
As he ran back to the Dodgers' dugout with his arms raised, Hundley stood in the base paths in disbelief.


Woman Slain and Two Raped in Central Park
The police yesterday morning discovered a homeless woman stabbed and killed in a pup tent in Central Park, and they are searching for her husband, who lived with her.
Separately, two women were raped in the park in different attacks, the police said.


Homosexuality in a 'New Age' Light
DAVID and Jeffrey, lovers for 12 years, do not just go to the opera and have sex all the time.
"We're 'new age' homosexuals," explaines Jeffrey, for whom sarcasm is a life support.
Turning a Roman holiday into a tireless pilgrimage, David searches for a glimpse of God.
But Jeffrey is along for the risotto -- and a glimpse of the shirtless construction worker from the terrace.


A House This Side of Madness
9 HIGHLAND ROAD By Michael Winerip. 451 pp. New York: Pantheon Books.


POSTINGS: New York Life Renovates; A $4.1-Million Facelift For a 150th Birthday
The 34-story New York Life Insurance Building just north of Madison Square Park is only 66 years old, but next year is the company's 150th anniversary.
With a $4.1 million renovation already under way, the anniversary called for something special.
That something is the retiling and regilding of the building's gold crown.
"The renovation had to be done," said Tom Carney, a New York Life corporate vice president.
"So why not dress the place up for the 150th?"


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League


False Alarm Causes Crash
Three people were injured in Flushing, Queens, yesterday when the car they were traveling in collided with a fire truck that was responding to a false alarm, fire officials said.
A 29-year-old Flushing woman, identified as Kate Davis, was later arrested and charged with two counts of falsely reporting an incident, said Firefighter Cosmos Romeo, a Fire Department spokesman.


Big Competitors Entering Market For Local Calls
FOR years, the most lucrative local telephone market in the nation -- area codes 201, 908 and 609 -- was virtually the sole dominion of one company, New Jersey Bell, recently renamed Bell Atlantic-New Jersey.
That ended this month, when the $700 million market was thrown open to competition.
Under an agreement reached in May among Bell Atlantic, AT&amp;T, MCI, Sprint and the state regulatory authorities, long-distance companies are starting to compete with Bell Atlantic on its home turf.


Germans Didn't Plot to Kill Shanghai Jews
To the Editor:
Your June 29 news article on the commemoration of Shanghai's role as a haven for 20,000 European Jewish refugees during World War II contains several misconceptions about the experience of this remarkable Jewish refugee community.


. . . And on 8th, A Grand Vision
For a dozen years the Broadway theater industry has been hoping to make Eighth Avenue more inviting to theatergoers by upgrading its storefront businesses and developing more apartments overhead.
Planners envisioned the changes as an outgrowth of Times Square's redevelopment.
Instead, the Times Square project stalled and the real estate market collapsed.
The major trend along the strip has been the spread of X-rated businesses -- some pushed out of 42d Street buildings vacated for the Times Square project.


Training Camp A Time To Adjust
The pro basketball and hockey playoffs ended less than a month ago.
Major league baseball reaches the All-Star break today.
World Cup soccer is down to its last six games.
Temperatures in much of the nation have been flirting with 100 degrees.
Obviously, it is time for pro football, or at least pro football training camps.
They start today when the Los Angeles Raiders open for business in Oxnard, Calif.
On Wednesday, four more teams open camp -- the Indianapolis Colts, the San Diego Chargers, the Seattle Seahawks and the Minnesota Vikings.
The Giants start work next Sunday, the Jets the following Saturday.


Ann B. Moran, Charles Hepburn
Ann Biddle Moran, the daughter of Charles M. Biddle 3d of Gwynedd, Pa., and the late Priscilla W. Biddle, was married on Friday to Dr.
Charles McGuffey Hepburn, the son of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Samuel B. Hepburn.
Judge Raymond F. Broderick of the Federal District Court in Philadelphia performed the ceremony in the Independence Garden at the Freedoms Foundation at Valley Forge, Pa. .
Mrs.
Hepburn, who graduated from Brown University, owned Ann B. Moran Associates, a former executive search firm whose headquarters were in Philadelphia.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


In Defense of Tinkering
To the Editor:
The comments by Al Ries in "Marketers, Stop Your Tinkering" (Viewpoints, June 19) on the state of marketing reminded me of Henry Ford's adage, "You can have any color you want, as long as it's black." Mr.
Ford's insistence on the status quo and his resulting failure to respond to marketplace needs almost bankrupted his company.
Mr.
Ries's recommendation for a successful Volkswagen strategy 20 years ago likewise would have been to stay the course.
Forget innovation, forget competition, forget technology changes, ignore changing customer needs.


Brazil Surges in a Frenzied Second Half
For 45 minutes today, the anticipated race-track quarterfinal match between Brazil and the Netherlands was played under a caution flag.
But once the green light winked, one of the most stirring second halves ever produced in the World Cup roared past, with five goals being scored in 30 frenzied minutes as Brazil crossed the finish line out of gas but not out of luck.


If 16 Is Around Corner, Can a Gold Be Far Off?
Kellee Davis will celebrate her 16th birthday later this month.
As she contemplates the road that's taken her from Cambria Heights, Queens, to Parkland, Fla., to the United States Olympic Festival, Davis has to admit that she's taken some long strides in a short period of time.
She began gymnastics in 1988.
In 1993, she made the United States senior national team and this year, ranked fifth nationally, Davis has a good chance to win a medal at the national championships next month in Tennessee.


2 Arrested In Robberies On East Side
Two robbers who stalked victims in plush restaurants and boutiques on the Upper East Side were arrested late Friday after being identified by an acquaintance who knew them from billiard halls, the police said yesterday.
The pair had stolen more than half a million dollars in jewels in eight robberies over the last year.
The most notorious robbery was at the Vera Wang Bridal House on Madison Avenue last March, when, the police said, the two followed a Maryland couple who had come to Manhattan to buy a wedding dress for their daughter.
At the store, one man demanded the wife's ring and, when her husband came to her assistance, shot them both.


Dodge Foundation: Financing Initiatives
AS government and corporate subsidies shrink in recession times, philanthropic organizations like the Geraldine R. Dodge Foundation are sometimes the only hope for those seeking to finance projects.
Created in 1974 with a $60 million bequest from Geraldine Rockefeller Dodge, who died in 1973, the foundation occupies offices here, close to the Madison site of the former Giralda Farms estate of Mrs.
Dodge, a niece of John D. Rockefeller.
Assets have grown to $190 million while grants totaling $103 million have been invested in a wide variety of carefully investigated projects.


Dahlin Is Swedish Player First, Pioneer a Distant Second
This is a story about a successful black athlete, an athlete who was named with Martin Luther King in mind and who, like a number of black athletes before him, was forced to make his way through largely uncharted territory to reach the top of his profession.
Only this story is different.
It is different because Martin Dahlin rarely had to wear his race like a badge of courage.
He is, first and foremost, Swedish.
He speaks with the distinctive Skansk accent of southern Sweden.
Although he knows that he is the first black to make an impact on his national team, it is not an accomplishment that defines him.


QUEENS UPDATE
*
FLUSHING: The Flushing Armory, one of the city's largest homeless shelters for women and a source of community complaints, will remain open for about a month as city officials scramble to place the women.
The Department of Homeless Services said in June that the shelter, at 137-58 Northern Boulevard, would close at the end of the month as part of the effort to move homeless people to smaller residences where they can receive social services.


Cards' Jordan Breaks 4 Ribs
Brian Jordan of the St.
Louis Cardinals broke four ribs in a collision with teammate Todd Zeile in the second inning of tonight's 5-3 loss to the Braves.
Fred McGriff's two-run 439-foot homer made Tom Glavine (10-7) a 10-game winner before the All-Star break for the fourth straight year.


No Spies, Just Book Lovers
A second-story bar in the East Village called KGB, swaddled in red and white hammer-and-sickle flags and paintings of Lenin, is becoming one of New York's most popular literary venues.
Climb the stairs of the turn-of-the-century building at 85 East Fourth Street near Second Avenue and you're likely to find people who are as serious about Kafka as they are about vodka.
Students of creative writing at New York University convene after classes, a number of publishers use the place for book parties and readings, and on one Tuesday a month there is a "stammtisch," or round-table discussion, modeled after a tradition of German students in the 15th century.


Judith P. Clarke, William Nixon
Judith Phyllis Clarke, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Clarke of Laurelton, Queens, is to be married today to William Elliot Nixon, a son of Roberta Nixon of Port Washington, L.I., and the late Waddie Nixon.
The Rev.
Earle Pratt is to officiate at Trinity St.
John Episcopal Church in Hewlett, L.I.


Inn Stays
To the Editor: The discussion of security in "Ins and Outs of Inn Stays" (April 17) reminded me of a trip to Beaufort, S.C., several years ago, where my husband and I stayed at the Rhett House Inn.
Our second-floor room had a four-poster bed, fireplace and private bath; the veranda was only a few steps away.
But we weren't quite sure if we loved the idea of sleeping in a room without a key or a lock.
Not to worry, our hosts assured us, nothing ever happens here.


Ms. Campbell, Mr. Menendez-Aponte
Sandra Topping Campbell, the daughter of Mrs.
Donald W. Campbell of Mendham, N.J., and the late Mr.
Campbell, was married yesterday to Rafael Braulio Menendez-Aponte, a son of Sergio Menendez-Aponte and Raquel Guzman, both of Miami.
The Rev.
John Morrow, an Episcopal priest, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Church of Point O'Woods in Point O'Woods, L.I.
The bride, 29, is a marketing consultant for the Dial Corporation, a consumer-products manufacturer in Phoenix.
She graduated from Denison University and received a master's degree in international management from the American Graduate School of International Management.


Desert Souvenirs
To the Editor: Suzanne Carmichael's article, "Oregon's High Desert" (June 12), was interesting, but I was saddened to read her comments about "filling her pockets" with obsidian and and collecting thundereggs.


Under Wraps
Salmani!
Salmani!
You'd better get up if you want to go to the salmani." It is 9:30, my first morning in Iran, and my uncle is yelling from the doorway. My body aches as I try to pull a definition from my rusty childhood Farsi. "Don't you want to get your hair done?" he bellows.
Ah, salmani is hairdresser.
Today is my cousin's wedding, and my aunt has made appointments for us.
After three flights and as many hours of sleep, I couldn't care less about my hair.
But I have returned from America for the first time in 15 years -- despite safety concerns -- to see the country where I lived as a child and where half my heritage lies.
I am determined not to miss a thing.


Playing Poker: Clinton Says Economy Is All Aces
President Clinton has often been accused of timidity in foreign policy, but the policy on the dollar that he articulated here at this year's economic summit meeting is about as gutsy as anything he could do these days short of invading Haiti.
When all the oratory is stripped away, the President has essentially looked the world's currency traders in the eye and said to them, "I dare you."


Leslie Rugaber, Gary Oliveira
Leslie Ann Rugaber, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Rugaber of Roanoke, Va., was married yesterday to Gary William Oliveira, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Oliveira of Wareham, Mass.
The Rev.
Jan F. Carruthers, the chaplain of Hollins College, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the home of the bride's parents in Meadows of Dan, Va.
Ms.
Rugaber, 27, is keeping her name.
She is an associate producer at KCTS, the public television station in Seattle.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
Her father is the president and publisher of The Roanoke Times &amp; World-News.


SUNDAY, July 10, 1994; Tracking the Telephone
In the highest realms of high technology, the hippest people use "tetherless" to describe cellular phones and other such devices.
But anyone who followed the police pursuit of O. J. Simpson knows there is still a cord that connects these gadgets to the rest of the world.
And that cord is getting tighter.
Cellular phones broadcast their location periodically so the cellular phone system can route the calls.
All the system can tell, however, is which antenna the phone is closest to, and even in dense urban areas the antennas are about two miles apart.


BEACHED
I admit that Maureen Dowd's columns are amusing.
But must she always pick on the Clintons and the White House staff?
Aren't the Republicans part of the Washington scene?
Don't Robert Dole and his flunkies have shortcomings also?
MAX E. LEWIS Great Neck, L.I.


Alison M. Kates, Alex M. Namzoff
Alison Mary Kates, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George Kates of Newport, R.I., was married there yesterday to Alex Mark Namzoff, a son of Fran Namzoff and Dennis Namzoff, both of the Bronx.
The Rev.
Frank Carpenter performed the Unitarian ceremony at the Channing Memorial Church.


July 3-9: 2 Banks Merge; A Well-Connected Banker Climbs a New Career Rung
Richard D. Parsons doesn't think of himself as a banker, and his friends say that isn't the way he is likely to be remembered.
Still, in the merger of the Dime and Anchor savings banks, he will become chief executive of what will be the fourth largest thrift institution in the country.
The deal, announced last week, combines two of the New York area's most venerable but troubled savings institutions into a much stronger entity, to be called Dime Bancorp.
It also makes Mr.
Parsons one of the country's most visible African-American business executives.


Hidden New York: Where Are These Secret Gardens?


Reduction in Workers Serving Welfare Recipients Is Postponed
New York City has postponed deep reductions in the number of workers serving welfare recipients until July 26.
The city agreed to the delay after advocates for the poor sued the city, claiming that the staffing cuts would deny thousands of people their benefits.
Court hearings on the three lawsuits, filed in mid-June by the Legal Aid Society and Legal Services for New York, are scheduled for July 21 and July 26.
The city had planned to eliminate about 900 supervisory and clerical jobs in the Human Resources Administration at the start of the fiscal year on July 1.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Bugs Bunny and Friends Arrive at Queens Mall. . .
The Warner Brothers Studio Store, which created a stir when it arrived in the high-style neighborhood of 57th Street near Fifth Avenue, has opened another store in a very different setting: the Queens Center mall in Elmhurst.


Goldman Family Reach Accord Over Properties of an Estate
After years of bitter internecine battling, the widow and children of the late Sol Goldman have reached an accord over how to divide the vast New York City real-estate empire that he assembled, according to lawyers for both sides.
At his death in 1987, Mr.
Goldman left an estate of some 600 properties, whose total value was once put at $1 billion.
His widow, Lillian Goldman, said she was entitled to one-third of the estate.
But her claim was challenged by their son, Allan, and daughter, Jane, executors of the estate.


Eastern Art Through Western Eyes
WHEN MARK TWAIN VISITED INDIA AT the end of the 19th century, he was appalled by much that he saw.
The holy city of Benares, he noted, was filled with multiarmed Hindu "idols." "Crude, misshapen and ugly," he wrote, they "flocked through one's dreams at night, a wild mob of nightmares."
His sentiments have been echoed many times, and the passage of much Indian art to the West has been a bumpy one.
This wasn't true for all Asian art or even all Indian art.
Japanese screens and Chinese export wares were ubiquitous in 19th-century America, and certain Indian images had an easier time than others.
The sweet, asexual Buddhas of the fifth-century Gupta dynasty were popular favorites, and are still seen in the West as representing a golden age of Indian art.
But rarely to be found were earlier Buddhist sculptures like the sensuous female nature deity, or yakshi, or Hindu images like the tiny 16-armed goddess Durga, both of which can be seen in the new Irving Galleries for the Arts of South and Southeast Asia at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Melissa B. Duryea And Craig J. Lewis
Melissa Billings Duryea, the daughter of Gretchen M. Elkus and stepdaughter of Christopher J. Elkus of New York, was married yesterday to Craig Johnson Lewis, a son of Lieut.
Col. and Mrs.
Joseph West Lewis of Londonderry, N.H.
The Rev.
Richard Fowler, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Beaulieu Gardens in Rutherford, Calif.
The bride, 28, is keeping her name.
She is also the daughter of William Mairs Duryea Jr. of New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a master's degree in urban planning from San Jose State University.
The bride's father is the director of Dorset Design Inc., a corporate and interior design firm in New York.
Her mother is the director of Experience Unlimited Inc., an advisory service for experiential learning.


'THE GREAT RUSSIA WILL LIVE AGAIN'
Michael Specter's article " 'The Great Russia Will Live Again' " (June 19) is vivid, imaginative and scary.
So scary, in fact, that if a Nazi-like bunch of Russian extremists is indeed just a few steps from taking over a nuclear superpower, one wonders why we, the public, aren't even discussing the threat to our very existence.


On the Stump, Not Much Talk Of Health Care
Health care may be at the top of President Clinton's agenda, but at least for now it has sunk near the bottom as an issue on the campaign trail.
With voters saying they consider crime and the economy more pressing, and with Congressional debate mired in complicated and contradictory health insurance bills, most incumbents surveyed around the country barely gave health care a nod as they campaigned back home this week during the Fourth of July recess.
Virtually no Democrats made a point of publicly embracing Mr.
Clinton's embattled proposal.
And even some of the physicians running for office have abandoned health care as their driving issue.


Wicked Fashion Sitcom? Delicious! Pity It's Fiction.
HOW's this for a plot line: Clotheshorsy British editor is lured from London to New York to work for an American magazine.
The magazine's owner is an elderly man of unfathomable wealth who heads a vast empire, and the editor immediately schemes to advance her career by cozying up to him.
Any resemblance between the editor and the likes of Anna Wintour or Tina Brown, or between the magazine owner and S. I. Newhouse, are purely coincidental, say the creators of "Absolutely Fabulous," no doubt on the advice of counsel.
And yet, much of the appeal of the show, a hit British sitcom that is coming to American television later this month, is based on its deadeye sendup of the fashion and magazine worlds, with characters who seem ripped from real life.
Since it made its debut on the BBC in 1992, no one has followed it more avidly than the targets of its wicked satire, who have tried to read the series as a roman a clef about their strange hothouse milieu.


Kim Philby and the Age of Paranoia
THE HEART OF THE MATTER
The presence of the Philby papers in London was still a closely guarded secret when I stumbled on them through an inadvertent slip by Graham Greene's nephew.
I'd found him, the nephew, in the cluttered basement of his Gloucester Road Bookshop, where he'd been preparing for the imminent sale of the late novelist's personal library.
I'd come to see him about one volume from that library in particular, Greene's copy of "My Silent War," the memoirs of Kim Philby, the spy of the century.
It had been reported that Greene had made some cryptic annotations in the margins of the Philby book, and I hoped they might provide a clue to the strange story I was pursuing.
A story about a possible deathbed revelation Graham Greene had had about Philby.
A story that epitomized the maddening, elusiveness of the man: the way those who felt they knew Philby, who thought they'd finally penetrated to the truth beneath the masks, may never really have known him at all.
Greene had first come to know Philby when the two were working for the British Secret Intelligence Service during World War II and Philby was the brilliant, charming counterintelligence specialist who disguised his intellectual arrogance with a disarming stammer.
Later, Greene would learn that Philby was disguising a lot more than that: that he'd been Stalin's secret agent, burrowing his way into the upper reaches of the British establishment since the 1930's.
And still later -- after Philby had been exposed as a long-term Soviet mole, indeed the ur-mole, the legendary Third Man, the most devastatingly effective known double agent in history, after Philby had surfaced in Moscow in 1963, a hero of the K.G.B. -- Greene and Philby had struck up a peculiar and controversial friendship.
They'd become correspondents, confidants and -- after perestroika had permitted them face-to-face reunions in Russia -- something like soul mates.
Greene seemed to pride himself on being the one Westerner who truly understood the endlessly enigmatic Philby; knew him with all the masks off.
But then, in 1991, as Greene lay dying of a blood disease in a Swiss hospital, a letter reached him throwing all that into question.
It suggested Philby had a wild card up his sleeve he'd never disclosed.
The provocative new take on the ambiguity-riddled Philby question came in the form of a letter from Greene's biographer Norman Sherry, who'd been researching Greene's Secret Service connections.
Pursuant to that, Sherry had been conferring in Washington with Anthony Cave Brown, the espionage historian then researching a forthcoming Kim Philby biography.
Cave Brown was the intrepid spy sleuth who'd first revealed (in "Bodyguard of Lies") the details of the elaborate D-Day deception strategy -- the way the Allies used the "double cross system" to blind Hitler to the truth about the Normandy landing.
Cave Brown had put forth a startling proposition to Greene's biographer: that Kim Philby might have been part of an even more complex deception operation than anyone had imagined -- a double double-cross.
It had been whispered about before in the West; it had been debated (we now know) in the inner sanctums of the K.G.B. itself.
But the theory the two biographers were weighing was deeply shocking: Kim Philby, famous for deceiving the British by posing as a loyal agent of the Crown while really working for the K.G.B., might actually have been deceiving the Soviets by posing as their agent on behalf of the Brits.
Could it be, Sherry wrote Greene, that Philby, regarded as the most destructive and demoralizing Soviet penetration of the West, was actually a Western agent penetrating the K.G.B.'s Moscow Center?
It's a notion that I suspect might have been extremely galling to Greene.
After all, he had risked his reputation as a judge of human character (a matter of pride to most novelists), as a man able to see into "the heart of the matter," by writing an extraordinarily sympathetic introduction to Philby's 1968 K.G.B.-blessed memoir, "My Silent War," an introduction that touched off a bitter row in Britain about the meaning of loyalty and treason.
Greene's introduction portrayed Philby not as a cold and ruthless traitor with the blood of betrayed colleagues on his hands (as most in Britain saw him) but as an idealist who sacrificed his friendships to a higher loyalty.
A man whose belief in Communism Greene memorably -- and maddeningly to many -- compared to the faith of persecuted Catholics in Elizabethan England, who clandestinely worked for the victory of Catholic Spain.
Greene portrayed Philby as someone who served the Stalin regime the way "many a kindly Catholic must have endured the long bad days of the Inquisition with this hope . . . that one day there would be a John XXIII."
Many in Britain have never forgiven Greene his defense of Philby, still an unhealed wound in England.
Some speculate his pro-Philby stand cost Greene a knighthood, and a Nobel Prize.
Imagine Greene's distress, then, at the possibility that Philby had been not a Soviet double agent but a British triple agent.
Greene had gone out on a limb to portray Philby as a passionate pilgrim, a sincere devotee of the Marxist faith -- radically innocent rather than radically evil.
But if, in fact, his friend had all along been an agent of the Empire, a hireling of Colonel Blimp, it would mean that Philby had been laughing at Greene.
Not merely laughing at him, but using him, using him as cover.
Graham Greene would turn out to be Kim Philby's final fool.
"As a matter of urgency," Cave Brown told me, "Greene summoned up enough energy to send for his papers, for all his literature relating to Kim and certain letters from him."
Cave Brown believes that Greene spent those last hours playing detective, sifting the literature and his memories of Philby for clues to the hidden truth about the role the ultimate secret agent played in the secret history of our century.
And that Greene was preparing to respond to Sherry's query with his last word on the Philby case.
It would have been Greene's summa, his ultimate espionage thriller.
With little time left to live, Graham Greene was in a race against the clock.
THE ORIGINAL DISINFORMATION VIRUS
Why does Kim Philby continue to cast such a dark spell over the imagination?
Why is Philby such a magnetic specter to novelists like Greene and John le Carre (whose "Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy" enshrined the Philbian mole Bill Haydon at the dark heart of cold war literature), to playwrights like Alan Bennett and poets like Joseph Brodsky (the Russian exile laureate, whose rage at the sight of Philby's face on a Soviet postage stamp inspired a magnificently vicious 10,000-word tirade in The New Republic)?
In part, it's the same sort of horrified fascination that fueled the sensation over Philby's mercenary successor mole, Aldrich Ames of the C.I.A.: a fascination with the primal act of betrayal itself.
Dante reserved the Ninth Circle of Hell for the Betrayer.
Even in an age jaded by serial killers, the crime of treason still has a primitive power to shock, treachery a still-compelling ability to mesmerize.
The mole, the penetration agent in particular, does not merely betray; he stays.
He doesn't just commit a single treacherous act and run; his entire being, every smile, every word he exchanges, is an intimate violation (an almost sexual penetration) of all those around him.
All his friendships, his relationships, his marriages become elaborate lies requiring unceasing vigilance to maintain, lies in a play-within-a-play only he can follow.
He is not merely the supreme spy; he is above all the supreme actor.
If, as le Carre once wrote, "Espionage is the secret theater of our society," Kim Philby is its Olivier.
And, like only the very best actors, Philby didn't merely hold up a mirror to human nature.
He revealed dark shapes beneath the surface only dimly glimpsed before, if at all -- depths of duplicity, subzero degrees of cold-bloodedness that may not even have been there until Philby plumbed them.
Once in an interview on another subject, the essayist George Steiner made the provocative suggestion to me that the nightmare world of the death camps might not have been realizable had not Kafka's imagination first embodied their possibility in his fiction.
I have a similar feeling that the Age of Paranoia we've lived in for the last half century -- the plague of suspicion, distrust, disinformation, conspiracy consciousness that has emanated like gamma radiation from intelligence agencies East and West, the pervasive feeling of unfathomable deceit that has destabilized our confidence in the knowability of history -- is the true legacy of Kim Philby.
Philby pushed the permutations of doubleness -- double identities, double meanings and double crosses -- into triply complex territory, into the bewilderment of mirrors we're still lost within.
He's the high priest of the Age of Paranoia, the original disinformation virus, and we're still only beginning to learn how much of the secret history of the century bears Philbian fingerprints.
Unlike the spy scandals of the 40's and 50's, the Philby case has been a slow-motion series of revelatory detonations stretched out over decades.
One reason the truth has been so slow in emerging is that it's just so embarrassing.
Even before James Bond, the spymasters of the British Secret Service enjoyed a worldwide reputation for infinite subtlety, invincibility and aristocratic elan.
Philby made them seem like bumbling fools who were so blinded by class prejudice they couldn't imagine that a man from all the right schools and all the right clubs could betray his blue-blood legacy.
Philby was no less a nemesis of the American spy establishment.
In the final act of his active duty career in the West, before the spotlight of suspicion fell on him in 1951, Philby was stationed in Washington, where, as chief British liaison with American intelligence agencies, he charmed the C.I.A.'s deepest secrets out of his principal contact, James Jesus Angleton, the man who would go on to become legendary as the C.I.A.'s chief mole hunter.
This shattering betrayal left behind a destructive legacy of distrust and paranoia in Washington -- principally in Angleton's mind -- reverberations of which would come to plunge the C.I.A. into civil war for decades afterward.
And in an incredible final act that closed the circle of deceit, in what may have been his last operational mission, Philby indirectly collaborated with Aldrich Ames in solving a high-level mole case for the K.G.B.
But these spy dramas only begin to capture the extent of Philby's role in the secret history of our century, the extent to which he was far more than a cold war spy -- he was a secret shaper of the very landscape of the cold war.
We know, for instance, that Philby was, in effect, talking to Stalin throughout World War II.
Stalin considered reports from Philby "particularly reliable," writes the intelligence historian John Costello, the first Westerner to get access to Philby's operational files.
What is less well known is that Philby was, in effect, talking to Hitler, too.
Cave Brown recalls a memorable conversation he had with Sir Ronald Wingate, a key member of the secret Churchill Cabinet department that formulated elaborate strategic deceptions like the one that kept Hitler guessing wrong about the D-Day landing.
"You were talking directly to the Devil himself weren't you?" Cave Brown asked Sir Ronald while they were out on a pheasant shoot.
"We could have a message on Hitler's desk within a half hour," Wingate replied.
"Sometimes 15 minutes at the right time of day."
Then Cave Brown learned the name of the man who was one of the chief conduits in these conversations with the Devil: Kim Philby.
As head of the Iberian section of M.I.6 counterintelligence, Philby was running agents in Madrid and Lisbon who were so highly trusted by the Nazis that the words he fed to them for transmission to the Abwehr would be whispered to Hitler almost at once.
In "Catch-22," Joseph Heller memorably envisioned all the mighty forces of World War II, Allied and Axis, manipulated by a single low-level communications specialist, ex-Pfc.
Wintergreen, an all-knowing, wise-guy proto-hacker of the war's information flow.
In fact, Kim Philby was the real ex-Pfc.
Wintergreen -- talking to Stalin, talking to Hitler, listening to Hitler through his command of the Ultra Secret, the code-breaking material produced by the famous "enigma machine" that read the ciphers of German military intelligence.
And just to complete the circle, Philby was also influencing Churchill.
Every day the Prime Minister would eagerly await his briefings by Philby's M.I.6 boss, Stewart Menzies, who would bring Churchill a digest of Hitler's secrets, some of the choicest bits prepared by Kim Philby.
Similarly, Philby could manipulate F.D.R., as well, through whatever he chose to pass on to his junior partners in United States intelligence.
Without a doubt, the mind of Philby was a key junction box, a node, a filter through which some of the most secret messages of the war were routed.
But the question remains: Was Philby merely a courier or was he a creator?
That question, I believe, is at the heart of the continuing fascination with Philby: we're still not sure whose game he was playing, or what his own game really was.
He remains a one-man enigma machine whose true aims and motivations have yet to be fully decrypted.
THE NOTIONAL PHILBY
I'd first written about Philby some 10 years ago in the context of his complex duel with C.I.A. mole-hunter Angleton and the espionage equivalent of three-dimensional chess that the two men seemed to be playing with phantom moles, false defectors and putative penetrations.
I'd advanced a kind of Philbian solution to the still-unresolved mole hunt controversy -- the "notional mole" gambit.
Angleton had turned the C.I.A. inside out looking for the American Philby.
I suggested the possibility that there never was a real mole, not of the stature of Philby, not while Angleton was there anyway.
But that Philby had deliberately planted the false suspicion in Angleton's mind that the K.G.B. had a mole within the C.I.A. (thus the phrase "notional mole" coined by Philby's Double Cross colleagues of World War II) in order to provoke the disruptive and destructive mole hunt that followed -- one that paralyzed the agency with paranoia and ultimately claimed Angleton himself as a suspect and victim.
What struck me in looking back on it, in reviewing the vast Philbian literature and mole war chronicles, was that, like many writers on the subject, like James Angleton himself, I had been seduced on the basis of fragmentary evidence by the image of a Notional Philby: an image of Philby in his post-1963 Moscow period that Philby himself had assiduously cultivated in his memoirs and correspondence with Westerners.
An image of Philby as the peerless mastermind, the Ultimate Player in the East-West intelligence game, always operating one level deeper than anyone else.
It was a romanticized, almost cinematic image: Philby still the unflappable Brit aristo waiting for the cricket scores to arrive at the Moscow post office, then returning to the K.G.B.'s Moscow Center to run a few more rings around the best intelligence minds of the West.
How much truth was there in it?
In the aftermath of the collapse of the system he sold his soul for, with the opening of the K.G.B. archives and the loosening of the tongues of the former K.G.B. men who were his colleagues, we suddenly have a wealth of new information about Philby's career since 1963, when he first reached Moscow.
We have more information, but do we have more answers?
In the hopes of sorting out the new clues to the mind of Kim Philby, I undertook an odyssey into the infamous "wilderness of mirrors" he'd bequeathed us, talking with spooks and spymasters in Washington, London and Moscow, with some of Philby's victims and bewildered successors; trading theories with mole war chroniclers like Cave Brown, Nigel West of Britain and Cleveland Cram of the C.I.A.
It was an odyssey that led me eventually to the bookshop basement in South Kensington and the tip-off about the hush-hush cache of Philby papers in London.
I'd asked Greene's nephew about the cryptic marginal annotations in Greene's copy of Philby's memoirs, thinking they might contain a clue to Greene's deathbed detective work.
The nephew, a friendly, intelligent fellow named Nicholas Dennys, confirmed that the annotations consisted of passages that had been suppressed in the British edition of the book by the British Official Secrets bureaucracy but had survived in the American edition.
And that they'd most likely been made long before Greene's final days.
A false trail perhaps, but then Dennys let slip a clue to a real one.
Why, he asked, had I chosen this time to come to London to pursue a Philby story.
Was it because of the papers?
What papers? I'd asked him.
The Sotheby's consignment, he replied offhandedly.
It seemed that Philby's Russian widow, Rufina (his fourth wife), had gathered up all the manuscripts, books and memorabilia he had left behind in his Moscow apartment after his death and had engaged Sotheby's to put them all on the block.
But when I called Sotheby's to inquire about the Philby papers, there was nothing offhanded about their reaction.
How did I find out?
Who had I talked to?
It seems that they'd promised a world exclusive to a British journalist whose wrath they feared.
What I found, when I got to see the consignment from Moscow, was a strange mixture.
There were letters, diaries, memoranda, a secret speech to K.G.B. spy luminaries.
There were tributes and tacky trophies from K.G.B. and Eastern European spy fraternities; posthumous tributes to Philby's father, the famed Arabian explorer St.
John Philby.
There were photographs of Philby on safaris to Siberia and Cuba; Philby with the East German spymaster Markus Wolf, the crafty intriguer often identified as the model for George Smiley's arch-nemisis Karla in the le Carre novels.
There was correspondence between Philby and Graham Greene, filled with catty comments about Brit Lit contemporaries like Malcolm Muggeridge and grandiose geopolitical pipe dreams the two old spies cooked up, most notably a Greene scheme for a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. commando raid to free the Ayatollah's hostages in Iran.
And a detailed request to a K.G.B. protege in London for special English brands of coarse-cut orange marmalade and lime pickle.
And then there was the unfinished autobiography.
Five chapters in manuscript pages whose publication the K.G.B. had apparently prohibited.
A fairly safe general rule when reading Philby's prose is to assume he's lying or distorting -- and then try to divine the truth the lies are attempting to conceal.
It's a tricky game, but there were some moments, particularly in the childhood memories he recounted in this autobiographical fragment, when I felt the real Philby, or perhaps more accurately, the original Philby, seemed closer to the surface.
One moment, one childhood memory in particular, stood out from the rest.
A moment I came to think of as a kind of metaphysical Rosebud of the Philby psyche.
A moment of communion between Philby and his colorful, eccentric explorer father.
One that probably leapt out at me because fresh in my mind was a remarkable vision of Philby and his father in the flesh that had been vouchsafed me shortly before I left for London.
THE TWO PHILBYS
Beirut, 1959.
Dawn outside the Kit-Kat Klub.
Anthony Cave Brown, then a correspondent for The Daily Mail, is gazing out from his hotel balcony.
"I'll never forget that morning," Cave Brown told me, "because at that hour of dawn the entire sky was suffused with a dramatic ocher color --threatening, ominous, mystical. It was the shamal, the wind from the Arabian desert."
Then he heard voices filtering up from the Avenue des Francais, home of the Kit-Kat Klub and other seedy belly-dance lairs.
And out of the ocher mists of dawn, staggering up the street came the two Philbys, arm in arm, singing an obscene song.
There was Philby the Elder, Harry St.
John Bridger Philby, then near 70, "potbellied and satanic looking," Cave Brown recalls.
Soon to die but still a living legend, St.
John was one of the great Arabian explorers and intriguers, a rival to Lawrence of Arabia and the first Westerner to have traversed and mapped the vast, forbidding and forbidden Empty Quarter of the Saudi interior.
Adventurer, scoundrel, convert to Islam, St.
John (pronounced sin-jin) had turned against the Empire during World War I, when the Brits backed the puppets of his rival Lawrence against Philby's patron Ibn Saud; bitter over this loss, he'd then avenged himself on the Crown by helping to spirit the Saudi oil concession out of its clutches and into the hands of American oil companies.
At the time of the Kit-Kat Klub sighting, St.
John, known then as Hajj Abdullah, was living in a villa in a mountain village with his Saudi harem-girl, still up to his neck in Mideast intrigue.
As was his son.
Nicknamed Kim by his father (after Kipling's boy-spy who played a part in the Great Game of intrigues between the Brits and Russians in 19th-century Central Asia), Harold Adrian Russell Philby had gone on to play an even greater game of his own.
He'd followed in his father's footsteps onto the imperial playing fields of Westminster public school and Trinity College, Cambridge, and then into the Imperial Secret Service, which he would, like his father, betray.
Forced to resign in 1951, he'd been subjected to repeated interrogations without cracking.
Publicly cleared in 1955 but still suspected privately by Western security services, Philby had been sent to Beirut by the Brits in 1956 to pose as a journalist -- in part to spy for them, in part to see if he'd continue to spy for the Russians.
Of course, he did both, playing and being played in a doubly complicated game in which he served as a two-way conduit for disinformation.
It's hard to imagine a father-son team causing the Crown more trouble.
That eerie ocher dawn in Beirut, the two Philbys were walking, staggering arm in arm, but were they working hand in glove?
They were, in any case, harmonizing together that morning on an old R.A.F. dirty ditty, one that lamented the passing of a lady of the night named Lulu.
"What shall we do," the song asks, for -- well -- carnal delight, "when Lulu's dead and gone?"
I suspect it was an emblematic moment for Cave Brown, this vision of the two Philbys.
He calls his forthcoming Philby biography "Treason in the Blood," and what distinguishes it from previous works on Kim Philby is the extent to which it's a father-son story.
Cave Brown sees a factual, even genetic link in their taste for treachery.
Reading Cave Brown's manuscript, one comes away with an impression of the two of them as a kind of family firm of global troublemakers whose self-aggrandizing game playing transcends any loyalties they might have had to lesser entities East or West.
But there's something primal, indelible about that image of father and son in the Levantine dawn.
The empire, like Lulu, might be dead and gone, but the two Philbys survive, two successful predators sending out an obscene howl of triumph and defiance before setting off in search of fresh treacherous pleasures.
SPY GLASS HILL
Where does the Philby story really begin?
Previous Philby literature has focused almost microscopically on the cloistered quadrangles of Cambridge in the 1930's, on the hothouse Marxist cells that flourished amidst the sherry parties and secret societies, on the overlapping erotic and political relationships amongst the privileged upper-class youth who were seduced by each other and by canny Russian case officers into what became known as "The Ring of Five," the single most deadly spy ring in history.
Cave Brown's biography differs from Cambridge-centered Philby studies in that he finds the true locus of origin of the Philby mystery in the Middle East, in the father's formative ventures into espionage, which, he says, set the pattern for the son.
Indeed, he goes further, asserting in his book (due out from Houghton Mifflin this fall) that Philby the Elder, regarded by most until now as far right politically, may have been recruited by Soviet intelligence in the Red Sea port of Jidda shortly before his son was approached in England.
Cave Brown says he was told by a former K.G.B. official, Oleg Tsarev, that St.
John Philby was a "Soviet asset." Cave Brown also raised the possibility with me that the father's contacts with the K.G.B. in the Mideast may have led to the son's being targeted for recruitment.
He almost goes so far as to suggest the father was running the son, that Kim was his agent.
I've come to believe that, in a sense, St.
John Philby did recruit his son into the Great Game.
But it was more a metaphysical than literal recruitment, and I'd put it much farther back in time and place, not in the Middle East itself but in a map of the Middle East.
In the opening pages of his unpublished memoir, Philby depicts himself as a wistful loner of a child -- collecting butterflies, spending long hours drawing imaginary maps.
Map making was his only real passion.
Not ordinary Atlas-type maps, but "maps that could be invented," Philby writes.
"This discovery resulted in  [ my drawing ]  a long series of imaginary countries with complicated promontories and inlets and improbably situated hills. My grandmother criticized me for calling all of them Spy Glass Hill."
Perhaps, in some sense, the young Kim Philby was drawing maps of his own lonely island psyche.
But the true apotheosis of his map-making obsession, the moment that blissfully, sublimely united him with his long absent father, came on the occasion of St.
John's return from one of his fabulous Arabian expeditions.
This, Kim says, was his first conscious memory of his father:
"I remember he took me through Kensington Gardens to the Royal Geographical Society. There, in an upper room he sat me on a stool beside a huge table covered with large sheets of blank paper, ink bottles, pens and a lot of pencils sharpened to the finest point imaginable. My father was drawing a map, and, as far as I could see, an imaginary map at that because he had no Atlas to copy from."
He was, most probably, filling in the blank spaces in the notorious Empty Quarter, giving reality to what was until them a largely imaginary landscape.
Kim admits to two feelings about this spectacle: first "admiration" and then "wonder" that this was his father's work.
To Kim, it was the supreme form of play.
A fierce debate has long raged in Philby literature over the question of his true motivation: Was he driven solely by sincere dedication to the cause of the oppressed proletariat, as he claimed to be?
Later on in the autobiographical manuscript, Philby gives us this pious version, perhaps designed for the eyes of his ultimate editors, the K.G.B.
From the earliest age, he says, he felt "a sympathy for the weak" and the underdog.
The plight of the poor lepers.
"Why," he says he wondered at an early age, "did Jesus cure only one leper when he could have cured them all?" Skepticism of this sort led him to question other established notions -- of nationhood and empire -- and, he declares, he "became a godless little anti-imperialist by the age of 8."
Perhaps this is true.
But reading the yellowing typescript of the unpublished autobiography in Sotheby's London offices, I became convinced that the map-making imperative is the telltale heart of the matter.
That, for Kim Philby, espionage, on the grand geopolitical scale he came to practice it, was a kind of map making, or map remaking, a way of creating the conceptual landscape of the world, the contour lines of desire and hostility, trust and distrust, power and weakness.
In a sense, then, Philby was not an anti-imperialist, but a personal imperialist, an imperialist of the self, who used his power to impose his own vision on the globe, to make the Great Powers navigate by his charts.
To make his own mischief on a grand scale.
To make his own map.
THE BLACK BERTHA FILE
Consider, for instance, the new information about Philby's role in the Hess case.
It's hard for those of us born afterward to recapture the kind of worldwide sensation made back in May 1941 by the news that Hitler's faithful No. 2, Rudolf Hess, had parachuted into the Scottish countryside on some kind of peace mission.
Imagine, for comparison, the headlines Dan Quayle might have made if, at the height of the gulf war hostilities, he'd parachuted into Baghdad on a self-proclaimed mission to talk peace with Saddam.
Whatever the case, the 1941 Hess flight came at a pivotal moment in the war and a pivotal moment in Philby's career as a spy.
Seven years earlier, Philby had left Cambridge to go to Vienna, where, with other Oxbridge leftists like Stephen Spender, he'd participated in the doomed struggle of the Socialist workers against the proto-Fascist Dollfuss regime.
It was there in Vienna he first found the heady thrill of being in the white-hot crucible of history in the making, of fighting the advance guard of Hitlerism, if only as a fringe player.
He became a courier in a Communist underground network and lost his virginity in the snows of the Vienna woods, to an Austrian Communist Jew whom he then hastily married to help escape the police.
When he arrived back in London, he was ready.
A Soviet intelligence officer made an approach on June 1, 1934, in Regent's Park.
His name was Arnold Deutsch and, 50 years later, in his autobiography, Philby seems still under the spell of Deutsch's magnetism, an almost sexual seductiveness.
Deutsch painted a romantic picture for Philby: the struggle for the future was being waged all over the world.
The Soviet Union was alone in resisting Hitler; the British Secret Service was forever scheming to destroy the world's only Socialist state; the Soviets needed someone sympathetic within the citadel of these incessant schemers.
That would be Philby's long-range penetration mission: do anything he could to get inside the British Secret Service.
In fact, he came close to becoming head of it.
But it was slow going at first; Philby publicly ditched his left-wing politics, and soon his left-wing Austrian wife.
For several years, he posed as a pro-German sympathizer, then used his right-wing contacts to make his way to Franco headquarters in Spain in the midst of the Civil War.
Originally sent there as an advance man for a possible Soviet-sponsored assassination attempt on Franco, he bootstrapped his way into a position as London Times war correspondent, eventually receiving a prestigious decoration, the Red Cross of Military Merit, from the dictator he'd originally been sent to kill.
Finally, in 1940, shortly after the fall of France (which he covered for The Times), he got the invitation he'd been hoping for, an invitation to join the British Secret Service.
He'd begun in guerrilla training operations and was just about to transfer to the true brains of the outfit, the foreign counterintelligence department of M.I.6, when Rudolf Hess fell out of the sky.
At that moment, huge forces in the world were on the verge of momentous shifts.
Hitler was about to make apparent his fateful choice between an invasion of England in the West and an attack on his then-ally in the East, the Soviet Union.
There were factions in both Britain and Germany hoping to arrange a peace between the two "Aryan" powers to free Hitler's hand for an attack on the Bolsheviks.
Stalin suspected a deal was being made behind his back, and Hess's flight seemed to confirm his suspicion.
He lashed his intelligence chiefs into finding out what was really going on, who was betraying whom.
After 50 years, we still don't really know for sure, but what we do know now is what Philby told Stalin was going on.
This came to light three years ago when the successors to the K.G.B. released the contents of its "Black Bertha" file on Hess ("Black Bertha" was reportedly Hess's nickname in the homosexual underground of Weimar Germany), a file containing the texts of Philby's reports to Stalin on the Hess Affair.
How reliable were they?
On the basis of Philby's reports, Stalin came to believe the most paranoid interpretation of the Hess flight that (as John Costello describes it) "Hess had been lured by an M.I.6 deception to fly to Scotland. He apparently had not only done so with Hitler's knowledge but with a genuine offer of a final peace deal before the impending attack on the Soviet Union."
There are some who believe there really was a plot by M.I.6 to lure Hess to England for one reason or another.
Most, however, take the position of the Cambridge historian Christopher Andrew and his co-author, former K.G.B.
Col.
Oleg Gordievsky: that Philby was innocently in error in his reports to Stalin, "that he jumped to the erroneous conclusion that  [ Hess's flight ]  was evidence of a deep laid plot between appeasers in high places and the Nazi leadership."
But was it just a mistake?
There is another, more sinister interpretation to be made of Philby's reports to Stalin.
An interpretation that suggested itself to me after a conversation with Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, the son of the Scottish peer Hess had come to England to see and the author of a respected book on the case based on his father's private papers.
Douglas-Hamilton, now an M.P. for Edinburgh, told me that, from his study of the Black Bertha file, he'd concluded that Philby hadn't made an innocent error but rather "he lied."
He lied, Douglas-Hamilton says, "by claiming that he was present at a dinner in Berlin when my father supposedly met Hess -- which never happened. My father never met Hess." Douglas-Hamilton believes Philby lied about that detail and others in his report to exaggerate his knowledge of the affair, to bolster the credibility of his conclusion that the Hess flight was part of a plot by the Bolshevik haters in the British Secret Intelligence Service to unleash Hitler on the Soviets.
We know the effect of Philby's reports: Andrew and Gordievsky conclude that "contributing to Moscow's distrust of British intentions was to be one of Philby's main achievements as a wartime Soviet agent."
Stalin's paranoia over the Hess case never diminished; he berated Churchill about it as late as 1944.
And Philby's interpretation of the Hess affair planted bitter seeds of suspicion and distrust that would bear fruit in the swift shattering of the wartime alliance after 1945 and in the Iron Curtain landscape of postwar Europe.
Of course, there were real enough reasons for distrust between Moscow and London, but what Philby did was not report but deliberately distort.
To what end?
Later, in his Moscow years, Philby liked to portray himself as a faithful servant of the Soviet people and the cause of proletarian internationalism.
But, in fact, here in the Hess case at least, he was using the immense leverage of his pivotal position to serve his own interests, play his own game -- make his own map.
An agent of neither West nor East but, more than anything, an agent of chaos.
By the end of the war, Philby would take the game to an even more dizzying level of complexity and power.
By 1945, he had engineered a spectacular coup within M.I.6 that got himself promoted to head of the newly created Russian section.
He was then the man simultaneously responsible for telling the Brits what Stalin thought and telling Stalin what the Brits thought.
In this unique Janus-faced position at this critical moment, he was perhaps the ultimate intelligence player, a key conceptual map maker of the postwar world, perfectly placed to make the colossi of East and West dance to his tune.
This is not the only interpretation of the Philby enigma, of course.
There are still those who come forward to say that Kim Philby was really dancing to their tune -- that Philby was "as much pawn as player."
Some die-hard supporters of James Angleton, for instance, claim he was playing a "deep game" with Philby all along, deliberately feeding him disinformation -- a proposition vigorously denied to me by the mole war historian of the C.I.A., Cleveland Cram, one of the few men who've read every single secret C.I.A. file on Philby, even those the agency denies exist.
And Cave Brown's forthcoming biography entertains a provocative variant on the Philby-as-pawn hypothesis, that Philby was used by "C" -- Sir Stewart Menzies, the legendary head of the wartime Secret Intelligence Service -- to play disinformation games with the Soviets during the war (a fact reported by none other than the former C.I.A. head Allen Dulles).
And that "C," knowing of Philby's early Communist background, may have known about, and used, Philby's relation with the Russian intelligence services for his own "deep game," a game that may have been played out even after Philby arrived in Moscow.
Support for this seemingly far-fetched triple-agent hypothesis, the one that triggered Graham Greene's deathbed summons for his Philby papers, comes from an unexpected source.
The newly opened K.G.B. files on Philby reveal that at least some elements in the K.G.B. were as paranoid about Philby's all-powerful, unfathomable deceptiveness as James Angleton was.
Cave Brown's manuscript quotes at length one senior K.G.B. colleague of Philby's, Mikhail Petrovich Lyubimov, formerly of the K.G.B.'s British section:
Just how subtle was Kim Philby?
Could he have been a British spy when he arrived in Moscow?
Those who argue the case -- on both sides -- focus on one of the single most mystery-shrouded episodes in the whole Philby saga: the moment in Beirut when he was literally between two worlds.
The moment in 1963 when one of his closest Secret Service colleagues confronted him with evidence that he was a Soviet agent in a dramatic, face-to-face showdown.
The showdown that resulted in Philby first confessing and then double-crossing his confessor by slipping out of Beirut to the safety of Moscow.
WINDOWS INTO THE SOUL
London, 1994.
The old spy was dying fast.
His breath was coming in gasps over the phone.
In three days he would be dead.
This was, I believe, the last interview he gave.
He couldn't talk for long, he told me, but there were still some things he wanted to say about Kim Philby, some myths he wanted to put to rest.
He was still haunted by Philby.
Still plagued by the rumors and whispers about his showdown with Philby that night in Beirut in 1963.
The dying spy was not the only one haunted.
The events of that night in Beirut have plagued and disrupted the spy establishments of the United Kingdom for the past quarter century -- Kim Philby's parting black valentine to those he betrayed.
The belief that Philby was tipped off to the coming confrontation, that the "confession" he gave was an artful sham, disinformation designed to buy time to execute his escape plan -- a belief still held by many in the spy business -- was directly responsible for the 20-year-long mole hunt in Britain that culminated in the famous "Spycatcher" controversy.
"It's nonsense," the dying spy insisted to me.
Philby was not tipped off he was about to be confronted.
Philby walked into it unawares.
"He wasn't ready at all. He was simply asked to come to an apartment by his  [ M.I.6 ]  contact in Beirut. He didn't know who he was going to meet. Instead of finding our man in Beirut, he found me."
The man Philby found, the spy speaking to me, was Nicholas Elliott, the perfect embodiment of the blue-blood, playing-fields-of-Eton establishment Philby arose from and betrayed.
After serving in a number of top M.I.6 posts, he eventually became Margaret Thatcher's personal intelligence adviser on Soviet affairs.
A cultivated bon vivant who also reportedly possessed an inexhaustible store of filthy jokes, Elliott had become close to Philby during their wartime service in M.I.6.
So close, in fact, that at one time Philby disclosed something to Elliott he'd disclosed to no one else -- the shattering secret of his marital life.
A secret that (Elliott argues in his memoirs) revealed that "the arch-deceiver had himself been deceived, the arch-liar had been tricked for so many years."
It wasn't sexual infidelity.
Rather it was his wife's failure to confide the nature of the secret life she was living -- and Philby's 10-year failure to penetrate her deception.
In 1948, Aileen (second of his four wives) came down with the latest in a succession of mysterious illnesses.
Philby begged his friend Nicholas Elliott, then M.I.6 station chief in Bern, to find a Swiss doctor who could get to the bottom of Aileen's problem.
After flying Aileen to Bern for treatment, Philby was devastated to learn from a psychologist there that ever since her teens, Aileen had been afflicted with a severe compulsive disorder that caused her to cut and mutilate herself and to inject herself with her own urine.
"It was an intense affront to Philby's pride," Elliott writes, that his wife had been able to hide a secret self from him.
Perhaps the fact that Elliott had that glimpse of the deceiver deceived explains Philby's peculiar conduct toward him in that Beirut showdown in 1963.
In describing that moment in Beirut to me, Elliott was at great pains to insist that he was in command.
In the last year of his life, controversy over the Philby confession had broken out anew in The London Times's letters column; Elliott had been accused of "bungling" the job.
Elliott insisted to me he had taken Philby by surprise and that Philby was "shaken."
"Very simply, I told him, 'I know you're a traitor and you'd better admit it, if you're as intelligent as I think you are.' " Elliott said.
" 'And we'll both try to work something out.' "
Elliott offered Philby full immunity from prosecution, if he'd return to England and provide the intelligence services with a complete damage assessment -- a deal similar to the one that would later be accepted by Philby's fellow "Ring of Five" mole, Anthony Blunt.
"That was the point of it all -- the damage assessment," Elliott told me.
Philby later told Phillip Knightley, his most famous biographer, that the deal had been unacceptable to him.
Because it would have involved naming names -- other K.G.B. moles -- "that was no deal at all." But Elliott contended to me that Philby had, in fact, accepted the deal.
Elliott believed then, and continued to believe till the end of his life, that Philby had been ready to give up and go home.
Of course, it didn't happen that way.
Philby returned with a typewritten confession and then asked for more time to arrange his affairs.
Elliott returned to London with the confession, apparently trusting Philby to keep his word about coming home.
Philby instead chose another home.
Within a week, he'd disappeared from Beirut and, before long, showed up in Moscow, mocking the men he'd betrayed.
From out of the murk of this exceedingly murky episode have emerged several conflicting theories of what was really going on:
1.
Philby had cracked: Tired and shamed by Elliott, he wanted to accept the deal and go back to Britain.
But, Elliott told me, when the K.G.B. learned of what had gone on between him and Philby, "it caused consternation" and Philby practically had to be kidnapped at gunpoint and shanghaied off to Moscow.
2.
3.
A third school argues that Elliott's real mission was not to persuade Philby to come back home to England at all but to pointedly hint Philby would be better off if he repaired to Moscow, sparing his old colleagues the embarrassing prospect of Philby at large in the United Kingdom, free to broadcast humiliating details of his successes in conning everyone.
4.
Finally, there is an even more conspiratorial school that believes it was at this point that Elliott "turned" Philby from Soviet double to British triple agent and that the whole confrontation had been nothing but a charade to convince the K.G.B. that Philby had to be brought back to Moscow, where he could serve as a British penetration of Moscow Center.
In the course of my odyssey through the Philbian cosmos, I came upon two extraordinary documents that throw new light on this mysterious episode.
The first is a memo that contains a purported account of a confession about Philby's confession.
A purported account of Nicholas Elliott's deathbed confession about that Beirut encounter -- the notional shrive.
It contends that sometime in the 72 hours between the time I spoke to him and his death, Nicholas Elliott was "shriven" -- his confession was taken according to the rites of the Anglican church.
What is said in a shrive is meant to be between the dying man, his confessor and his God.
The memo on the alleged shrive was sent to me by E. J. Applewhite, the C.I.A. station chief in Beirut during Philby's last days there.
It records Applewhite's conversation with a spook in London whose name Applewhite has blotted out in the copy he sent to me.
The memo, entitled "Elliott and Philby Confrontation," begins as follows:
Applewhite, distancing himself from the informant's story, calls it "an oversimplification." But I think it's more than that.
It sounds to me like a sophisticated disinformation operation on the part of the informant, one worthy of Kim Philby himself.
Note that the "informant" tries to give the impression that Canon Pilkington betrayed the sanctity of the confession, when in fact the informant only conjectures what the Canon might have told him, had he not been "interrupted." And, in fact, when I reached Canon Pilkington, he denounced the story colorfully as "a load of codswallop." Pilkington said he and Elliott had had "a few words" on the subject of Philby, but that there was no formal shrive and no deathbed remorse about Philby.
Who might have been the source of the disinformation?
I'd suggest it's a manifestation of the undying bitterness over the Philby affair between the gumshoes of M.I.5 (the British equivalent of our F.B.I.) and the old-school-tie aristocrats of M.I.6, who were thought to have protected Philby as one of their own.
What's shocking here is the lengths to which the partisans in the never-ending Philby wars will go: a notional version of a dying man's final rites is used to accuse him of collaborating in the escape of a traitor.
Still, there was something about that confession drama in Beirut that tormented Elliott until the end.
And if it did weigh on Elliott's conscience, might it also have weighed on Philby's?
Did Kim Philby have a conscience?
Here the second revealing document to surface has particular relevance -- a memorandum in Philby's own handwriting that I found myself fixated on while going through the Philby papers in Sotheby's London offices.
If espionage, as defined by Sir Francis Walsingham, the 16th-century founder of the British Secret Service, is the effort to "find windows into men's souls," I found this document to be, if not a window into Philby's soul, then a glimpse of his own chilling soullessness.
It's a nine-page memorandum in Philby's tiny, precise handwriting, a memo that seems to have escaped the K.G.B. sweep of his apartment after his death. (His wife, Rufina, claims it only recently turned up, perhaps stuck in the back of a file drawer.) As such, it may be the only manuscript from Philby's Moscow years not read, pored over and vetted by his suspicious spymasters.
All we have of the uncensored Philby.
The subject of the memo is one that was obviously close to Philby's heart: the psychology of interrogation and confession; how a spy should behave when he's confronted and accused of treason.
The memo seems to have been drafted for a K.G.B. training course for agent handlers.
But it also may have been Philby's indirect way of confronting K.G.B. suspicions about his behavior in Beirut.
Philby opens the memo with a "syllogism" on confessions:
1. "Giving information to the enemy is always wrong.
2. "Confession is giving information to the enemy.
3. "Therefore, confession is wrong."
This is a pretty audacious ploy.
After all, Philby himself had supposedly confessed -- he certainly gave some kind of information to the enemy, his friend Nicholas Elliott.
Was it all disinformation and black valentines?
Could the K.G.B. be sure?
It seems possible Philby is attempting to counter suspicion of him with this syllogism:
-- Philby says all confession is wrong.
-- Therefore, Philby could not have (really) confessed.
Whatever the ulterior purpose of Philby's syllogism on confession, something else emerges in the remainder of the nine-page memo, the painstaking analysis he devotes to the interrogation-confession dramas of two K.G.B. atom spies of the late 40's, Klaus Fuchs and Alan Nunn May, who faced the same kind of tense inquisitions Philby had but who cracked under pressure.
With the eye of a expert who's seen such battles of will, both as interrogator and suspect, Philby takes us inside the give-and-take of the atom spy confrontations and concludes that in both cases the seemingly confident interrogators were actually in a desperately weak position.
They knew that the sort of evidence they had was either too vague or too explosively secret to be used in court.
The interrogators were therefore "bluffing desperately," Philby says, and the suspects were in a far stronger position than they knew: if they had held out and refused to confess, "they'd have remained free men."
Free men!
His use of the term is doubly ironic.
He'd just enumerated all the obstacles the interrogators faced from the due-process, civil-liberties protections afforded by Western democracies -- the right to a public trial, to confront accusers, to the protection against self-incrimination that shielded the suspected spies from the tortured "confessions" and summary executions the Soviet system routinely used for those suspected of treachery.
I found something particularly repellent about Philby's smug dissection of the weaknesses of Western interrogators, inhibited by the protections afforded the weak and the underdog -- something almost willfully unconscious.
Why, one wants to ask him, dedicate oneself to destroying this system, for the sake of one that he knew had arbitrarily murdered its most naively idealistic operatives on the basis of mere suspicion?
Philby writers often cite the doggerel verse from Kipling's "Kim" about the qualifications of a successful spy, as a way of explaining this kind of moral schizophrenia: Something I owe to the soil that grew --
More to the life that fed --
But most to Allah, Who gave me two
Separate sides to my head.
But schizophrenia doesn't really explain Philby so much as excuse him.
The disease metaphor suggests he was a victim and not responsible for his thought processes and the acts that grew out of them.
Unfortunately -- in some cases, unforgivably -- he was.
THE GREAT PRETENDER
The former spy was talking about Kim Philby's love letters.
His courtship style.
He was attempting to counter a tale told by another spy suggesting that Philby was bisexual.
No, this spy said, that wasn't Philby.
He'd never thought Philby was homosexual, he insisted, but there was something peculiar about the nature of his heterosexuality, something that revealed itself in his love talk.
"What I never understood is the way he used language," the former spy said.
"He would describe himself as deeply, utterly devoted from almost the first moment, as if the last woman had never existed, even though he'd professed himself deeply, eternally devoted to her. Those letters to Eleanor. . . ."
Eleanor Brewer was the married woman Philby wooed away from her husband, a New York Times correspondent in Beirut.
In "The Master Spy," his book on Philby, Phillip Knightley describes the "tiny love letters written on paper taken from cigarette boxes," which Philby would send to Eleanor several times a day:
"Deeper in love than ever, my darling. . . ."
XXX from your Kim
To be followed later the same day by;
"Deeper and deeper my darling. . . ."
XXX from your Kim
Of course, it was more than just little love notes that won Philby the affection -- and, amazingly, the enduring loyalty -- of his women.
In "The Spy I Loved," Eleanor's memoir of their affair, their marriage and her brief sojourn in Moscow with Philby (before he left her to take up with Melinda Maclean), Eleanor describes her first impressions of Philby in Beirut:
"His eyes were an intense blue. I thought that here was a man who had seen a lot of the world, who was experienced, and yet who seemed to have suffered. . . . He had a gift for creating an atmosphere of such intimacy that I found myself talking freely to him. I was very impressed by his beautiful manners."
Many men, as well, found themselves "talking freely to him," much to their regret.
For Philby, intimacy was his special espionage talent.
When the former spy finished his disquisition on Philby's all-or-nothing-at-all love rhetoric, I asked him if he thought there was an analogy between the kind of near-religious conversion experiences Philby underwent in his romantic life and the blind romanticism of his ideological conversion.
He smiled and asked me, "What do you think?"
It may strain the analogy a bit, but after a lifelong romantic affair with the image, the fantasy of Soviet Communism, Moscow was still a mail-order bride for Philby until he came face to face with her in 1963.
Up until then, he'd enjoyed the best of both worlds.
He could wallow in decadent bourgeois freedoms while maintaining a surreptitious self-righteous superiority over others who did, keeping pure his devotion to the promised bride.
Then, in 1963, after his flight from Beirut, he arrived in Moscow and saw with his own eyes the ugly reality of the love object he'd worshipped from afar.
Not just the grim, disillusioning reality of Soviet life, but the shocking truth about his own status in the organization he'd dedicated his life to, the K.G.B.
"They destroyed him," the former K.G.B. man told me over the phone from Moscow.
The man speaking, Mikhail Lyubimov, was among Philby's closest K.G.B. colleagues, the one who perhaps knew him best, the one with whom Philby shared the depths of disenchantment and doubt he'd successfully concealed from journalists and friends in the West up until the moment of his death.
Before speaking to Lyubimov, I'd listened to some 20 hours of tapes made in Moscow by Cave Brown.
Tapes, for the most part, of interviews with key figures in the K.G.B. orbit around Philby's apartment on Patriarch's Pond in Moscow, men who'd shared his hospitality, his secrets and his doubts.
It's astonishing at first to hear these men, once possessors of the most closely guarded secrets of the century -- the secrets of the inner sanctum of the K.G.B., secrets men were murdered for knowing or seeking to know -- discussing them so freely, so offhandedly with a journalist.
Astonishing to hear these men casually dissecting the Philby personna.
One can hear in their voices different degrees of affection, admiration, sadness and anger at the treatment of this man, who had come to be such a highly charged symbol.
But the common thread running through all their memories and reflections about Philby was deception.
Not deception in the sense of the grand game of global psych-out that Philby's enemies envisioned him playing.
"This is rubbish!" Lyubimov told me.
It's a judgment former K.G.B Gen.
Oleg Kalugin (Philby's boss in Moscow from 1970 to 1980) concurs in on Cave Brown's tapes.
It's also one that the writings of Oleg Gordievsky, the British mole within the K.G.B., reflect: Philby wasn't running deception operations in Moscow.
He was the victim of one, of a Soviet deception about the kind of life he'd be leading once he came in from the cold.
According to Lyubimov, this deception began in Beirut just before his escape to Moscow.
While Philby was weaving a web of deceit around Nicholas Elliott, he was unaware of the one being woven for him.
"When he was leaving Beirut, he was told he would be in Lubyanka," Lyubimov told me, referring to the Lubyanka headquarters building of the K.G.B., not the infamous prison in the basement known also by that name.
Others have reported that Philby expected to be made a K.G.B. general, that he expected to be named head of the K.G.B.'s England division.
But, in fact, when he arrived, he found he'd been deceived in several ways: he was told that he was not and never would be a K.G.B. officer of any kind; rather he was an "agent," a hireling -- a lack of respect that never ceased to rankle him.
Not only didn't Philby get a rank, even more humiliating, he didn't even get an office.
"Any normal man who'd accomplished the feats Philby had would think he'd get his own study, his own telephone, a desk," Lyubimov told me.
"It never happened. Nothing happened. He became a sort of a little beggar somewhere in a little apartment. It was three rooms but very small."
In fact, Philby's first seven years in the Soviet Union were almost a form of house arrest.
Again a victim of deception: "The K.G.B. told him they were afraid the British M.I.6 was going to try to assassinate him, so he had to have guards all the time, close surveillance," Lyubimov said.
But the real reason was the Soviets didn't completely trust him not to bolt for home.
"They were afraid something would happen. And he would end up back in Britain or even America."
"Did he know they didn't trust him?"
"Oh yes, he knew."
But it didn't take long after he arrived in the Soviet Union for Philby to realize he'd been the victim of another kind of deception, an even more profound one.
From the first, he felt "a complete disillusionment from Soviet reality," Lyubimov says.
"He saw all the defects, the people who are afraid of everything. That had nothing to do with any Communism or Marxism which he had a perception of."
The Marxism that Philby "had a perception of" before his arrival was a variety Lyubimov characterizes as "the romantic Marxism of the Comintern agents of the 1930's." Of the daring "illegals," like the sexologist Deutsch, who thought of themselves as fighting Fascism for the sake of the future but rarely had to endure the reality of the future as it was embodied in Stalinist rule -- until Stalin brought them back to be murdered in the Purges.
The reality of Brezhnev's Russia, with its slow-motion Stalinism, was deeply demoralizing to Philby.
According to several of the K.G.B. men Cave Brown interviewed, Philby was often dangerously outspoken in his open contempt for the Brezhnev regime.
But was this because Philby was morally outraged by the system or because he wasn't given the place in it he thought he deserved?
Lyubimov, who tends to romanticize Philby, believes his distress was genuine.
"The idea of the absence of freedom -- he couldn't understand it," Lyubimov told me.
"He began to see it with how they treated Solzhenitsyn -- which he called disgusting. That was the beginning of his dissidency. Once we had a quarrel about the treatment of writers. Kim was shouting, 'Who is responsible?' And I was saying: 'Well it's not my department  [ of the K.G.B. ] . I'm not responsible.' And he said: 'No! You are responsible! We are all responsible.' "
Kim Philby dissident?
Cave Brown tends to believe, based on his conversations with the former K.G.B. men around Philby, that he may have played a role with other liberal elements of the K.G.B. in making Gorbachev's success possible.
He suggests that Margaret Thatcher's early embrace of Gorbachev in 1984 ("We can do business together") might even have been prompted by information about Gorbachev's intentions passed to her Soviet affairs adviser, Nicholas Elliott, by Philby -- through Graham Greene's British intelligence contacts.
Cave Brown advances the argument that, toward the end of his life, Philby was seeking "redemption" -- that fostering a Thatcher-Gorbachev rapprochement might have been the means for a reconciliation with the England he betrayed.
Cave Brown hedges his bets on whether Philby was doing so on behalf of his homeland, as an actual British triple agent, on behalf of reformist factions in the Soviet Union or on behalf of himself.
The perennial Philby mystery again.
My belief is that while Philby may have hedged his bets in some ways, it's unlikely he was a triple agent.
Indeed, he was extremely sensitive about being called even a double agent.
Hated it, in fact.
The way he saw it, a double agent betrays one master for another, while he, Philby, had only one master all along: the Soviet Union.
He had no loyalty to the Brits to betray.
But I also believe Philby was engaged in an elaborate and desperate deception operation during his Moscow years, his last great intelligence operation.
This was his campaign to conceal from those in the West just how badly he'd been deceived about the Soviet system.
One thing we learn from a study of Philby's Moscow years is that for all his contempt for the capitalist world, he had a pronounced, even unseemly, eagerness to be respected by the West, particularly by his fellow Brits.
One thing he was not going to do was give them the satisfaction of seeing how badly the betrayer had been betrayed.
Not while he was alive.
"He had a natural desire to have a pretense, to have a facade," Lyubimov told me.
The counterdeception-disinformation operation began with Philby's book "My Silent War," a masterpiece of overstatement through deceptive understatement.
In it, Philby created a picture of himself as a cool, daring, nerveless, unflappable operator, who used only the driest deadpan understatement to describe his hairbreadth escapes, ingenious stratagems and clandestine coups.
The conspicuous absence of boasting accomplished what boasting itself could not.
And along with casually dropped references to "my comrades," his unfailingly brilliant and loyal K.G.B. collaborators, he painted a portrait of espionage superheroes, a team that had accomplished far more than he could ever speak about.
The truth was, he really wasn't on the team at all any more.
Occasionally, the K.G.B. took pity on him, because it looked as though he was drinking himself to death in his despair, and gave him some quasi-operational tasks.
For a few years, he taught an informal seminar on England to fledgling K.G.B. officers about to depart for Albion to try to recruit the next generation of Philbys.
Still, there was at least one instance when Philby's talents were brought into play.
In the late 70's, Philby, who never lost his nose for sniffing out a mole, was called in to assess a K.G.B. intelligence disaster in Norway, a key agent blown.
Given a sanitized version of the files to analyze, Philby contended he knew what went wrong: the Brits must have a mole in the K.G.B. who blew the cover of the Norway agent.
In fact, he turned out to be right.
There really was a high-level mole in the K.G.B., Oleg Gordievsky, although the Soviets were unable to pinpoint him until years later when, Gordievsky believes, Aldrich Ames provided information that clinched the case.
Gordievsky barely escaped with his life.
But for the most part, Philby was frozen out, his suggestions ignored.
"The K.G.B. was too stupid and impotent to make use of him," Lyubimov reiterated to me.
"This destroyed him. This ruined his life."
And, in fact, the book "My Silent War," which had been one of the chief vehicles of Philby's deception of the West, became one of the chief instruments of torture the K.G.B. used against him.
Philby desperately wanted the book, which came out in 1968 in the West, to be published in the Soviet Union -- to give him the heroic status with the Soviet public his vanity thought he'd earned.
"All this time, he wanted to be a hero of this country," Lyubimov says.
"But they did everything to prevent him from this."
It took 12 years of delays, of brutal editing, of bad translations for Philby to get a mutilated version of "My Silent War" into print in Russian.
And even then, Lyubimov says, "It wasn't really published. A little edition, just distributed to the Central Committee, the military." It was, adds Lyubimov, "almost a confidential publication. He was killed by this."
And yet you wouldn't know it from the way Philby bragged about his book to Phillip Knightley in 1988: "It was an enormous success and sold more than 200,000 copies. The trouble was that I hadn't foreseen that it would sell so well. It was only in the bookshops a few days and then it was gone. So I didn't get enough copies for myself."
This is fairly pathetic, but at times Philby's desperation to be thought of as a success by his British peers reaches comedic levels.
To Knightley, he described his Order of Lenin decoration as comparable to "one of the better K's" (degrees of knighthood), sounding like a pseud out of Evelyn Waugh.
And there was one point at which Philby's image-building campaign seemed to go beyond deception to an astonishing level of self-deception.
The former C.I.A chief Richard Helms is fond of telling a story about an exchange between Philby and an American reporter in Moscow.
The reporter told of a projected film about his life.
Philby asked who was going to play him.
"Michael York," replied the reporter.
Philby recoiled, as if slapped. "But he's not a gentleman," he said.
Perhaps the single most telling instance of Philby's last great disinformation operation can be found in correspondence between him and Graham Greene over Greene's novel "The Human Factor." It was a book Greene wrote in the 60's but didn't publish until the late 70's because it came so close to the Philby affair.
Many found resemblances to Philby and his predicament in Greene's protagonist, a mid-level mole named Castle.
Apparently, Philby did too.
Greene had sent him a copy of the manuscript before publication, and Philby had made particular objection to one passage, at the very close of the book, when Castle, like Philby, has escaped to Moscow and is trying to adjust to his ambiguous position there.
The passage Philby objected to depicts Castle in a tiny, depressing apartment, amid stained, secondhand furniture, insisting over his malfunctioning telephone to his wife in London, that he's quite content: "Oh, everyone is very kind. They have given me a sort of job. They are grateful to me. . . . "
Philby wrote to Greene urging him to change this impression.
It was misleading, melancholy.
And, by implication, not at all like his circumstances in Moscow.
Greene wrote back thanking Philby for the helpful suggestion, but he would not change the bleak mood.
Greene must have had the novelist's sixth sense from this exchange that the melancholy portrait of the lonely mole in his Moscow apartment, vainly boasting how "grateful" everyone was, had struck home with Philby.
That there was a truth to it Philby recognized, a truth about himself that all the tacky ribbons and trophies he gathered from his "grateful" fraternal K.G.B. comrades could not obscure.
Shortly after Graham Greene's funeral, his biographer, Norman Sherry, visited the room where Greene had died.
On a table next to the empty bed, he found the letter he'd written to Greene, the one asking for his final thoughts on Philby.
Members of Greene's family said that they had found no reply.
If Greene took a Philby secret to his grave, it might have had nothing to do with whether Kim was a double or triple agent.
It might have had everything to do with the lonely man in the Moscow apartment.
Perhaps Greene saw through Philby's last great lie, but -- unlike Kim -- he wouldn't blow a friend's cover.


PRESUMED INTIMATE
What is wrong exactly with a "little lunchtime confidence" (Hers: "Presumed Intimate," June 12)?
When a woman shares information about flex-time employment, or speaks of her pregnancy, Martha Gershun thinks she mistakenly "sees their biology as a common thread." Her husband assures her that "men wouldn't be caught dead talking about such personal matters."


The Elusive Spark That Ignites the Choreographer
STARTING OUT IN ANY BRANCH OF THE ARTS IS RARELY A SNAP, but choreography poses special challenges.
To bring a dance to life, a choreographer has basic needs that are enormous and expensive.
Besides time to develop and try out ideas, the requirements include dancers, music, rehearsal space, a performance site and an audience.
Still, the dance world knows no shortage of choreographers.
The intriguing question is: What motivates the dance supplier, to use George Balanchine's famous term?
It certainly isn't money.
According to Dancemakers, a recent survey of American choreographers by the National Endowment for the Arts, choreographers earn an average of $6,000 a year from their trade.
Nor is it fame.
Asked to name three prominent living choreographers, most people would be stumped.


Ms. Crombie, Mr. Sanderson
Maureen Ann Crombie, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
H.
David Crombie Jr. of West Hartford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Schuyler Otto Sanderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael O. Sanderson of New York.
The Rev.
John F. Kiely performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Peter Claver.
Mrs.
Sanderson, 24, is an admissions officer at Noble &amp; Greenough School in Dedham, Mass.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is the director of the surgery department at Hartford Hospital.


Elegant Touches From the Land and Sea
WHEN Hamptonites think of sophisticated elegant dining Westhampton does not immediately come to mind.
Tierra Mar may change that.
This newcomer, nestled beside Montauk Highway, is a beauty.
The dining room is sleek, stylish and stunning.
Its look is defined by skylights, sponge-painted walls and floors of pale wood and terra cotta tiles.
Mediterranean-style mirrors and abundant greenery, including hibiscus, topiary and citrus trees sporting ripe grapefruit, are eye-catching.
Cobalt-blue vases filled with flowers, a different variety for each table, add color.


How a Wide Variety of Nails Holds Things Together
SELECTING nails is challenging, even for professionals.
One reason is the wide variety of building materials, as nearly all need nails with specific holding properties.
For an idea of how different nails function, consider their three parts, the point; the shank, or shaft, and the head.
Nails with long sharp points wedge fibers apart and are easier to drive than nails with blunt points, which simply punch through wood.
But sharper nails are more likely to cause splitting.


SPERM IN A JAR
It would be neat if you could find a writer as skilled as Anne Taylor Fleming to report that it is possible to get a life, indeed a very good life, and even a very good married life, without the benefit of a baby ("Sperm in a Jar," June 12).
It is hard for me to believe that I am the only woman in the world who, long ago, walked happily away from the drudgery of child care.
L.
A.
FARROW Highlands, N.J.


An Artist's Way With Obsession That Leaves No Scandal
MORTON BARTLETT, who died at the age of 83 in 1992, left an estate worth $300,000, a collection of painted plaster figures and the photograph-like movie stills that he had taken of them.
He also left a great deal of mystery.
Bartlett, who was an orphan, arranged for his assets to be divided among orphans, but he made no provision for the sculptures, which were his own.
Hence, they were found among his effects, wrapped in newspapers of 1965 -- three years after he received his only notice, in Yankee Magazine, and 30 years after he had first laid hands on modeling clay.


July 3-9: Police Corruption; A Report on Lax Command Is a Challenge for Giuliani
After a two-year investigation, a special commission has concluded that corruption in the New York City Police Department is bigger than a few cops on the beat taking bribes -- that it has also infected the entire department, from "willfully blind" sergeants and precinct commanders who condone corruption to internal investigators who bury complaints in "tickler files."
All of which creates a particularly acute problem for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former prosecutor who got elected Mayor last year in part with strong support from the police department's members -- and the patrolmen's union.


Under Wraps
Salmani!
Salmani!
You'd better get up if you want to go to the salmani." It is 9:30, my first morning in Iran, and my uncle is yelling from the doorway. My body aches as I try to pull a definition from my rusty childhood Farsi. "Don't you want to get your hair done?" he bellows.
Ah, salmani is hairdresser.
Today is my cousin's wedding, and my aunt has made appointments for us.
After three flights and as many hours of sleep, I couldn't care less about my hair.
But I have returned from America for the first time in 15 years -- despite safety concerns -- to see the country where I lived as a child and where half my heritage lies.
I am determined not to miss a thing.


For Those Who Work Up High, a Feast for the Eye
Some of New York's most elegant gardens can be seen at Rockefeller Center, but not by everyone.
And they exist only to be seen. not visited.
For 60 years, the gardens have sat several floors above the bustle of Fifth Avenue, adorning four roofs on low-rise parts of the center.
They can be viewed only from the buildings above.


Cruising Russia's Lakes and Rivers
Two travel companies are offering sightseeing cruises along Russia's inland waterways this summer.
A 16-day trip available from New York-based Finnway begins with three days in Moscow before setting sail up the Volga, across the Rybinsk Reservoir, through the Volga-Baltic Canal, over Lake Onega (Europe's second-largest lake), and on to spend two days in St.
Petersburg.


Wall Street; For Spectrum, Even So-So News Is Good News
WITH some companies, the ongoing news is so bad that even so-so announcements can spark a rally.
Shares of Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. have risen 31 percent since June 30, a period in which the company announced an $8.1 million loss, a round of job cuts and the severing of its relationship with its former president, whose business practices have come under question.
On Thursday, along with news that it would terminate the employment contract of Peter T. Caserta, the former president, Spectrum said that four new outside directors had been elected.
By Friday, Spectrum shares closed at $2.125.


My Love Is Like a Red, Red Roadster
DO men love their automobiles more than the women in their lives?
How many cars have nicknames?
Does Old Betsy make its driver more desirable as a date?
In a recent poll of 708 men and women across the country, Firestone Inc. sought to determine not only what drivers know about their cars, but also their attitudes toward life and love behind the wheel.


In a Flooded Georgia City, Care for Living, and Dead
In this waterlogged town where about a fifth of the people have been evacuated from their homes and where a posse is rounding up 200 or so coffins that floated up from a historic cemetery, Mary Polite is not sure whether to worry more about the living or the dead.
"My husband died of a massive heart attack March 24," she said, as she packed boxes at the still-dry Polite Southside Package Store.
"He had one of the biggest funerals in Albany history. Oooh, it was pretty. Seven limousines, all full of red roses. He lived in style and wanted to go out in style. Now I hope he's not floating around out there. I'll tell you, if he does come up, I'm not going to put him back in there."


After Manzanillo Strikes, He Runs Like Mad
Tony Gwynn raised his eyebrows and stood and watched.
Jim Eisenreich snorted in disdain.
Chuck Carr took offense.
The last batter to face Josias Manzanillo, in any given inning, best be prepared for Manzanillo's personal method of leaving the mound.


School Violence: Trouble Spots


Sound Bytes; Tracking High-Tech Culture
HANG around any of Silicon Valley's legendary watering holes long enough and you're sure to hear about Wired magazine, a 14-issue-old monthly of eye-popping graphics and lengthy analyses of the cultural side of technology.
It's no surprise that Marshall McLuhan is listed on the magazine's masthead as its "Patron Saint."
It's also no surprise that a chat with Jane Metcalfe, the 32-year-old president and co-founder of Wired, is like a conversation with a well-spoken religious zelot.
After an unsuccessful attempt to launch a similar publication in Europe several years ago, Ms.
Metcalfe and Louis Rossetto, Wired's editor, publisher and other co-founder, introduced Wired in January 1993 with their personal money and help from a few investors.
Wired recently received financial backing from Conde Nast, which became a minority investor.


Nancy Weltchek, Henry Ferris Jr.
Nancy Ellen Weltchek, a vice president at Edelman Public Relations Worldwide in New York, was married yesterday to Henry Atwater Ferris Jr., a senior editor at Times Books in New York.
Judge David G. Trager of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York performed the ceremony at the home of bride's parents in East Hampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Ferris, 34, graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in Latin American and Caribbean studies at New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul R. Weltchek of East Hampton.
Her father, who is retired, was a partner in Shearman &amp; Sterling, the law firm in New York.


City Animals: Just Trying to Cope; Summer Heat Brings an Increase in Urban Pet Afflictions
The annals of urban veterinary medicine and the wards of animal hospitals in New York City on hot summer nights offer a weird glimpse of the perils and pressures of big-city life in the late 20th century.
Physicians and others who care for the human body and soul have long recognized certain physical and psychological consequences of urban living.
So it seems logical that similar patterns might prevail among the animals that intimately share city dwellers' lives.


Hackensack Police And Minorities
As a resident of Hackensack, I write about misrepresentations in a June 19 article entitled "Police Department Extends Itself to Recruit Minorities." The article becomes a travesty to those of us publicly involved in improving community relations in Hackensack.
I have devoted much of my life to working for civil rights.
The Chief of Police, John Aletta, who co-sponsored the event, was never interviewed.
The other co-sponsors, the African-American Ministry of Hackensack, who were also present, were never interviewed either.


Kids in Madrid
To the Editor: I enjoyed reading about Madrid's night life ("Madrid's Round-the-Clock Pace," April 3) and family vacations ("All Together Now," April 10).
My husband and I recently enjoyed Madrid's night life with our family, and found that jet lag worked in our favor.
Elizabeth and Emme, aged 6 and 3, , slept past 10 o'clock every morning and stayed up past 10 every night.
Perfecto!
Dinner in Spain begins at about 9 and no one there objected to relatively well-behaved children in restaurants.


Ruth A. Hirshey, Joseph L. Lincoln
Ruth Arlene Hirshey, the public relations director of the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia, is to be married today to Joseph Leopold Lincoln, a partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Pepper, Hamilton &amp; Scheetz.
Rabbi Daniel H. Freelander is to officiate, and Mayor Edward G. Rendell of Philadelphia is to take part in the ceremony at the Four Seasons.
Ms.
Hirshey, who is keeping her name, graduated from Temple University.
She is a daughter of Florence and Nathan Hirshey of Wyncote, Pa.


Car Stereo Blasters, Beware This Device
WHAT: The Precision Sound-Level Meter Type 2232, made by Bruel &amp; Kjaer Instruments of Denmark.
Generic name: the sound meter.
Greenish and rectangular (about 10 inches by 3 inches) with minuscule buttons and lettering, it resembles a prop from an old "Star Trek" episode.
BEAM THEM QUIET, SCOTTY: The sound meter is used by police officers and environmental control inspectors to crack down on motorists, nightclub owners and others whose noisy cars, stereos or air-conditioners are violating the law. (Yes, air-conditioners, if their noise output exceeds 45 decibels.)


Factory Fire During Flood
In the midst of the worst flood ever recorded in southwest Georgia, a fire consumed a frozen-foods factory that had been the largest employer in the small town of Montezuma.
The building housing Southern Frozen Foods, which packed vegetables grown in the Southeast, caught fire about 10 P.M. on Thursday, city officials said.
Although the factory was standing on dry land at the time it caught fire, much of Montezuma, population 4,800, and surrounding Macon County was flooded.


Four New Yorkers, Four Journeys of Discovery: BENJAMIN SOLOMOWITZ; Learning the Horror of the Holocaust
Benjamin Solomowitz grew up comfortably middle-class in Brighton Beach, graduated from dental school in 1983 and set up a practice in Jackson Heights.
Around that time he also became interested in genealogy, an interest that has helped him understand the horrors of the Holocaust.
While visiting Brody, the town in Ukraine where his maternal grandmother was born, a resident told him how the road leading past the local synagogue had caved in one day.


A Timely Pinch Brings On the Bloom
THERE are sure to be some giggles but it is time to talk about pinching.
Pinching plants, that is.
This age-old practice, which is a form of pruning, is usually learned early on.
It merely describes what is done to plants to force them to develop side shoots.
Many a new gardener has been disappointed by the telephone-pole look of asters, chrysanthemums, ageratums, zinnias and many other flowers.
Only one or two blooms show at the top of the gangly plants, not exactly what one was expecting given the pictures in the catalogues.
The cure is simple: pinching.
It should be applied early in the season.


Kelly McManus, Jonathan Stinnett
Kelly Sisk McManus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Patrick McManus of Branford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Jonathan LeBaron Stinnett, a son of Deborah G. Stinnett of Merion, Pa., and Dr.
James L. Stinnett of Point Pleasant, Pa.
The Rev.
Maurice Maroney performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church.
Mrs.
Stinnett, 27, is an account executive at Valentino Uomo, the New York men's wear company.
She attended the Sorbonne and is studying international business and marketing management at New York University.
Her father is the trust officer at the Southington Savings Bank in Plantsville, Conn.


A Boy and His Mom Are Soon Partners
SIPPING CHAMOMILE TEA amid the tastefully hatted ladies in the Astor Court of the St.
Regis Hotel one recent afternoon, David O. Russell hardly looked like the kind of man who would name his debut feature film after a term for a common solitary sexual activity.
Tall, dark and soft-spoken, Mr.
Russell, whose "Spanking the Monkey" opens on Friday, seemed perfectly at home on a tapestry-covered love seat, nibbling finger sandwiches to the tender plink, plink, plink of a golden harp.
But the director, who is 35, has an audacious streak -- in his words, "a certain fearlessness." It is a side of his character that will serve him well this summer.
"Spanking the Monkey," which won the Audience Award for the most popular dramatic film at the Sundance Film Festival in January, is the story of pleasant, soft-spoken Raymond Aibelli, who at the age of 18 takes the fearful misstep of sleeping with his mother.


Elisabeth Lloyd, William Shields
Elisabeth Boardman Lloyd, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis V. Lloyd 3d of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married yesterday to William Moore Shields, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Shields of Hamilton, Mass.
The Rev.
Samuel Rodman performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Redeemer in Chestnut Hill.
The couple, both 25, graduated from Yale University.
Mrs.
Shields was until recently a research assistant for two environmental lawyers in Seattle.
Her father is the manager of the Boston office of Nordberg Capital Inc., a New York investment banking concern.
Her mother, Lida Lloyd, teaches gifted and talented students in the Brookline (Mass.) school system.


SUNDAY, July 10, 1994; Skating Injury Bonanza
Eighty-three thousand injured American in-line skaters will visit emergency rooms this year.
And, since in-line skating is favored by the young and the employed, many of the whom have health insurance, hospitals have noticed the influx on their balance sheets.
At Lenox Hill Hospital, on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, not far from Central Park, emergency room doctors call the weekend appearance of the rolling wounded the Rollerblade Express.
Dr.
Michael Marin, chief of emergency services, says, "People can't stop running into others or falling down on their faces."


Would 15th Street Be Lost for Lack of a Subway Entrance?
The subway station at 14th Street and Eighth Avenue is a tangle of dark passageways, long stairways, open unlighted mezzanines and a welter of entrances reaching up to 17th Street.
Small wonder, since it is really two outdated and awkwardly joined stations: one for the Carnarsie line, built in 1931, and one for the IND, built in 1932.
Now, as the first renovation of the station approaches, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority is finding that "improvement" means different things to different people -- particularly in Manhattan, where access is everything and established rivers of pedestrians tend to define areas the way highways do in the Midwest.
And so a plan to close the 15th Street entrances to help security has prompted a local tempest.


Where Doctors Tell How Bodies Work
ON most days the 225 seats in the Green Auditorium at the University of Connecticut Medical School in Farmington are filled by students studying to be doctors and dentists.
For nine Tuesday evenings this past spring, however, the seats were occupied by people in all sorts of occupations, including teachers, lawyers, retired secretaries, homemakers and a massage therapist.
Welcome to the Mini-Medical School, a program in which medical faculty members give two-hour weekly lectures on a variety of topics ranging from genetics to the problems of aging.
The program is the only one in Connecticut, and one of only six in the country, said Dr.
Bruce M. Koeppen, dean for academic affairs and education, who runs the UConn program.
Other programs are in Virginia, Colorado, Alabama, Arkansas and Florida.


'Saving the Memory of Self'
The Striggles family goes like this: Doris is the daughter of Zollie, and Zollie was the son of Jasper.
Jasper was the son of Sam, and Sam was the eldest son of Archibald.
Archibald was the second son of Nicholas, who was the son of George Striegel, a German expatriate who received a land grant of 450 acres from the British crown in 1762 and settled along Brier Creek, an offshoot of the Savannah River, on what would become red-clay Georgia farmland.
All across that quiet lineage, in black and in white, are the fingerprints of American history: battles against the British, struggles with Mother Nature, the seesawing of race relations in the South, one family's sorrows and successes.
Much of the story was handed down in the oral tradition, the sometimes embroidered memories of parents and grandparents gathered from elders who could not read or write.
But most of it has been documented by Doris Striggles Porter of West 87th Street in Manhattan, who has spent parts of the last 14 years poring over dusty archives in Georgia county seats and reels of microfilm in Harlem and lower Manhattan, stringing ancestors like beads to reach the present and figure out how she herself fits into the pattern.


'THE GREAT RUSSIA WILL LIVE AGAIN'
Not Demi; not Stallone; not funny. Get a grip, please. SONIA SABLE Great Neck, L.I.


How to Look Like a Million When You're Not
WHEN Deborah Watring started a business in her bedroom eight years ago, she wanted the giant telecommunications companies to whom she offered marketing advice to think she was running a much larger enterprise.
Although pinched for money, she spent several thousand dollars on a "high-end image package" that included three-color professionally designed stationery and business cards printed on expensive paper.
Today her company, Watring &amp; Associates, rings up $1.5 million in annual sales doing business for the likes of Nynex, MCI and AT&amp;T.
Ms.
Watring credits her success in part to the big-company attributes that her business has adopted -- despite its structure as a small "virtual" corporation.
Ms.
Wat ring's "associates," it turns out, are 40 sole proprietors and small companies, most operating from home offices, spread over eight states.


Green Havens in London's Heart
WHEN visitors to London tour the City, the traditional square mile that was the ancient center of Britain's capital and is now its bustling financial district, they expect to see its great commercial and financial institutions, like the Bank of England and the Stock Exchange, and to tour St.
Paul's Cathedral, and perhaps the Barbican, home of the Royal Shakespeare Company.
What they usually don't see are gardens.
Hidden among new towering office blocks or preserved in out-of-the-way small parks, these range from tiny pockets of greenery to a luxuriant tropical conservatory.
Last spring my husband, James, and I spent three leisurely half-days exploring gardens in the financial district, plus three just outside the City limits.
Our first stop, just north of the boundary, was Fortune Street Garden, a small, unpretentious green rectangle, with beds of daffodils and a few roses beginning to bud below its brick walls.
It was almost deserted, as was nearby Bunhill Fields, a graveyard with tombs of William Blake, John Bunyan, Daniel Defoe, Isaac Watts, Cromwell's family and others, and also an unexpected oasis with a pleasant expanse of grass edged by flower beds.


Campus Sees Hope On Faculty Housing
PURCHASE COLLEGE officials are euphoric about the new state budget, which allots $6.6 million to build on-campus housing here for staff and faculty members.
"We're still celebrating," said an elated Bill Lacy, president of the college, who succeeded where others have failed in bringing the project closer to reality.
The housing will be a first for the State University system, which provides dormitory space for students but no residences for faculty or staff on any of its 64 campuses.
Dr.
Sheldon N. Grebstein, who led a five-year effort to build faculty residences while he was president of the college, called the appropriation a miracle and "a precedent-making development" that could have important consequences for the school.
Financed by Bonds
Mr.
Lacy said the breakthrough came after he and Assemblywoman Naomi C. Matusow found a way around the legislative quagmire that sank two faculty housing bills in the State Senate, in 1992 and 1993.
The residences, which fall under capital projects in the budget, will be financed by bonds sold by the state-run Dormitory Authority and built by the State University Construction Fund.
Under the plan, rental income from the apartments will pay for maintenance of the housing, which will be owned by the university.


Fairs Celebrate Cultural Diversity
THERE is something for every interest and taste," County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke said recently about the summer scene in Westchester. "Celebrate our cultural diversity by attending one or all of the ethnic heritage fairs being held at various county parks." These colorful events involve food, crafts displays and, of course, a variety of performances by American soloists and ensembles reflecting ancestral ties.
A Slavic Heritage Celebration takes place at Tibbetts Brook Park in Yonkers today from 1 until about 6 P.M.
And next Sunday will be a great day for the Irish from 1 to 8 P.M. in Ridge Road Park in Hartsdale.
Arab, Polish, Italian, Yiddish, Ukrainian and Hispanic fairs complete the July-August Sunday roster.


Parenthood: Rethinking the Big-City Bargain
MY husband weighed in the other day with a helpful suggestion for reducing the risks of city living: From here on out, when going anywhere with our 23-month-old daughter, we should stay off Broadway.
We live on Broadway.
We depend upon it for the following: milk, bread, vegetables, fruit, poultry, fish, diapers, toothpaste, soap, toilet paper, books, coffee, dry cleaning, film, ice cream, the subway, taxis, cash.


Rental Conversions to Condos Spurt in Philadelphia
AN upturn in conversions of rental buildings to condominiums is under way in Philadelphia.
New owner-sponsors are undertaking the conversions in multifamily properties that they acquired at favorable prices from lenders or regulatory institutions.
In three properties alone, there are more than 300 apartments, and prices are much lower than they were a few years ago.


Two Altazano Adds To Oaks Collection
Two Altazano, who seems to make a career traveling around the country winning classic races for fillies, won the biggest one yesterday when she took the Coaching Club American Oaks at Belmont Park by six and a half lengths over Plenty of Sugar.
It was the third time in the last four months that Two Altazano had won an Oaks.
She won in Louisiana in March, she won in Houston in May and she won in New York in July.
She has now won four of her last five starts and has run first or second in six straight.
And she wasn't particularly supposed to win this one, going off at odds of 8-1 and paying $19.40 for anyone who bet $2 that she would outrun the favorites.


22-1 Shot at Yonkers
The Yonkers Trot -- the first leg of trotting's triple crown -- was supposed to set the stage for a heated summer rivalry between Mr.
Lavec and Wesgate Crown.
But by the last turn, their acts wore thin tonight as Bullville Victory stormed to an unlikely victory.
Driven by Catello Manzi, Bullville Victory, a 21-1 shot, watched from the middle of the pack as the two favorites dueled through quick early fractions.


Leader of the Pack
The subway is full of roses.
Everywhere roses stick their bright heads out from paper cones: cream roses, tea roses, a dozen American Beauties cradled by a knight on Rollerblades.
It is 5:30 in the afternoon at the 34th Street IRT station, on Mother's Day.
We have already delivered our rose-and-snapdragon bouquet, my daughter and I, via the Long Island Rail Road, and we are waiting on the laden platform.
Closer to the tracks, with his back to us, holding his father's hand, is a little boy dressed like Christopher Robin.
He has a shining helmet of light hair, and he's wearing a navy sweater, knee-length plaid shorts, perfectly clean white socks and Buster Brown sandals.
"Look," I say to my daughter, who is 2 to the boy's 4 or 5, "the little boy has a knapsack and he carries his own things." At this cheery exclamation, the man, in flannels, blazer and bow tie, turns around, as does the child.
"It's a girl," he says.
This is clearly so.
The roaring beast of a train, reptilian amid the reefs of flowers, enters the station.
Inside, a man is selling gladioluses from a cart.
Our new friends sit directly across from us.
Under her blue sweater the child has on a starched white blouse, embroidered on the collar, with violets, and as her own personal addition to this costume she had draped a man's knit tie around her neck.
Someone has helped her tie a Windsor knot.
The tail stops rakishly just short of her knees.
We sit expectantly, waiting for conversation.


Barbados Eases Limits
Getting married in Barbados recently became a lot easier.
For years, couples had to wait six days for a marriage license and permission to hold the ceremony.
But as of March 31, the marriage-minded could do it all in a day -- arrive on the island, obtain a license and hold the ceremony.


SPERM IN A JAR
Fleming stops just short of blaming her infertility on her feminist past.
Infertility is neither the wages nor the fruits of feminism.
In her efforts to become a mother, she might shift her focus away from herself (to get her "hands on an embryo, a baby, a life") to adoption.
GLENDA E. GILMORE Charlotte, N.C.


More Suggestions on Using Berries as the Basis for Desserts
BERRIES are one of the things that set summer apart from other seasons.
Bushes and vines in the countryside are heavy with blueberries, raspberries and blackberries, while in produce markets and supermarkets baskets of berries are banked on display.
The season begins with strawberries, which, by mid-July, have about finished their season in this area.
Decent ones from California may still be available, but with all the other berries on the market, they are not much missed.


Teen-Agers, in a Poll, Report Worry and Distrust of Adults
A nationwide poll of teen-agers suggests that many lead lives shadowed by adult concerns like violence, drinking and getting a good job, but these are worries that many say they cannot share with adults.
Many appear to live in virtually separate worlds from adults.
Four in 10 say their parents sometimes or often do not make time to help them, and many say the people they both trust and fear the most are other teen-agers.


Voting Today In Ukraine And Belarus
Ukraine and Belarus will choose Presidents on Sunday in elections that have been dominated by debates about relations with Russia.
The outcomes, which are likely to produce a tighter core of Slavic post-Soviet states, are being closely watched in Washington and Europe, where worries about Russian neo-imperialism are growing.


SCIENCE FICTION
Robert Charles Wilson writes superior science fiction thrillers.
The American Heritage Dictionary defines "thriller" as "one that thrills, especially a sensational or suspenseful book, story, play or movie." I'm not sure what "sensational" means in this context, but Mr.
Wilson's novels are suspenseful in the best sense; once I begin, I feel compelled to keep turning the pages, not just to find out what happens next but to learn the fate of characters I have come to care about.
MYSTERIUM (Spectra/Bantam, paper, $11.95) is set in the northern Michigan town of Two Rivers, where a secret Government facility is investigating a mysterious artifact dug up several years before in Turkey.
Following an accident at the plant, the townspeople discover that the world around Two Rivers has changed.
The roads out of town all end abruptly in virgin forest; there is no electricity; even battery-operated radios pick up no transmissions.
Gradually, in a process that Mr.
Wilson describes in agonizing detail, it is revealed that Two Rivers has been transported across some dimensional fault line to a North America dominated by a political entity called the Consolidated Republic, a French-English state whose level of technology is roughly that of the United States a century ago.


A 'Dear Leader,' Not Very Well Known, but Trained for Years to Take Control
The man who is expected to be the next leader of North Korea has been described as a ruthless terrorist, a spoiled playboy and an erratic manager who will have trouble keeping control of his country.
But perhaps the only thing that can be said with certainty about Kim Jong Il is that very little is known about him.
Most foreign visitors to North Korea, including former President Jimmy Carter on his recent trip, have been turned down when they asked to meet Kim Jong Il, 52, who has been groomed for two decades to take over from his father.
They are generally told that he is out in the villages working with peasants or that it would be impolite for Mr.
Kim to upstage his father.


'Have One Hard Cry. Then Stanch the Grief.'
A WHOLE NEW LIFE By Reynolds Price. 213 pp. New York: Atheneum. $20.


The Nation; Defending Men Who Kill Their Loved Ones
HALF of America, it seems, has already convicted O. J. Simpson.
The evidence, at least in the court of the television talk show, appears overwhelming: the 911 call from his terrified wife, her previous complaints to the police, a drop of blood at the crime scene that matches Mr.
Simpson's so closely that it excludes more than 99 percent of the population.
But even though a Municipal Court judge in Los Angeles ruled Friday that there was "ample evidence" for Mr.
Simpson to stand trial for murder, a conviction is not at all assured.
Some evidence may never come before a jury.
And even if it does, there are legal and cultural barriers that make it difficult to convict men who are accused of murdering their wives.


Kurds Flee Violence In Turkey
In the first hours of daylight, small groups of Kurdish refugees, their bewildered children perched on pack mules, straggled across the rocky peaks from Turkey into northern Iraq.
They arrived, like most refugees, with stories of deprivation, violence and fear.
"The troops burned our houses and told us to get out," said Gule Amartok, a 40-year-old mother of six.
"We spent three days in the mountains, hiding by day, and traveling by night.  We were bombed by the planes, but we have arrived."


Technology; Smart Paper Documents For the Electronic Age
FOR all the popularity of E-mail and other forms of electronic communication, a lot of the information eventually ends up being printed on paper.
Indeed, each development in computer-based communication seems to generate a new excuse for felling trees.
Unfortunately, this conversion of electronic files into paper copies is usually a one-way journey.
When the information is translated from the 1's and 0's of computer language to the words that humans read on paper, the coding that typically accompanies an electronic file is lost.


Jersey City Schools Audit Complicates State Control
When the State of New Jersey seized control of the Jersey City schools in 1989, officials cited fiscal corruption as a prime reason for the action.
Now, five years later and just weeks before the state board is decide whether to extend the takeover, charges of financial mismanagement have again shaken the district.
Leo F. Klagholz, the Commissioner of Education, announced this week that an audit of the office of the Jersey City school business administrator had found a host of irregularities, inappropriate spending and weak controls.
Two top officials have been dismissed over the findings that led to the audit.
Elena Scambio, the Superintendent appointed by the state to run the district, has resigned.


Girlz N the Hood


No Headline
"It's like looking at a kaleidoscope. The more you look at it, the more the parts change." -- SENATOR DIANNE FEINSTEIN, analyzing the four current health care proposals.  [ 18:1. ]


Virginia Reilly, William Shew
Virginia Van Loozen Reilly, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul G. Reilly Jr. of Port Washington, L.I., was married there yesterday to William Edward Shew, a son of Capt.
James E. Shew, U.S.N., retired, and Mrs.
Shew of Alexandria, Va.
The Rev.
Thomas P. Maloney, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of St.
Peter of Alcantara.
The bride, a graduate of Lafayette College, received an M.B.A. from Duke University.
In September, she is to become a senior associate in the financial-services group in the Boston office of Coopers &amp; Lybrand.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.


Prem Parameswaran, Laura Del Valle
Laura Del Valle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
F.
Del Valle of New York, was married yesterday to Prem Parameswaran, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ven Parameswaran of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Msgr.
Edward M. Connors performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Church in Scarsdale.
The bride, 26, was until recently an associate at Friedland, Fishbein, Laifer &amp; Robbins, a law firm in New York.
Both she and the bridegroom graduated from Columbia University.
She received her law degree from Brooklyn Law School.


Innovation Time at a Montauk Standby
RUSCHMEYER'S INN is a microcosm of Montauk.
It is a rustic relaxed sort of place.
For many years, families and fishermen gravitated to the laid-back inn overlooking Fort Pond and found comfortable rooms and a nautical-style dining room offering a traditional Montauk menu.
Although the food rarely disappointed diners, it never excited them, either.
This summer Ruschmeyer's looks the same, with its handsome high-beamed cathedral ceiling, gold chandeliers, red carnations, mounted fish, built-in aquariums, captains' chairs and pictures of old Montauk.
But the trusty conventional fare from the kitchen has been energized, and some cutting-edge cuisine dishes have been added by a gifted chef, Gene Ponsini.


Mr. Kim's Death
Kim Il Sung's death comes at a critical moment, just days after he had personally eased mounting tensions over North Korea's nuclear program by moving to resume talks with the United States.
President Clinton struck the right note, expressing appreciation for Mr.
Kim's role in recent days and reassuring the North that he wants a continuing and "personal" dialogue with his successor after an appropriate hiatus to mark Mr.
Kim's passing.
A delay poses no risk, with international inspectors in place to assure that the North's nuclear freeze remains in force.


Driving in Spain
To the Editor: I wish to warn readers to beware of "speed traps" in Spain.
I was recently caught by the Guardia Civil on the N-400 outside Noblejas, near Ocana, in a deserted area, while traveling between Aranjuez and Cuenca.
I was probably guilty of going 69 in a 40-kilometer zone, but the fine was outrageous: 35,000 pesetas, or $255.
I felt I had no recourse but to pay the policeman, who spoke no English.
When I related this tale to our hotel clerk, he said I got the tourist rate.
He said they would have charged a Spanish citizen only 20,000 pesetas, or $150.


Rachel T. Avigad and Daniel R. Noel
Rachel Tamar Avigad, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gad Avigad of New York, was married yesterday to Daniel Robert Noel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Noel of Wauwatosa, Wis.
Town Justice John B. Colangelo of Rye, N.Y., officiated at the home of the bride's uncle in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Noel, 24, is studying for a master's degree in education at Boston University.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in Near Eastern languages and civilizations from Harvard University.
Her father is a professor of biochemistry at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in Piscataway, N.J.
Her mother, Lois Avigad, retired as a research microbiologist at the New York University School of Medicine.


Most Russians Know Violence and Starvation; Two-Jacket Diplomacy
To the Editor:
"Getting Real on Central Europe" (Op-Ed, June 28) by Zbigniew Brzezinski brings to mind a Ralph Waldo Emerson observation: "People see only what they are prepared to see."
Contrary to Mr.
Brzezinski's perception, Russia's post-imperialist behavior isn't primarily defined by its relations with Ukraine.
The Kremlin's dual geopolitical approach has been labeled two-jacket diplomacy by several analysts, namely, a dinner jacket is worn when discussing Western issues, a flak jacket is worn when discussing Eurasian concerns.


Electricity Industry Needs Competition
To the Editor:
Ralph Cavanagh argues that allowing electricity consumers to choose their suppliers (called retail wheeling or direct access) will be bad for the environment.
Customers who support retail wheeling want lower rates.
Even the newly fashionable proposals for incentive rate making cited by Mr.
Cavanagh are no substitute for direct competition.
Current California electricity rates are almost 50 percent higher than the national average.
One can hardly blame customers for wanting to maximize the pressure to bring them down.


IN SHORT: FICTION
HAITIAN-AMERICAN NOVEL  BREATH, EYES, MEMORY  By Edwidge Danticat. Soho, $20.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
PROSPECT PARK Young Musicians Take to the Stage
The 15 members of Worldbeat 130 -- students at Public School 130 in Kensington chosen four years ago for musical training through the Arts Connection Young Talent Program -- are now 12-year-old troupers.
And next Sunday, the ensemble will take its blend of jazz and pop to Prospect Park for the summer Hot Prospects concert series.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  McCumber Takes Over Busch Classic Lead  Mark McCumber and Justin Leonard accomplished something yesterday that hadn't been done by anybody in the first two rounds of the Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic: they put some heat on Bob Lohr.
Lohr, who opened the PGA Tour event in Williamsburg, Va., with a 10-under-par 61 and followed that by setting a 36-hole scoring record, slipped to a 73 yesterday, capped by a double bogey on the 18th hole.
That knocked Lohr out of the lead and installed McCumber, the 1987 Busch winner, in the top spot heading into today's final round at Kingsmill Golf Club.
McCumber charged from seven shots off the pace with a six-under 65, leaving him at 12-under 201 -- one shot ahead of Lohr -- after three rounds.
Leonard, the 1994 N.C.A.A. champion from Texas who is appearing in his third event as a pro, had a 67 and was at 203. (AP)


'THE GREAT RUSSIA WILL LIVE AGAIN'
Zhirinovsky may be "primitive," as you state in your cover caption, but do you have to be primitive as well by showing him in the shower?
What will you do to top this?
Show Clinton cavorting in his briefs?
MELANIE CORONETZ New York, N.Y.


Fly Me to the Moon
Humankind likes to believe in progress -- it's a flattering notion.
And so we ask ourselves, if we can put a man on the moon, why can't we cure cancer, end poverty or put a stop to war?
As time goes on, our expectations diminish, and yet still we ask ourselves: If we can put a man on the moon, why can't we at least make a funny Flintstones movie?
Alas, the answer to all these questions is not a comforting one: We can't put a man on the moon.
Not anymore.
Twenty-five years ago this July 20, astronauts first landed on the lunar surface.
They picked up rocks, posed for famous pictures and went home; this was widely regarded as an important step in human evolution.
Over the next three years, astronauts returned to the moon five more times, picking up more rocks and posing for less famous pictures, to greater and greater public indifference.
Eventually, like any TV show with declining ratings, the moon missions were canceled and the nation moved on to further evolutionary steps, like learning how to spell General Tso.
Today, NASA doesn't even have rockets big enough to send men to the moon.
Nor does NASA have the technical capability to build such rockets.
This is the price we pay for never having elected Jerry Brown president.


Heavenly Color
"It is agreeable, I think, to be rescued from unreality," John Shearman, the formidable Harvard University art scholar, writes in THE SISTINE CHAPEL: A Glorious Restoration (Abrams, $75).
And there are many downright exhilarating rescues performed in this volume, produced with the Nippon Television Network, which underwrote the project to clean Michelangelo's frescoes in the Sistine Chapel and documented it on film.
The color photographs in the book, by Takashi Okamura, are captivating, especially a double foldout spread depicting the entire ceiling.
In fact, the title of the book is slightly misleading, since the book covers only the ceiling, having been prepared before work on "The Last Judgment" was completed this year.
The book contains essays by 10 leading experts on Michelangelo and the restoration.
They are not written for casual readers, but several will make the great frescoes, and all of Michelangelo's art, vastly richer for anyone with the determination to understand them -- especially Michael Hirst's treatise on the surviving drawings of bodies the artist made from life for the huge figures on the ceiling; Gianluigi Colalucci's beguiling and illuminating essay on how the frescoes were made; and Mr.
Shearman's warm and opinionated chapter on the purposes of the colors.
"The Sistine Chapel" is a book that can be read, in part or wholly, many times with increasing wonder.
Now that the ceiling appears much as it did to its creator, I want to leap up into it, looking and feeling and sniffing, to roll around in it.
I am glad to have the assurance of the angular Mr.
Shearman that Michelangelo invited such robust reactions.
What is obvious now, he says, is that this heaven of color was meant to give pleasure, "like that of a bouquet," and he adds that as the artist worked "the poet in him was released." That is one reality rescued from the grime.
D.
J.
R.
BRUCKNER


SUNDAY, July 10, 1994; Battle of Wounded Me
America continues to make progress in racial tolerance.
At Bear Butte State Park in South Dakota, Indians have been protesting the number of whites (often called "New Age practitioners") frequenting sites they hold sacred.
A park official, responding to such concerns, has said that restricting access to the disputed butte is not feasible.
"I wouldn't know a New Age person from an Indian."


Nel Eland and Charles Ellwein
Cornelia Ann Eland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Timothy B. B. Eland of New York, was married yesterday to Charles Erwin Ellwein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leon B. Ellwein of Chevy Chase, Md.
The Rev.
Jay H. Gordon performed the Episcopal ceremony at Grace Church in Millbrook, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ellwein, 23, is known as Nel.
She was until recently a financial analyst at CS First Boston, the New York investment bank.
Her husband, 26, was until recently an associate at Black Rock Financial Management in New York.
The couple, graduates of Brown University, are to enter the Stanford Graduate School of Business in the fall.


The Decor's Colorful, the Menu's Eclectic
IT is hard to imagine a more complete change in decor than that transforming the old Manero's into the new Restaurant 540 (the name and the restaurant's address on Riverside Avenue in Westport).
The building is caramel-corn-color stucco with dark red trim on the outside; inside, Restaurant 540 offers avocado green, salmon and vibrant blue walls that tilt inward like a cross between a ship and a funhouse at an amusement park.
But one soon realizes the artistry (the work of the fashion designer Alexander Julian) required to deal with such a high-ceiling cavernous space, which has now been broken artfully into more intimate sections, with banquettes along one wall and a separate dining space on one side.
Slightly separated from the main dining area is an equally colorful bar area with tables where a jazz trio plays every Sunday evening.


Why Not Promote Broker Services?
To the Editor:
"Picking the Best Broker," the Your Home column on June 12, warns sellers that "brokers have become highly skilled at promoting their services."


Habitats/Bedminster, N.J.; Home Plus Menagerie
STANDING at the end of the long gravel driveway, with the horse barns to one side, the pony shed to another, the children's playhouse off at an angle and the rambling 18th-century farmhouse straight ahead, Sarah Clark, a horsewoman, is in her element.
"It's my favorite part," said the trail rider and mother of three.
"All the barns around a courtyard -- we're going to do the driveway over with cobblestone pavers. I love the idea of the horses' hooves clicking over them."


Profile; She Always Said Feminism and Economics Can Mix
AS virtually any feminist academic knows, one occupational hazard of doing scholarly research on women is the possibility of failing to be taken seriously.
Heidi Hartmann understands this and mostly chooses to ignore it.
But she recalls finding out that her research organization was excluded from a competition for grant money on a subject it was well qualified to pursue.
"You go along, you're getting increased recognition and more respect," she said.
"And suddenly, you realize you're just a girl."
Ms.
Hartmann, a Yale-trained economist who heads the Institute for Women's Policy Research in Washington, admits that she shed some tears -- "for days, literally" -- over that episode.
She has shed more tears lately, but not over insults from dismal scientists in Washington research circles.
Last month the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation in Chicago awarded her the fellowship known far and wide as the "genius grant," provoking an outpouring of good wishes that both surprised and somewhat overwhelmed her.


Bristol, R.I.
To the Editor: I thoroughly enjoyed your article on Bristol, R.I. ("That Pleasant Blur Is Bristol," May 8), the kind of hidden treasure one occasionally finds.
Last fall it was my good fortune to help with the start-up of the law library at the new law school at Roger Williams University there.
I had been to Newport, and driven through Providence, but had not crossed the Mount Hope Bridge, or even heard of Bristol.
What a wonderful discovery.
The views from the campus, the bridge and other lookout points are magnificent.
I also had the very good fortune to stay at William's Grant Inn.


Whimsical and Wise, Lyrics by Yip Harburg
I could while away the hours
Conferrin' with the flowers


Happy Anniversary, Hudson River Museum
The Hudson River, which starts as a stream at Lake Tear of the Clouds in the Adirondack Mountains and empties into the New York Bay 315 miles away, is being celebrated in a 75th-anniversary exhibition at the Hudson River Museum of Westchester in Yonkers, to Jan. 22.
"The River That Flows Both Ways: Hudson Stories," which opened last month, examines the river from historical, cultural, economic and environmental perspectives.
Among the exhibition's highlights are paintings by artists of the 19th-century Hudson River School, like Frederick Church, Asher B. Durand and Francis Silva.


World Cup Catwalk
Uninhibited soccer fans converging on the Port Authority bus terminal in Manhattan for a ride to Giants Stadium for the 1994 World Cup matches are turning the heads of jaded New Yorkers.
Fans dressed in full regalia and in silly hats are creating a spectacle, indeed, with most of them wearing their national colors in the form of headdresses, painted faces or flags that are draped as capes.


Tastes of Brooklyn, Fulton to Flatbush
AKWAABA ++ (718) 941-5599; 614 Flatbush Avenue at Cluster Court, Flatbush; (c) no credit cards
Bright, friendly and family-run, Akwaaba calls itself the African restaurant in Brooklyn and caters to a mixed crowd that includes Ghanaians and Nigerians.
The food centers on rice or vegetables.
Although the food is traditionally eaten with the fingers, table settings at Akwaaba offer the full range of silverware.
Rich soups, rice balls and various mashed tubers, roots and grains are served with towels and silver bowls for washing hands.
African specialties include omo tuo, a salami-size cylinder of moist compressed rice that is torn and dipped into a fragrant peanut soup or stew, slightly peppery and rich with palm oil.
The soup comes with beef, chicken or fish (salt cod or fried mackerel).
Egushie is a pungent mix of ground sunflower seeds and spinach that also goes well with fish.
Another winner is watche, a peppery combination of rice and black-eyed peas served with a lightly fried whole porgy. ($25 and Under: 4/16/93)


Conventions Are Ready, Primaries To Follow
SEVEN men and women have been campaigning to succeed Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. for months now, but except for occasional bursts of television advertising introducing their unfamiliar names to Connecticut, the candidates have focused on convention delegates rather than the public.
That ends in the next two weeks, as Democrats and Republicans meet in Hartford to choose their candidates for governor, and Mr.
Weicker's A Connecticut Party convenes in Wallingford for a picnic at which Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice S. Groark will be nominated by acclamation.


A Debate Over Executive Stock Options
To the Editor:
While many big companies may abuse options, that is a failure of the directors of those companies to act in a proper manner, not in the options themselves.


Four New Yorkers, Four Journeys of Discovery: RALPH HOLLOWAY; Looking for Continuity, Finding Rollo
Dr.
Ralph Holloway, a professor of anthropology at Columbia University, had a simple, scientific goal in mind when he began tracing his family.
"I was interested in the genetic continuity and longevity," he explained, his analytic blue eyes comparing for a moment the plaster chimpanzee brain and the cast skull of Australopithecus, the "missing link," on his desk.
Dr.
Holloway got the bad news first, both scientific and personal.
"It turned out you could only go back a couple of generations to get a cause of death that's anywhere near scientific," he said.
"I did find out that there's an appalling lack of longevity on my father's side. I'm 59, and I've outlived everyone on my father's side, from my father to my great-great-grandfather."


A Timely Pinch Brings On the Bloom
THERE are sure to be some giggles but it is time to talk about pinching.
Pinching plants, that is.
This age-old practice, which is a form of pruning, is usually learned early on.
It merely describes what is done to plants to force them to develop side shoots.
Many a new gardener has been disappointed by the telephone-pole look of asters, chrysanthemums, ageratums, zinnias and many other flowers.
Only one or two blooms show at the top of the gangly plants, not exactly what one was expecting given the pictures in the catalogues.
The cure is simple: pinching.
It should be applied early in the season.


Mutual Funds; A Core Debate: Rankings vs. Ratings
AMONG the myriad pieces of information an investor can sort through to pick a mutual fund, are "ratings" or "rankings" more useful?
Rankings, of course, says A. Michael Lipper, who heads his own mutual fund research company where funds are ranked by performance.
In a recent study sent to fund industry executives, he sharply criticizes ratings, epitomized by the system used by his big rival, Morningstar Inc., the research company based in Chicago.


Karla J. Grazier, Howard Berlin Jr.
Karla J. Grazier, the president of ERC, a business consulting company in Bridgewater, N.J., was married yesterday to Howard R. Berlin Jr., a mortgage broker at Mortgage Access Inc., a brokerage firm in Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
William Davis, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Purnell School in Pottersville, N.J.


Tobago Villas
To the Editor: We read the letter to the editor from William Peters (May 1), telling of the problems he had at a villa rented through the Grunys' Tobago Villa Agency.
We rented the sister villa in February.
Our experience was different from the Peters's.
We found the unit to be charming, nicely decorated and very clean.
The view was also spectacular.


Mollen Panel Says Buck Stops With Top Officers
Over most of the decade that was the focus of a special commission's two-year investigation into police corruption, three men presided over the New York City Police Department.
First there was Benjamin Ward, a former patrolman who had become a lawyer and had headed the city and state prison systems before being appointed by Mayor Edward I. Koch in 1984.
Then, after an interim tour of four months by Richard J. Condon, came Lee P. Brown, who had received a Ph.D. in criminology and run the Police Departments in Houston and Atlanta before becoming Mayor David N. Dinkins's Police Commissioner.


Susan Molinari and Bill Paxon
SUSAN MOLINARI, the Republican Representative from Staten Island, is not the type of politician who always has a limousine waiting at the curb.
Known for being down-to-earth, Ms.
Molinari, 36, drives herself around in a wood-paneled Jeep Grand Wagoneer, carries a backpack instead of a briefcase and owns far more jogging shorts than tailored suits.
While she can discuss women's rights and Staten Island's environmental problems with the toughest policy makers, she is not above talking about haircuts or her favorite pasta.


Georgiana Mundy, Alfred Evans Jr.
Georgiana Coyle Mundy, the finance director for United States Representative Robert G. Toricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, was married yesterday to Alfred Lee Evans Jr., an executive vice president of LCF &amp; L, an advertising agency in New York.
The Rev.
Emil Augustine performed the Episcopal ceremony at Panther Valley Ecumenical Church in Allamuchy, N.J.
Mrs.
Evans graduated from Goucher College.
She is a daughter of Mary C. Coyle of Centreville, Md., and the late Dan D. Coyle.
The bride's father was a vice president of Princeton University.


Benchley's Martini
To the Editor:
Your June 28 article on the wits of the Algonquin Round Table states: "It has never been clear whether Benchley or Woollcott, if anyone, said, "I've got to get out of these wet clothes and into a dry martini.' "


Arithmetic of the Avenues


The Metal Became A Medal Too
To the Editor:
In her article "When a Prussian King Played Decorator"  [ June 19 ] , Rita Reif wrote in detail of the decorative and practical uses that King Friedrich Wilhelm III made of iron.
What she did not mention is the iron for which most Germans remember Wilhelm: the Iron Cross.


After Uproar, State Switches Operator of Proposed Home
After extraordinary pressure from neighborhood groups, state officials have decided to replace a nonprofit group, Volunteers of America-Greater New York, as the primary operator of a proposed residence for the mentally ill on Broadway near 100th Street.
The facility was to have been the group's first venture into residences for the mentally ill.
The organization is one of the largest operators of social-service programs in the city, running centers for the homeless and recovering drug abusers at 50 sites.


Laura Lagomarsino, E. P. DeForest 3d
Laura Ida Lagomarsino, a lawyer at Morgan Stanley in New York, is to be married today to Edmond Peter DeForest 3d, a vice president of Chemical Bank, also in New York.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard is to perform the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
DeForest, 33, graduated cum laude from Bryn Mawr College and received a law degree from the University of Michigan.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Lagomarsino 3d of Cresskill, N.J.


For Yubbies (Young Urban Bourgeois Bohemians)
The corporate culture at Urban Outfitters is really a corporate counterculture.
"We're not set up like some huge pyramid," said Richard A. Hayne, 47, the president of the company, a Philadelphia-based apparel and home furnishings chain that seeks customers among aggressively hip 18- to 30-year-olds.
"We've inverted the pyramid," said Glen T. Senk, 38, the president of Urban Outfitters' fledgling chain of Anthropologie stores, which are aimed at over-30 suburban shoppers.
"Dick's set things up so he's the least important person in the company."


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
A PLACE FOR CRYING
An admonition in Spanish, "En la barberia no se llora," or "No crying in the barber shop," is the title of an unusual sociological art exhibition opening Saturday in a storefront at 481 Park Street in the Frog Hollow district of Hartford.
Pepon Osorio, the artist, has exhibited at the Whitney Museum in Manhattan and the Bronx Museum, among others, and he has been featured in Art Forum and Art in America magazine articles.


Man Admits Abandoning Child in Subway
A Newark man was arrested yesterday after admitting that he had abandoned his 2-year-old daughter at a Bronx subway station on Tuesday because he was too high on crack to take care of her, the transit police said.
The man, David J. Davis, 32, was charged with abandonment and endangering the welfare of a child, said Lieut.
Thomas Russo, a transit police spokesman.


Who Will Manage Any Evacuations From Fire Island?
IF a major hurricane hits the South Shore, Suffolk County officials say, they are prepared with a detailed emergency plan.
But that plan, which has a list of scores of officials, has organizations serving Fire Island fighting to control a situation that they say they have managed successfully for years.


Germana Fabbri, Mason Day
Maria Germana Doreen Fabbri, the daughter of Kathleen Fabbri of Darien, Conn., and the late Alessandro Fabbri, was married yesterday to Henry Mason Day, a son of Conway Day of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Lee Garnett Day Jr.
The Rev.
William Donovan performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in Darien.
The bride, 31, is known as Germana.
She is a national account marketing manager for Red Sail Merchandising, an advertising and sales-promotion company in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her mother is a sales representative at Scott Associates, a real estate company in Darien.
Her father was the president of the Fabbri Steel Company in New York.


Political Notes; Road From Stooge to Running Mate
It was only six weeks ago that Herbert London was running for the Republican gubernatorial nomination, swearing that he would never, ever, cross my heart, not in a hundred years, accept another spot on a ticket headed by State Senator George E. Pataki.
That vow, of course, lasted only as long as it took delegates at the Republican State Convention to deny Mr.
London a spot on the gubernatorial ballot.
Two days later, he accepted a position as Mr.
Pataki's running mate for State Comptroller.
Following is a sampler of quotations, some of them collected by aides to State Comptroller H. Carl McCall, that perhaps track the evolution of Mr.
London's thinking.


Ribbon-Cutting for New Affordable Housing in Harlem


Long Island Q&amp;A: Howard Silverman; A Financial Business Casts a Vote of Confidence for the Island
THE career of Howard Silverman, chairman of Gruntal &amp; Company, the Wall Street brokerage house, has had a major theme -- Long Island.
Mr.
Silverman has not only made Long Island his home, but also the site of three branch offices that are the fastest-growing for Gruntal.
His latest endeavor is the Gruntal Financial Center in Hewlett, which is to be completed this year.
The company signed a 15-year lease on a two-story 13,500-square-foot building, double the size of its current office in Hewlett.
The new office will have room for a staff of 75.
Gruntal has also expanded its branches in Great Neck and Syosset.


Italian Leader's Brother to Stand Trial on Corruption Charges
At what should have been a moment of accolades and pride for him as host of the Group of Seven summit meeting, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy learned today that a judge had ordered his brother to stand trial on corruption charges relating to the family's property business.
For Mr.
Berlusconi, a business magnate who entered politics only in January, the development was an embarrassment just when he seemed poised to crown a lightning rise to power at home with all the imagery of international statesmanship.


IN SHORT: FICTION
COMIC NOVEL  SHE FLEW THE COOP  A Novel Concerning Life, Death, Sex, and Recipes in Limoges, Louisiana.
By Michael Lee West.
HarperCollins, $22.


The Bee Team
LIKE a scene out of a late-night horror film, the wriggling swarms of bees appear around the city like clockwork every year in football-size globs.
They are a hideous sight -- tens of thousands of bees stuck to trees, light poles, traffic signals and, to the dismay of unsuspecting residents, parked cars.


The World; A Spin Doctor Goes Abroad
DAVID R. GERGEN, who helped make Ronald Reagan's image what it was and then was recruited to do the same for Bill Clinton, has found it hard to shake his own public image, as the master of spin.
Even under his new title of Special Adviser to the President and the Secretary of State, his debut was most remarked upon here last week for the intensity of the Administration's efforts to manipulate public perception.
To be sure, Mr.
Gergen stayed behind the scenes during the President's European trip.
But no one traveling with them could help but notice how suddenly accessible often-remote Administration officials had become.
In briefing rooms, hotel lobbies, even on the charter aircraft carrying the White House press, they descended so relentlessly that whispering began about just what was going on.
When even the State Department's director of policy planning, James Steinberg, showed up on the press plane and volunteered a mid-air pre-briefing on the summit meeting for the seven biggest industrialized democracies, the explanation that jumped to everyone's lips was that a lot was being done to distract attention from Haiti, and that it must be Mr.
Gergen's doing.


Most Russians Know Violence and Starvation
To the Editor:
Re "On the Right Track With Russia" (editorial, June 27): President Clinton doesn't have a "Russia policy" that helps anyone or anything except maybe his image.
I returned from my seventh trip to Russia a few days ago, and these are the facts:


Karen Herskovitz, William Ackman
Karen Ann Herskovitz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Herskovitz of New York, is to be married today to William Albert Ackman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence D. Ackman of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Rabbi David Posner is to officiate at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Herskovitz, 28, is a landscape architect at the Central Park Conservancy in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in landscape architecture from Harvard University.
Her father retired as the president of Imperial Merchandise, an import-export company in New York.
Her mother, Marilyn Herskovitz, is the executive vice president of the Ambrose-Mar Elia Company, a real estate brokerage in New York.


Inn Stays
To the Editor: Just a note to commend you on a fair and evenhanded piece on inns by Janet Piorko.
As innkeepers, we would like to comment on two issues raised in the article.
The room: Often we have requests for queen- and king-sized beds.
One room has twin beds, the three others full-sized.
After explaining that we're an 1852 country residence and could put kings and queens in the rooms with precious little else, people accept or don't, the basic concept of our arrangements.


World Markets; It's a Case of U.S.-China Syndrome
FROM an all time high on Jan. 4, the Hong Kong stock market has skidded downhill like an errant grocery cart, skittling across pavement, jolting over rocks and careering around blind corners.
Famously susceptible to the political and economic health of China looming just across the border -- a cough from Deng Xiaoping, China's senior eminence, can bring on pneumonia here -- the Hong Kong market is now troubled by last year's delirious property boom and this year's anxiety about the interest rate intentions of Alan Greenspan and the Federal Reserve.


Data Bank/July 10, 1994
Data Bank/July 10, 1994
Employment
June
May
April
In thousands
122,400
122,900
122,300
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
7,800 (6.0)
7,900 (6.0)
8,400 (6.4)
Weekly Jobless Claims
July 1
June 24
June 17
In thousands
332
353
353
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,914
1,906
1,917
Cash Wheat Price
July 8
July 1
June 24
No. 1 K.C., per bushel
$3.44
$3.44
$3.46
3-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.35
4.18
4.14
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.81
4.64
4.58
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.69
7.60
7.52


Sudden Death And Kick-ins
Three European soccer leagues will experiment with kick-ins instead of throw-ins next season, FIFA general secretary Sepp Blatter said today.
Blatter also said sudden-death goals would be introduced at the next World Cup final with the first team scoring in extra time taking victory.


Lawmakers Oppose an Invasion of Haiti Now
As the Clinton Administration talks more about using force to oust Haiti's military dictatorship, Congressional leaders in both parties say most lawmakers oppose invading Haiti at this time.
"If you asked Congress to vote today on whether to intervene in Haiti, the answer would be, 'No, we would not,' " said Representative Lee H. Hamilton, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.





A Job Fit for a Goddess
WOMEN'S WORK The First 20,000 Years.
Women, Cloth, and Society in Early Times.
By Elizabeth Wayland Barber.
Illustrated. 334 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $23.


More Suggestions on Using Berries as the Basis for Desserts
BERRIES are one of the things that set summer apart from other seasons.
Bushes and vines in the countryside are heavy with blueberries, raspberries and blackberries, while in produce markets and supermarkets baskets of berries are banked on display.
The season begins with strawberries, which, by mid-July, have about finished their season in this area.
Decent ones from California may still be available, but with all the other berries on the market, they are not much missed.


July 3-9; Across America, a Week When Extreme Weather Was the Norm
Photo: Record rainfall and vicious floods in Georgia.
A heat wave in New York.
Lethal wildfires in the dry Rockies.
One way or another, last week's extreme weather events and their consequences were linked in ways climatologists can describe but not fully understand.
Georgia's pain came from the remnants of tropical storm Alberto, a near-hurricane of relatively little fury but much moisture that dawdled inland from the Gulf of Mexico, moving so slowly that it could drop 21.1 inches of rain on Americus in 24 hours, an state record.


Anna Park and Kenneth Song
Anna Park, a daughter of Mrs.
Soon Duk Park of Bethesda, Md., and the late Rev.
Won Bong Park, was married yesterday to Kenneth Song, the son of Dr.
In Sook Song and Chul Sup Song of Alpine, N.J.
The Rev.
Dong Hwan Moon officiated at the Presbyterian Church at Tenafly (N.J.).
The bride, 28, is the director of membership services at the Advisory Board Company, a Washington-based business that provides research for health-care and financial institutions.
She graduated from Columbia University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.


Breast Self-Exam Can Save Lives
To the Editor:
As a one-year survivor of breast cancer surgery, I read with great interest "A Surgeon's War on Breast Cancer," your June 29 article about Dr.
Susan Love.
While I admire and respect Dr.
Love for all her great work in breast cancer, I vehemently disagree with her views on breast self-examination.


Ann Stoneburner, David Finkelson
Ann Bellamy Stoneburner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis T. Stoneburner of Richmond, was married on July 2 to David Evan Finkelson, the son of Allen Finkelson of New York and Ellen Finkelson of Boca Raton, Fla.
Thomas Ogburn Bondurant Jr., a substitute judge of the Henrico County General District Court in Richmond, officiated at Evelynton Plantation in Charles City, Va.
Mrs.
Finkelson, 23, is studying for a master's degree in literature at the University of Utah.
She and the bridegroom graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a partner at Russell, Cantor, Arkema &amp; Edmonds, a law firm in Richmond.


With Words and Music, Deviltry in Church
SCREWTAPE, a senior devil, instructs his nephew Wormwood,a junior demon, in the art of winning over a young man's soul - not by luring him into a sudden fall into mortal sin but by means of the routine temptations of daily life.
These classes indeviltry, in the form of readings from C.S. lewis's "The Screwtape Letters," will be heard Friday at the Church of the Advent Hope.
They will be accompanied by the music of Benjamin Britten, John Ireland and Frank Bridge, as performed by Michael Stutzman and the piano.


'THE GREAT RUSSIA WILL LIVE AGAIN'
Featuring Zhirinovsky in the shower on your cover caused all kinds of speculation in my family.
My daughter (age 27) thought it was vulgar.
My wife thought the picture represented his primitiveness.
I kind of agreed with her, but I felt it also represented the cleansing process he thinks Russia needs.
ARNOLD SANDER Manhasset, L.I.


Manager's Profile
Kevin L. Wenck
Fund: G.T.
Global America Growth A, $160 million in assets; 4.75% sales load.
Manager since 1991. (Sponsor: G.T. Global Financial Services, San Francisco.)


Hertz and Budget Offer Credit for Air Mileage
The Hertz Corporation has become a partner in Delta Airlines' frequent flyer program, while Budget Rent a Car has joined forces with Lufthansa.
Members of Delta Airlines' frequent flyer program can now earn 1,000 miles by renting a car from Hertz within a 24-hour period before or after a flight on Delta, Delta Connection or other airlines affiliated with the Delta program.
Only those renting cars at participating Hertz sites in the United States, Canada, Mexico and the Caribbean are eligible for the mileage award.


MANHATTAN MINUTE
AND THE WINNER IS. . .: Carl Weisbrod lands downtown and will try to revive the Wall Street area.
The head of the city's Economic Development Corporation under Mayor Dinkins, he is picked to run the Lower Manhattan Business Improvement District. . . .
HARD TIMES: Neoclassical 409 Edgecombe Avenue was once home to Thurgood Marshall and one of Harlem's architectural highlights.
Now it is in a state of disrepair.
One more problem: Workers repairing the roof walk off the job after saying they had discovered asbestos. . . .
A PLACE TO RUN: Community Board 5's parks committee makes dog owners happy and recommends a dog run for Madison Square Park. . . .
THE VIEW FROM THE M6 Bus: Tuesday night.
Broadway and 34th.
A lamppost.
A circular sign announces: "New Yorkers use enough water daily to fill jugs stretching from here to Australia." . . .
Broadway and 28th.
A bus stop.
MCI's billboard is entirely in Korean (but Little Korea is on 32d Street). . . .
Union Square Park.
The Society of Creative Anachronism, a medieval re-creationist group, presides.
A dozen sweating men in armor clash swords, rapiers, shields and maces.
Passers-by stop, amazed.
The society calls it "freaking the mundanes." The Rollerbladers shrug and make way.


Everything's Relative
FAMILY TERRORISTS A Novella and Seven Stories.
By Antonya Nelson. 269 pp.
New York:  Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


How a Shubert Fund Produces and Directs
Along 44th Street west of the throb of Broadway, marquees trumpet the latest theatrical offerings and the din of voices animates the street.
In the midst of this strip of theaters, out of cramped offices above Sardi's restaurant, the Shubert Foundation discharges its philanthropic glow, handing out grants: $100,000 to the Actors Theater of Louisville, $5,000 to the Indiana Repertory Theater and on and on, perpetuating its standing, in volume of grants and quantity of unrestricted money, as the country's largest private financial supporter of nonprofit theater.
But the Shubert Foundation has long been more than it appears, although keeps its operations purposely in the shadows.
The foundation is not just an altruistic extension of the Shubert Organization, the country's most powerful owner and operator of legitimate theaters, home of hits ranging from "Oklahoma!" to "A Chorus Line" to "Cats." Thanks to a little-known and highly unusual tax arrangement, the foundation actually owns the Shubert Organization and dictates who runs it.


A Culture Clash On Seventh Street
In the heart of the raucous and rowdy East Village, St.
Stanislaus Bishop and Martyr Church has hung onto its aging Polish congregation even as teen-agers with nipple rings, lime green hair, tattoos and combat boots have swarmed over the neighborhood.
But the window display at a shop across Seventh Street called Body Worship -- two mannequins striking sexually revealing master/slave poses prepared to engage in explicit sadomasochistic activities -- was the last straw.
"Our parishioners are outraged," said Rev.
Lucius Tyrasinski.
"They ask, how can the city allow this scandal in front of a church?" To add insult to injury, the window sits directly across from the golden bust of Pope John Paul II that marks the church's John Paul II Friendship Center.


Baby at a Crawl, Bombs Away II And Evil Lurking
The Shadow  Alec Baldwin, John Lone Directed by Russell Mulcahy PG-13 112 minutes


The Spy Who Loved Her


Barber: No Need Of Any Label
To the Editor:
In his article "Composers' Closets Open for All to See"  [ June 19 ] , K. Robert Schwarz states that my "mammoth study" of Samuel Barber "addressed the composer's alcoholism and depression but not his sexuality." I find the juxtaposition odd, since homosexuality, unlike alcoholism and depression, is not an illness.
Mr.
Schwarz's further comment that the word homosexual does not appear in my book, while true, is misleading.
In referring to Barber's romantic attachments to men, I treat his homosexuality as a given, a matter needing no label.
Would one be obliged, for example, to identify Wagner's relationship to Cosima or Liszt's to Marie D'Agoult as heterosexual?


Tastes of Brooklyn, Fulton to Flatbush
AKWAABA ++ (718) 941-5599; 614 Flatbush Avenue at Cluster Court, Flatbush; (c) no credit cards
Bright, friendly and family-run, Akwaaba calls itself the African restaurant in Brooklyn and caters to a mixed crowd that includes Ghanaians and Nigerians.
The food centers on rice or vegetables.
Although the food is traditionally eaten with the fingers, table settings at Akwaaba offer the full range of silverware.
Rich soups, rice balls and various mashed tubers, roots and grains are served with towels and silver bowls for washing hands.
African specialties include omo tuo, a salami-size cylinder of moist compressed rice that is torn and dipped into a fragrant peanut soup or stew, slightly peppery and rich with palm oil.
The soup comes with beef, chicken or fish (salt cod or fried mackerel).
Egushie is a pungent mix of ground sunflower seeds and spinach that also goes well with fish.
Another winner is watche, a peppery combination of rice and black-eyed peas served with a lightly fried whole porgy. ($25 and Under: 4/16/93)


A Timely Pinch Brings On the Bloom
THERE are sure to be some giggles but it is time to talk about pinching.
Pinching plants, that is.
This age-old practice, which is a form of pruning, is usually learned early on.
It merely describes what is done to plants to force them to develop side shoots.
Many a new gardener has been disappointed by the telephone-pole look of asters, chrysanthemums, ageratums, zinnias and many other flowers.
Only one or two blooms show at the top of the gangly plants, not exactly what one was expecting given the pictures in the catalogues.
The cure is simple: pinching.
It should be applied early in the season.


The First Lady's New Clothes
A few years ago, an editor told me that the women on his staff felt I had been sexist to write that the Lithuanian Prime Minister had worn a pink suit during her Washington visit.
I argued that it would not advance the cause of women to cut out all information about appearance and cede the visual ground to television.
We simply needed to make sure it was put in the context of accomplishments and to pay equal attention to the style of male officials.
I had, after all, written about Dan Quayle's frayed collar, James Baker's cowboy boots, George Bush's Easter-bunny tie and Brent Scowcroft's excruciatingly short plaid golf pants.


Cold Snap
The appetite of summer doth protest too much.
"Just something light," goes the refrain from May to September, "something easy, something soothing, something cool." So unvaried and unceasing are these demands that the cook begins to suspect they're a cover-up for more complicated yearnings.
And, of course, they are.


SUNDAY, July 10, 1994; Against Reasons
The ad from R. J. Reynolds reads: "Today It's Cigarettes. Tomorrow?" Higher cigarette taxes are a step toward a ban, it argues, and next the Government may turn to bans on hamburgers or some movies.
"And regardless of their reasons," the ad warns, antismoking forces are mounting a threat to freedom.
But just what are those ignorable reasons?
Cancer?
Heart disease?
Emphysema?
They pose a pretty fair threat themselves.


Orioles Now Half a Game Behind Yanks
Orioles 8, Athletics 7
Jeffrey Hammonds homered leading off the ninth inning last night as the Baltimore Orioles rallied from a five-run deficit to beat the Oakland Athletics, 8-7.


The Executive Computer; Trouble With the Software? Ask Other Software
I HAVE a software problem, a printer driver that won't drive, a spreadsheet that won't chart?
It used to be that you'd call a "help desk" on the phone, and a knowledgeable -- and, ideally, sympathetic -- human being would be there to talk you through the crisis.
Increasingly, now, there's a software program to help you instead.
Actually there are about 150 or so of these programs, nearly all from small companies looking to jump on information technology's next big growth vehicle.
Carter J. Lusher, an analyst with the Gartner Group in Stamford, Conn., estimates that the market for "help-desk" software tools will grow from $160 million this year to more than $500 million in 1997.
With the market so fragmented, picking likely survivors among the vendors is difficult, but Mr.
Lusher believes technically aggressive companies will adopt these programs rapidly anyway, because it is relatively easy to change from one to another.


Political Correctness Infects the Pentagon
In looking for someone to head the United States' complex and dangerous military operations in the Pacific (including the Korean Peninsula), one could hardly have found an officer more qualified than Adm.
Stanley R. Arthur -- who until recently was indeed the nominee for the job.
And in seeking an example of how far Pentagon leadership has fallen, and how the issue of sexual harassment has descended into ugly McCarthyism, one could hardly find a more telling case than Admiral Arthur's sudden dispatch to early retirement.
Admiral Arthur is a hero of two wars -- a pilot who earned an extraordinary 11 Distinguished Flying Crosses while flying more than 500 combat missions in Vietnam, then commanded the allied naval armada in the Persian Gulf.
His Pentagon experience is exemplary, too, including high-level budget planning, nearly three years as chief of the Navy's worldwide logistics system and two years as Vice Chief of Naval Operations.
After Admiral Arthur was nominated for the Pacific command, Senator David Durenberger of Minnesota indicated that he would raise questions about the treatment of a constituent, a female officer who claimed the Navy treated her unfairly when she failed flight training after accusing an instructor of sexual harassment.
Admiral Arthur's only role in the case was that of final reviewing officer.
He approved earlier findings that although the woman, Lieut. (j.g.) Rebecca Hansen, had been harassed (the Navy had already disciplined an instructor), she failed to quality as a pilot because of a poor flight record, both before and after the incident.
The inspectors general of the Navy and the Defense Department agreed with this finding.
Navy Secretary John H. Dalton approved a recommendation that the Navy prepare to discharge her.
Key senators told the Pentagon that Admiral Arthur would be approved for his new command but that because of Mr.
Durenberger's "hold" his confirmation might be delayed until fall.
Then on June 24, the Navy said in a terse statement that Admiral Arthur "agrees with Chief of Naval Operations Adm. Mike Boorda" that his nomination should be withdrawn because an "anticipated delay in Senate confirmation" would not permit "a prompt relief" for Adm.
Charles R. Larson, the current commander in the Pacific, who is scheduled to become Superintendent of the Naval Academy.
Admiral Arthur is to be retired as soon as his job is filled.
The Navy's explanation was disingenuous at best.
Admiral Larson's new assignment is not time-sensitive; in fact, it also awaits Senate action.
It has been widely reported that Admiral Boorda is less concerned about a delay in Admiral Arthur's confirmation than about becoming ensnared in another sexual harassment scandal.
Even Senator Durenberger's key staff assistant said he was "flabbergasted" by the decision to end Admiral Arthur's 37-year career in such a manner.
More important, this episode raises serious questions about Admiral Boorda's fitness to be Chief of Naval Operations and demonstrates the Clinton Administration's lack of regard for military leaders.
Admiral Boorda has gained a reputation for political expediency.
In 1992, when he was Chief of Personnel, he summarily relieved one of the Navy's brightest young admirals, Jack Snyder, after the initial revelations about the Tailhook scandal.
Admiral Snyder, who had gone well beyond what was required in his efforts to assist the key female witness and urge an investigation, was not even allowed to defend his actions.
This abandonment of a deserving officer in the face of political attack did not hurt Admiral Boorda's chances for advancement -- which may well have encouraged his shoddy treatment of Admiral Arthur.
After quashing Admiral Arthur's career, Admiral Boorda disregarded Secretary Dalton's recommendation to discharge Lieutenant Hansen and went to Great Lakes, Ill., to meet with her.
She presented him with 10 demands, including that the Navy rewrite her fitness reports using words of her choosing, that they send her to law school at the Navy's expense and then assign her to work as a lawyer handling women's issues, and that the Secretary officially apologize to her.
According to The New York Times, Admiral Boorda responded by offering her a job on his personal staff. (She did not accept it.)
Under any standard of leadership, Admiral Boorda's conduct is seriously deficient on several grounds: disloyalty to deserving subordinates, faulty judgment and usurping the authority of the Secretary of the Navy.
Which leads us to the Clinton Administration's handling of this event.
Once his nomination went forward, Admiral Arthur was the President's candidate, and it was not within Admiral Boorda's jurisdiction to withdraw.
In fact, since the Pacific command is "purple" -- that is, commanding military units from all the services -- Admiral Arthur was technically never Admiral Boorda's candidate from the beginning.
And yet after the withdrawal we heard no word from either the Secretary of the Navy or the President, and Defense Secretary William J. Perry merely said he had decided not to intervene.
On July 1 the Administration announced that Vice Adm.
Richard Macke, a capable but far less experienced officer who had been slated to replace Admiral Arthur as Vice Chief of Naval Operations, would be nominated instead to the Pacific command.
Thus a three-star officer is to be placed in the Navy's most senior and prestigious four-star billet, partly because his paperwork was already in the White House.
The casual way in which the Administration has dealt with command replacement for a theater where war could be imminent indicates either naivete or arrogance when it comes to the importance of strong military leadership.
And it is a grim omen for the future of the U.S. military when competent warriors are sent home by political admirals.


Masquerading as a B-26, But Not a Marauder
To the Editor:
"50 Years After D-Day, an Aircraft Industry Remade" (June 5) is wrong about the Glenn L. Martin Company's B-26 Marauder.
It was not active into the 1950's.
When World War II ended in 1945, we did not bring the Marauders home; they remained in Europe and were destroyed.
It is easy to make this mistake.
About the time of the Korean War, the Air Force redesignated the Douglas A-26 and called it the B-26.
It was this airplane that was active into the 1950's.
Those of us who flew the Marauder know that there was only one B-26 -- a truly splendid machine.
GERALD F. KERCHER  Quaker Hill, Conn., June 21  The writer, a retired Air Force pilot, served in the Mediterranean theater in World War II.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Producer prices, June, percent change
-0.1
0.3
Consumer credit, May, change, billions
$8.9
$7.2
Wednesday
Consumer prices, June, percent change
0.2
0.3
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
332
340
Retail sales, June, percent change
-0.2
0.5
Friday
Industrial production, June, percent change
0.25
0.4
Business inventories, May, percent change
0.2
0.4
This Week's Developments
Tuesday
Atlanta Fed survey of business conditions
Thursday
U.S.-Japanese talks on cars and car parts
Friday
One-year Treasury bill auction announcement


Rick Hendrick's Days of Thunder
THE life of Joseph R. Hendrick 3d sounds like a hard-driving country song set to the rhythm of a souped-up car, with lyrics that celebrate life in the fast lane.
He has owned a race car team with Paul Newman, hung out with Tom Cruise and helped found basketball's Charlotte Hornets.
In the movie "Days of Thunder," the car dealer and race car owner portrayed by Randy Quaid was modeled on Mr.
Hendrick.


Beethoven Fest Plus A Trio's Premiere
TWO popular summer festivals are returning this week, "Beethoven Bravo!" resuming its Tuesday evening series, in a new location, and Summer Music returning to Harkness Memorial State Park.
Beethoven Bravo! is the summer cycle of Chamber Music Plus, which begins its 15th season by moving its performances to the Aetna Theater at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford.
The directors, Harry Clark and Sanda Schuldmann, said the three weekly 8 P.M. recitals will be an exploration of the works of Beethoven, his contemporaries, composers who influenced him, and those he influenced during his lifetime.
The series will also be the occasion of the American premiere of an 1807 trio by Louis Spohr for harp, violin and cello, a piece discovered in Europe last summer by the guest harpist, Susan Jolles.


Traveling Light


A Lapsed Reputation Is Restored
HE WAS KNOWN AS THE PRINCE OF DREAMS.
No one in the historic 1913 Armory Show was better represented or sold more works out of it.
So why, today, is the French Symbolist master Odilon Redon perhaps the least known of the major European artists from the turn of the century?
His work, much of it delicate drawings, pastels and watercolors, is intensely personal and strange, and therefore not easy to grasp.
He was a shy, modest man, without the biographical drama of a van Gogh or a Gauguin.
He identified himself as an outsider, a misfit, and his art depicts lonely figures in empty spaces, and other figures with eyes shut, lost in thought.
While his Impressionist contemporaries were making everyday life the subject of art, Redon was creating his own world.
Their works were sunlit.
For years he stuck to charcoal, casting his images in an eerie moonlight.


Sharon O'Connor, James D. Yellen
Sharon Catherine O'Connor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. O'Connor of Brookfield, Conn., was married yesterday to James Donald Yellen, a son of Lola Yellen of Fishkill, N.Y., and the late Donald J. Yellen.
The Rev.
Joan O'Gorman, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the West Mountain Inn in Arlington, Vt.
Ms.
O'Connor, 28, is keeping her name.
She is an international marketing analyst for J. Crew, the New York apparel company.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.


BOATING IN BIG BEN'S SHADOW
WITH two short blasts on the horn, the captain throttled down the engines and slipped the Sarah Kathleen sideways, wrestling the tidal surge of the Thames as he began to bring the boat around.
The cruiser had just glided underneath Tower Bridge, and most of the passengers who paid for the hourlong sightseeing trip aboard the open-decked 60-foot boat were still twisted round in their seats, squinting at the great Gothic-style towers soaring above the river.
"Now would be a good time to get out your cameras," the captain announced over the loudspeaker as he swung the bow upriver and steered between the bridge's huge stone piers.
Never mind that the boat, and everyone's cameras, were now aimed into the late afternoon sun.
Backlighted and framed in shadow, the gray stone towers and latticeworks of iron girders, freshly painted in brilliant white and blue to celebrate the bridge's centenary this year, loomed spectacularly over the river, offering a new and dramatic view of one of London's most familiar landmarks.


In the Region/Westchester; A Hopeful Sign on Yonkers Riverfront Plan
SINCE 1934, the City of Yonkers has been floating a variety of development plans for its 17 acres of vacant land on the Hudson River waterfront.
But nothing much has come of them.
So when the latest waterfront plan was unveiled last December it hardly created a ripple.
People adopted a wait-and-see attitude, said Jim Surdoval, director of the Mayor's Downtown Waterfront Task Force.
"Waterfront development plans have been more talk than action," he said.


46 Floors Down, Still Purring
Proposed addendum to city fact sheets.
Place after Tallest Building.
Greatest Known Height From Which Cat Has Fallen and Survived: 46 Floors.
Set: June 25, 1994, by Leo, of Manhattan Plaza off Tenth Avenue.
Details: Owner, Kirk Romero, leaves apartment at 3 A.M. to walk puppy, leaving door to terrace open.
Owner returns, hunts for cat; finally found in planter at base of building.
Dr.
Mary Suchowiecki at Animal Medical Center finds injury common in high falls: pneumothorax, air forced out of lungs and into lung cavity.
Footnote: Cats achieve terminal velocity (60 m.p.h., half that of humans) after 7 to 10 stories, so the impact is never greater than that.
Experts believe cats relax at that speed, lessening impact trauma.
Epilogue: "He's getting back to his own self," Mr.
Romero says.
"He wants to go back on the balcony."


Q and A
Election Dispute In a Co-op Q We are a co-op of almost 300 apartments.
The following situation caused an interruption that led to a postponement of our annual meeting.
A shareholder was renominated for a position on the board of directors.
Our bylaws state that "all directors shall be of full age and citizens of the United States."


In the Park: Is Fox Show Friend or Foe?
When Fox Inc. decided to place its new cable entertainment network, fX, in a vacant building at Fifth Avenue near 26th Street, many residents and merchants rejoiced, elated that the company would give the neighborhood a much needed financial boost.
But not everyone is happy: Some residents say Fox is trying to "buy" Madison Square Park, across the street, for its own use.


Summer Parties in Manhattan
Greeting Harvard alumni, meeting an artist, congratulating a famous family.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Wally Blohm and a handful of fellow apiarists are the city's bee team.
Their mission: to tame the swarming masses.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  In the stands at Yankee Stadium, Raymond Accetta is "pretty much all hot dogs." He aspires, however, to beer.


While Some Got Lost Along the Way, Svorada Was the First to Finish
Up front, way ahead, Eros Poli sailed along today in the Tour de France, alone and dreaming of victory.
Out back, far behind, Didier Rous rode alone too, trying mournfully to remain part of the bicycle race.
Neither rider fulfilled his goal.
The seventh stage of the three-week race proved once again that the Tour is a great leveler of men and their ambitions.


Elizabeth St. John, Christopher Abelt
Elizabeth Stillman St.
John, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fordyce B. St.
John Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher Mitchell Abelt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph W. Abelt of Willoughby, Ohio.
The Rev.
Kevin A. Barry performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Holy Trinity in New York.
Mrs.
Abelt, 40, was until recently the manager of corporate communications and recruiting at Automated Concepts Inc., a computer consulting concern in New York.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father retired as a senior vice president of the Bank of New York.


Margaret Chan, Albert L. Siu
Margaret Chan, a principal of Webb, Johnson &amp; Klemmer, an executive recruiting firm in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Albert Louis Siu, a Deputy Commissioner of the New York State Department of Health in Albany.
The Rev.
Joyce Gioia, an Interfaith minister, officiated at the Roger Smith Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Chan, 35, is keeping her name.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheow Lim Chan of New York.
The bride graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.


'Hot Dogs Here, Hot Dogs!'
AT Yankee Stadium, there is hot-dog etiquette, and Raymond Accetta has it down.
Condiments?
Strictly mustard.


In the Simpson Case, the Easy Part Is Over
For all its drama and sensation, the six-day hearing that persuaded a municipal court judge to order O. J. Simpson arraigned on two charges of first-degree murder was a breeze for prosecutors.
They only had to demonstrate that a crime had been committed and that Mr.
Simpson was the likely assailant.
Now, the prosecuting becomes harder.
To win a conviction in Superior Court, the District Attorney's office will have to meet a much higher standard of proof in trying to persuade a jury of 12 people beyond reasonable doubt that Mr.
Simpson killed his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend Ronald L. Goldman by stabbing them to death.


Where to Go for a Bureaucratic Green Light
PERHAPS you have decided that it is high time you opened a bingo parlor.
You've got the boards, you've ferreted out those little chips, you've even lined up an expert caller.
That's fine, but don't think you can simply set up shop in a church basement and start calling out numbers.
It takes a license to have official bingo games, or as the city puts it, "To lease premises to Bingo Licensees for the conduct of Bingo games within."


Plan for Downtown Buoys White Plains
GOOD news.
We couldn't bear to leave you.
Dakota is staying put." So read the message in large red letters on a yellow sign in the window of the Dakota Flannel shop at 131 Mamaroneck Avenue in downtown White Plains. In smaller type the message continued:
"New cohesive leadership of the city is now starting to take real steps in revitalizing downtown White Plains. I'm looking forward to greatly improved conditions and a conducive environment for the retail business of downtown White Plains. Sincerely, Julian D. DiDonato, proprietor."


25-Year Journey to Find Otto's 'Voice'
IN Alan Isler's first novel, "The Prince of West End Avenue," it is the arrival of the luscious Mandy Dattner at the Emma Lazarus retirement home on the Upper West Side of Manhattan that throws Otto Korner into a state of emotional turmoil and prompts him to start keeping a journal.
A physical therapist from Cleveland, the "unbearably beautiful" Ms.
Dattner, is a dead ringer for the passion of Otto's youth, Magda Damrosch, the toast of Zurich's Cafe Voltaire in 1916 and the darling of the Dadaists, who made it their headquarters.


F.Y.I.
Timeless on Astor Place
Q.
What happened to the big clock on the north-facing wall of the Carl Fischer music store on Astor Place?
That was such a handy clock, especially since the Zeckendorf Towers on Union Square blocked my view of the clock on 14th Street.


Corrections
A review on page 26 in the Arts and Leisure section today of the Rolling Stones' new album, "Voodoo Lounge," misstates the surname of the group's bassist.
He is Darryl Jones, not Johnson.


Barbed Wire Sends Shiver Through Port
A few days before 2,000 United States marines were scheduled to arrive in Haitian waters, other marines from the United States Embassy were busy filling sandbags and piling them atop the embassy roof today.
Diplomats here say that the deployment is simply a precautionary measure taken in the event that American citizens are in danger and must be evacuated.


Heather Vickers, Joseph Ryan Jr.
Heather M. Vickers, a daughter of Dr.
William W. and Vivian P. Vickers of Bonsall, Calif., was married yesterday to Joseph J. Ryan Jr., a son of Jeanne C. and Joseph J. Ryan of Woodside, Queens.
The Rev.
Kevin Quinn performed the Catholic ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Wolcott, N.Y.


Bill to Unify School Vote Languishes in Albany
LEGISLATION that would set one uniform date for all school districts on Long Island to hold their budget votes and board elections was approved unanimously in the State Assembly last month.
But the State Senate did not take up the measure before it adjourned for the summer.
The bill, co-sponsored by Assemblyman Thomas DiNapoli, Democrat of Great Neck, and Senator Kenneth P. LaValle, Republican of Selden, called for all districts in Nassau and Suffolk Counties -- the only two noncity counties in the state with populations of more than one million -- to hold elections on the third Tuesday in May and to require that absentee ballots be provided.


At a Street Fair, Some Tropical Relief for the Ongoing Heat


On Ninth Ave., A New Call For Help. . .
In its heyday in the 1930's, Paddy's Market thrived as an open-air pushcart bazaar that jammed Ninth Avenue below 42d Street.
Vendors of all nations sold fresh produce that drew customers from across the city.
Now, after a half-century of setbacks, only a few merchants survive there.
On several blocks, parking lots and boarded-up storefronts outnumber active shops.
Along the west side of Ninth, from 35th to 38th, the only businesses operating are a parking lot and the Kam Hong restaurant.


Nicole Prenovost, Dan Negrea
Nicole Marguerite Prenovost, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Guy Prenovost of Troy, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dan Negrea, the son of Claudia Visan of Bucharest, Romania, and the late Adrian Negrea.
The Rev.
Sean O'Malley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
The bride is an assistant treasurer with Credit Lyonnais, the international bank in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


Giuliani Plans a Market For Unlicensed Vendors
Responding to complaints from merchants in Harlem, the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani plans to create a temporary open-air market for scores of sidewalk vendors that now illegally crowd 125th Street, and then move ahead with sweeps of the unlicensed vendors that remain.
Under the plan, the city would grant special licenses to many of the illegal vendors and permit them to sell their wares in two vacant lots at Lenox Avenue and 116th and 117th Streets.


Balancing the Equation for Girls and Math
AN educated woman can publicly admit that she is absolutely useless at balancing her checkbook, and the news will generally be met with knowing laughter.
That same woman, however, would probably never confess that try as she might, she just couldn't read a book.
If she did, it would be no cause for a joke.
That double standard -- that it is socially acceptable for a woman to be ignorant in math, but not in humanities -- persists today.
In an effort to reverse that trend and to encourage girls to pursue the study of math and science, Marymount College is holding its second yearly summer science and math workshop for high school girls.


July 3-9; Getting Even With Harry and Louise, Or, Republicans Get a Taste of Their Medicine
The Democratic National Committee has taken revenge on Harry and Louise, the yuppies who star in television commercials for the nation's health insurance industry.
It has maimed them and left them penniless.
For months, Harry and Louise have been raising doubts about President Clinton's health plan, suggesting that it would ration health care and establish a huge regulatory apparatus.
Last week the Clinton Administration struck back, with help from the Democratic National Committee.
The committee is running a new commercial, "Harry Takes a Fall," which spoofs the ads run by the Health Insurance Association of America.


The Tinkling of Ice in a Glass, the Rustling of Skirts
ONE FLOOR ABOVE Broadway and 49th Street in Manhattan, on a screen in the Foley room of Sound One, on a spring afternoon, the image flashes of Jack Nicholson entering his office in a scene from the film "Wolf." Mr.
Nicholson, who plays a book editor, has paused beside a desk to sniff the air in lupine fashion while his secretary looks on with understandable concern.
Watching the screen intently, Brian Vancho sniffs along with Mr.
Nicholson, trying to synchronize sinuses.
When the second sniff is judged four frames (one-sixth of a second) late, Mr.
Vancho sniffs again.
This is the sniffing audiences hear in the finished film, which opened last month.  (An engineer could move the errant sniff, but that is considered something of a last resort.)


Christopher to Meet Hanoi Counterpart
Secretary of State Warren Christopher is scheduled to meet with the Vietnamese Foreign Minister in Bangkok this month, senior Vietnamese officials disclosed today.
The meeting would be the first between the foreign-policy chiefs of the former foes since the Communist victory in 1975.
Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai, who oversees relations with the United States, declined to confirm formally that the meeting was set.
But he said in an interview, "I think there is a high possibility."


Deborah Stern, R. A. MacDonald
Deborah Ellen Stern, the daughter of Betsy and Lawrence Stern of New York, is to be married today to Robert Allen MacDonald, a son of Barbara MacDonald of St.
Louis and Lieut.
Col.
Robert MacDonald, U.S.A.F., retired, of Overland Park, Kan.
Rabbi Alan Seccher is to officiate at the nondenominational ceremony at Cafe Brauer in Chicago.
The bride, 31, graduated from Swarthmore College and received a master's degree in teaching from the University of Chicago.
She is a teaching consultant and freelance writer in Chicago.
Her father is an executive vice president and chief financial officer of the Anne Klein &amp; Company and the Donna Karan Company, both in New York.


SUNDAY, July 10, 1994; The Scent of a State: Vermont
The smell of Vermont?
Don't even think about Holsteins.
"I'm keeping cows out of this," says Elise McLaughlin, co-owner of Valley Spirit in Burlington and creator of the state's first scent, Vermontage.
To McLaughlin, Vermont smells like "fields of radiant wildflowers," with top notes of citrus (for the state's famed orange groves, no doubt) and "woody bottom notes." The suggested retail price is $29.50 for 1.7 ounces.
According to the Fragrance Foundation in Manhattan, California is the only other state to inspire a scent, California for Men, unless you count Lonestar, which presumably honors Texas.
Quite a few cities have their own fragrances, however.
There are perfumes called Newport, Aspen, Santa Fe, Hampton, Malibu Musk and New York Nights.
Beverly Hills is a scent, as is Beverly Hills 90210.
A few streets have even inspired perfumes: Fifth Avenue, Broadway Baby and Sunset Boulevard.


A Timely Pinch Brings On the Bloom
THERE are sure to be some giggles but it is time to talk about pinching.
Pinching plants, that is.
This age-old practice, which is a form of pruning, is usually learned early on.
It merely describes what is done to plants to force them to develop side shoots.
Many a new gardener has been disappointed by the telephone-pole look of asters, chrysanthemums, ageratums, zinnias and many other flowers.
Only one or two blooms show at the top of the gangly plants, not exactly what one was expecting given the pictures in the catalogues.
The cure is simple: pinching.
It should be applied early in the season.


A Tug-of-War Redux
It is a classic battle for space in a crowded city.
A venerable private day school, bursting at the seams, wants to take over the recreation floor of an apartment building that houses its high school.
The building's tenants, for whom the floor has long served as a sort of town hall and community playground, become angry.
They carry pickets at the school's commencement, send angry letters and enlist the help of politicians, including the Borough President, Ruth W. Messinger.


Where Life Is a Carnival
A fair on Orchard Street benefits the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, June 29.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $495,000
380 West 12th Street  2,000-sq.-ft. co-op in loft building; part-time doorman, 2 baths, fireplace, exposed-brick walls, fireplace, original moldings and detail, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,699, no tax deduction, listed at $550,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)


Four New Yorkers, Four Journeys of Discovery: ANTONIO YOUNG; Reaching Back to Chompong Nanny
Antonio Young has traced his family back to the 1740's, to a woman named Chompong Nanny.
He has just a few smatterings of knowledge about her: a white man brought her from Africa to Jamaica.
She was never enslaved.
She was fair-skinned, tall and beautiful.
And she lived to be 125 years old.
He knows because his great-grandmother remembered Chompong Nanny, and told him what she could remember when he found her in Costa Rica.
She herself was more than 100 years old.


Mary E. Kelly, Peter N. Freiberg
Mary Elizabeth Kelly, a daughter of Marilyn Hollandsworth and John A. Kelly, both of Huntington, W.Va., was married there on Friday to Peter Newton Freiberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Freiberg of New Orleans.
The Rev.
Patrick McDonough officiated at Our Lady of Fatima Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 28, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she also received a master's degree in education.
She was until recently a Spanish teacher at Murry Bergtraum High School in Manhattan.


Electricity Industry Needs Competition
To the Editor:
In "Electricity Shopping Can Be a Bad Deal" (Viewpoints, June 12), Ralph Cavanagh bases his argument against deregulation of the electricity industry on his erroneous assertion that electricity production "has a greater effect on the environment than any other economic activity." Like many environmentalists, Mr.
Cavanagh prefers to find fault with utility companies rather than tell us that the transportation sector -- especially the cars we drive -- is the primary source of pollution in this country.
Perhaps he has not read the current New York State Energy Plan, which found that 80 percent of toxic air emissions in this state come from the transportation sector.
Until environmentalists focus their efforts on the transportation sector, we will have neither a cleaner environment nor the beneficial lower prices that deregulation of the electricity industry would produce.
RICHARD B. MILLER  Albany, June 14  The writer is an energy and environmental lawyer.


Tiny Trifles That Loom Large With Collectors
A CHAIR AS SMALL AS A THIMBLE, a highboy a mere yard high or a Chihuahua-size bed may look silly individually, but a crowd of these Lilliputian delights makes it clear why some collectors pursue them so obsessively.
Tiny trifles, like a hunt table four inches high or a 17-inch-tall Windsor chair, may trigger a rocket back to childhood for unsuspecting adults.
And, once seduced into buying a mini-chest, a mini-chair or a mini-desk, people tend to treat these adult toys like sculpture, displaying them on shelves or as end tables.
No one ever admits it, but most people yearn at one time or another to live in a doll house.


Randi Ryzoff, Steven Regenstein
Randi Ryzoff, a daughter of Sandra Ryzoff of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., and Dr.
Ronald Ryzoff of Woodmere, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Steven Regenstein, a son of Mrs.
Ethel Regenstein of Hillside, N.J., and the late Harvey Regenstein.
Rabbi Philmore Berger officiated at Water's Edge in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 31, is a sales executive at Betsy &amp; Adam, a dress manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a cardiovascular surgeon with a private practice in Rockville Center, L.I.


McDougald, Once a Quiet Yankee Star, Now Lives in Quiet World
It is a silent summer for Gil McDougald; they are all silent summers.
Once, summertime for Gil McDougald, a standout Yankee infielder in the 1950's, was full of the sweet sounds of baseball -- balls being struck, the chatter and laughter of teammates, the roar of the crowd.
He can no longer hear those sounds, although his wife, Lucille, says, "He can hear them internally."


Hostels: Not Just for Students
"AMERICANS hate sharing anything," an innkeeper in upstate New York said in a recent letter to this section, discussing guests' preference for separate tables at breakfast and private bathrooms.
He knows his clientele, but when the question is saving money on a really tight budget, Americans are apparently willing to share.
Sharing is what cuts costs at hostels, Y's or other dormitory-style residences, where guests typically use a communal bathroom and may even bunk in a room with strangers.
One possible drawback: Communal residences affiliated with Y groups or Hostelling International-American Youth Hostels, as well as many school campuses, are likely to have no-alcohol policies.
On the plus side, many Y's and campuses have excellent health clubs.


Most Russians Know Violence and Starvation; How to Help
To the Editor:
Re your June 29 article on philanthropy in Russia: It is remarkable (and encouraging) that despite serious economic and political chaos, the business community has made a commitment to support charities with private contributions on a grand and growing scale.
And lest we get too smug about the dubious sources of some of the private wealth that supports charity in Russia, the selfish motivation of many donors and the existence of phony charities that steal contributions, it is important to remember that these can be found in our own philanthropic sector as well.


SPERM IN A JAR
The second wife of an elderly man, Fleming claims, at 38, to be childless because in college she was the dupe of radical feminists.
She dismisses a handful of female writers on account of their childlessness.
I might disagree with her characterization of Virginia Woolf and Simone de Beauvoir as "barren." ROSWITHA T. BOTH Chicago


Correction
The Choice Tables column on June 26, about dining in Auckland, New Zealand, located the Marlborough region incorrectly.
It is on the northern tip of the South Island, not on the southern tip of the North Island.


REAGAN'S REVENGE
Some of us tax-revolt advocates are too young to know much about Proposition 13 ("Reagan's Revenge," by Alan Brinkley, June 19).
Our discontent with tax-and-spend was not created by the rhetoric of Ronald Reagan or the orchestrations of Howard Jarvis.
Our discontent stems from the dual frustrations of (1) watching our paychecks get devoured by taxes and (2) knowing that government will spend our tax money on programs that are politically motivated and recklessly wasteful.


Now Overhear This
T he language of penetrated privacy has a new noun.
The verb to overhear, "to hear what is not intended by the speaker to be heard," has been used by snoopers since 1549, when a man on the gallows murmured a message meant for a lieutenant, but -- according to a sermon by Bishop Hugh Latimer -- "the worde was over heard."


Yankee New-Timers Demonstrate No Sense of Tradition
If the Yankees had spent the day at a carnival yesterday, their teammates would have applauded the efforts of Scott Kamieniecki and Greg Harris.
The two pitchers each would have won a kewpie doll for plunking the most milk bottles or George Steinbrenner look-alike targets.
But Kamieniecki and Harris were pitching at Yankee Stadium, and the idea there is to hit bats, not the people holding them.
But Kamieniecki hit J. T. Snow twice and Harris hit Gary DiSarcina twice, and those misguided tosses helped the California Angels cruise past the Yankees, 10-5.


Sports of The Times; The Return Of the Sober Superstar
OUT near home plate during the Yankees' Old-Timers Day, the announcer Frank Messer asked the 42,521 customers to stand in memory of more than three dozen baseball people who had died during the past year.
"Bill Dickey . . . Marv Throneberry," were among the names he mentioned.
"Chub Feeney . . . Harvey Haddix."


At Work; Questioning Productivity Beliefs
GIVEN anonymity and half a chance, corporate executives will talk about management fads as if they were a bad Cheez Doodles habit: controllable but not breakable.
They spend evenings chewing over the latest mutation of total quality and then hate themselves in the morning.
They laugh sheepishly while ticking off the names of managerial miracle cures from years past -- remember work circles? -- most of which turned out to have the efficacy of Carter's Little Liver Pills.
Employees may be entitled to wonder if all new management paradigms should come with a laugh track.
Well, perhaps not.
But evidence from several sources suggests that some of the self-initiated upheavals and changes in direction corporations have experienced in the last few years were misguided.
There is first a new study of manufacturing from the Center for Economic Studies at the Census Bureau that contradicts the common wisdom that cutting jobs -- "downsizing" -- is the most efficient way to increase productivity.


Field of Dreams


In Wake of Attacks, Swimmers Profess Pool Loyalty
Immersed in water that was bluer, clearer and certainly cooler than the hot, hazy afternoon sky overhead, Angela and Dawann Greene last week defended their favorite neighborhood summer retreat: the Hamilton Fish pool on Manhattan's Lower East Side.
In the wake of a rash of sexual assaults against girls in several city pools, including Hamilton Fish, since they opened July 2, city Parks Department officials have been tightening security measures as well as considering other precautions, such as segregating some pools by the age or sex of the swimmers.


Baby at a Crawl, Bombs Away II And Evil Lurking
I Love Trouble Nick Nolte, Julia Roberts Directed by Charles Shyer PG 123 minutes


Ignorance Can Be Bliss
To the Editor:
Musicology generally studies the history and techniques of music, not the lives of composers, for a good reason: it is irrelevant whether a composer was homosexual or heterosexual, single or married, male or female.
Those who think otherwise are reading in their own prejudices, along with a desire "to clarify" aspects of the music that they are incapable of hearing directly.
Those who call themselves musicologists and write biographies "discovering" homosexuality in various composers are guilty of the most unscientific research.
They are discovering only what they have set out to prove.


The World; When Neighbors Aren't Friends
FOR nearly three years now, the United States has confronted a tide of Haitian refugees whose management has gone well beyond its considerable logistical challenges to become a sore on the conscience of a country that cherishes an image of itself as warm and welcoming to foreigners.
As scenes of Haitians being stockaded in sweltering tent cities have become commonplace, a moral question has arisen in Washington: Is it just the Haitians' blackness and poverty that causes them to be treated differently from, say, Vietnamese, Russians or Cubans?
And one truth that gets lost in the heat and fog of debate is this: The question could just as easily be asked in the capitals of the Caribbean, albeit with different perspectives on race and racism.


On Sunday; On the Radio, A Lifeline For Haitians
HAITIAN taxi drivers hacking about the city bootleg Ricot Dupuy as if his name were that of a fine liqueur from home rather than something even better, the relentless voice of a radio journalism watch on Haiti's fast-shifting political crisis.
His reports worsen by the hour with ever more anxious developments: marines on the move, fleeing kin drowning as the embargo bites deeply and the Clinton Administration risking checkmate in the contest.
Not to mention Mr.
Dupuy's managing five exhausted Haitian journalists on a shoestring budget.


Baby at a Crawl, Bombs Away II And Evil Lurking
Little Big League  Luke Edwards, Timothy Busfield Directed by Andrew Scheinman PG 119 minutes


Ideas &amp; Trends: Cosmic Noise; Scaling Lofty Towers of Belief, Science Checks Its Foundations
Unless the laws of celestial mechanics are repealed (or have been misapplied), this Saturday, on the very date 49 years ago that the scientists of the Manhattan Project produced the largest manmade sound, Jupiter will be the stage for what some astronomers are billing as the loudest noise in the solar system, except for the constant, silent roaring of the Sun.
For almost a week, about 20 pieces of the Shoemaker-Levy 9 comet, some perhaps two or three miles in diameter, are expected to hit the far, hidden side of the planet with an impact equivalent to many nuclear bombs.
Jupiter is considered big and mushy enough to absorb the attack with aplomb.
Closer to home, the concern is not whether the cataclysm might damage the Earth but whether it will be detectable at all.


Italy Leader's Limelight Dims
A day of glory as summit meeting host for the new Prime Minister of Italy, Silvio Berlusconi, was marred by an order for his brother to stand trial on corruption charges.
Page 9.


An Equal-Opportunity Rodeo
LAST GO ROUND By Ken Kesey with Ken Babbs.
Illustrated. 238 pp.
New York:  Viking. $21.95.


Shabbiness Invades a Park
Last Wednesday morning a dozen children sat at picnic tables at the Louis Zimmerman Playground, working quietly with Magic Markers.
A couple of feet away, workers tried to drain a large puddle that had been stagnating for at least a couple a days.
To users of the playground, just east of the New York Botanical Garden, the scene has become all too familiar.
The Zimmerman Playground is just one example of what happens to community amenities when tight budgets take their toll.


Asians Before Columbus
To the Editor:
Geoffrey Parker, reviewing "When China Ruled the Seas," by Louise Levathes (May 29), remarks that "it now seems certain" that Asian voyagers took "ideas, knowledge and artifacts" to the Americas "between the 7th and the 15th centuries." Evidently his source for this view is the book under review, for no such voyages are indicated in the fourth edition of The Times Atlas of World History, of which he is the editor.
Ms.
Levathes does claim that "little doubt remains" that Indonesians and Chinese voyaged to Mexico and Peru several times before the sixth century A.D.
But the evidence she cites is shaky, and for at least the last 20 years has not been accepted by anthropologists qualified to evaluate it.
I hope the fifth edition of The Times Atlas of World History does not adopt Ms.
Levathes's outdated ideas on this matter.
WILLIAM C. STURTEVANT  Washington


Shorewood Packaging Corp.(SHOR,NMS) reports earnings for Year to April 30


Reggae the Old-Fashioned Way, With a Bow to Bob Marley
Ten years ago, reggae was more or less a dead issue in pop music.
Bob Marley's shadow squashed all possibilities, and the idiom languished.
Then dance hall, a raplike variety, appeared, and reggae regained its dance-floor and commercial muscle.
Both influencing and influenced by hip-hop, it is now one of the sounds of urban America, vastly heard and vastly powerful, with its own gangster subculture and an army of D.J.'s using the last name Ranks.
At "Reggae Sunsplash" on Saturday night at Radio City Music Hall, it would have been hard to know that the style existed, with two socially conscious D.J's appearing to mild indifference from the fans.
The concert, put on by a touring review, instead emphasized an older style, both wise to non-reggae pop music and overtly political.
It looked to Marley for some pointers; not one D.J. named Ranks showed up and there wasn't a gangster in the house.


Safety-Kleen Corp.(SK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 18


Corrections
An entry in the News Summary in some copies yesterday about Representative Peter Hoagland's stand on health care misstated his home state.
It is Nebraska, not Nevada.


Debt Offerings This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month issues.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.35 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 4.81 percent.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about negotiations between American Airlines and its pilots' union misidentified the union in some editions.
It is the Allied Pilots Association, not the American Pilots Association.


Felix Kelly, 80, Artist of Houses
Felix Kelly, a New Zealand-born artist known for his paintings of stately country houses, died on July 3 in Devonshire in southwestern England.
He was 80 and had lived in Britain since 1938.
He had had Alzheimer's disease for two years, The Times of London reported.


For United Pilots, 2 Views of Buyout
They fly the same type of plane, a Boeing 737, and they have worked for the same airline, United, for at least 25 years.
And since 1985 Roger D. Hall and George T. Lenormand have been players in one of Corporate America's longest-running soap operas.
The finale may come tomorrow, when United shareholders will vote on whether to approve the employees' offer of wage and work-rule concessions in return for 55 percent of the UAL Corporation, the airline's parent.


How Un-American Can a 1950's Teen-Ager Get?
Un-American Activities  A Memoir of the 50's  By Sally Belfrage  263 pages.
HarperCollins. $22.50.
In "Un-American Activities: A Memoir of the 50's," Sally Belfrage describes with verve, grace and remarkable wit what it was like to live through an unusually perilous adolescence.
Her parents had descended from the British upper class by way of Hollywood, where the author was born in 1937.
Their eventual crash landing in New York City left Ms.
Belfrage the ultimate misfit as she entered her teen years in 1950.


Don't Let Health Care Go the Mississippi's Way; Deciding Life's Value
To the Editor:
Jonathan R. Mook (letter, June 29) reports that disability rights groups question the legality of Oregon's health care rationing plan on the ground it discriminates against the disabled.
But he tells us little about the reasoning behind this objection.


Ways and Means Chairman at Home: Politics Wasn't Always Like This
There wasn't a speck of Southern gentility in the angry remarks directed at Representative Sam M. Gibbons over health care and abortion.
"It's communism," exclaimed one man.
"Socialistic," another yelled.
"We're morally opposed," a woman shouted.
"I understand you, ma'am," the new acting chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee replied politely during a gathering at a neighborhood center here on Saturday.
"I respect you," said the man whose committee had approved a sweeping health care bill a little more than a week before.
"You don't need to shout," he said, struggling a bit to stay calm.


Germany Out. Some of Its Veterans Will Be, Too.
There will be no Germany for anyone to kick around during the rest of this World Cup of surprises.
And these same Germans won't be around either the next time the World Cup rolls around, France in 1998.


Don't Let Health Care Go the Mississippi's Way; Make Health, Not War
To the Editor:
It is encouraging that the health care debate has progressed to the point where the basic principle of universal health care coverage for everyone -- coverage that cannot be taken away -- is at least being discussed in serious conversation.


Case Against Clinton Brings Former Professor Before His Former Student
Twenty years ago Susan Webber Wright studied navigation law under Prof.
Bill Clinton.
Now she is about to travel through scarcely charted legal waters as the Federal judge presiding over a lawsuit that accuses President Clinton of improper sexual advances.
Life can be full of strange twists, especially in a state where it sometimes seems that everyone has crossed paths with everyone else.
About the time she was in Mr.
Clinton's classroom she was also out on the campaign trail working against him, in the Congressional race that was the only election Mr.
Clinton ever lost.


Remembering That Giant Step


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Another rise in interest rates is expected by many credit market analysts and traders.
The employment report for June, which was released on Friday, showed economic strength and reinforced their view that the Federal Reserve will move on rates for a fifth time this year.  [ Page D1. ]


Not a Traitor
To the Editor:
Jeff Stein's "Mole's Manual" (Op-Ed, July 5) lists a number of "traitors" and includes Jonathan Pollard's name.


South Waits Calmly as North's Transition Begins
The death of the North Korean leader, Kim Il Sung, has sent ripples of concern across the globe, but in this capital, just 30 miles from the border with the North, most people have responded with wariness and an enormous amount of curiosity.
South Korean officials have spent years and huge sums planning for precisely this moment, the death of their hard-line Communist nemesis, and they have constructed dozens of scenarios for taking advantage of any opportunities the transition might offer.


U.S. Skirting Issue of Using Force in Haiti
Senior Administration officials today demanded the ouster of Haiti's military rulers but stopped short of saying the United States would use force to make that happen.
Despite the repeated assertion that "vital interests" are at stake, President Clinton has not said whether the interests are so vital that Washington should use force to protect them.


Medgar Evers and His Tragic End, With Re-enactments
Medgar Evers deserves a better tribute than the overproduced documentary on view tonight.
As though fearing that the story of an authentic martyr of the black civil rights struggle was not strong enough to be told in a straightforward way, the British producers of "Southern Justice: The Murder of Medgar Evers" have gussied it up with re-enactments, flaming crosses, flashing lights and other banal images and effects so overworked on television.
They only get in the way of the inherently inspiring story of a black N.A.A.C.P. worker who dared do battle with the powers that controlled much of the South in the 1950's and 60's.
Evers's courage in investigating and publicizing the murders of blacks that went unpunished by all-white juries, fighting for voter registration and school desegregation and leading boycotts against Jackson, Miss., stores needs no trivializing adornments.


New York's Minority Bidding Rule Is Void
To the Editor:
Your news articles on New York City's affirmative action program and its implementation (June 26 and 27) were generally consistent with what we learned in connection with two lawsuits challenging the city's price preference rule.


In It, on It or Under It, the Water Was the Place to Be


William Halford Selby, British Admiral, 92
Rear Adm.
William Halford Selby, a Briton who figured in a confrontation known as the Corfu incident, died on July 3 at his home in Wiltshire, England.
He was 92.
In 1946, Admiral Selby, then a Royal Navy captain, commanded the British destroyer Saumarez, which was one of four vessels ordered to pass through the strait between Albania and Corfu.
They were told to shoot back if they came under fire from Albania, which claimed control of the waterway.


Results Plus
GOLF  Robbins Wins Playoff for L.P.G.A.
Title  Kelly Robbins birdied the first playoff hole yesterday to win the Jamie Farr Toledo L.P.G.A.
Classic in Sylvania, Ohio.
Robbins and Tammie Green finished 54 holes tied at nine-under-par 204.
Robbins then rolled in a five-foot putt for a birdie on the par-4 18th hole, the first of the playoff, while Green left a 16-foot birdie putt inches short.
Robbins shot a final-round six-under 65 at the 6,319-yard Highland Meadows Golf Club, with birdies on four of the final nine holes.
Green had a 67.
Kim Williams, who was struck by a stray bullet while entering a drug store after the second round of last weekend's Youngstown-Warren Classic, had a 70 and finished tied for 10th at 210 with Amy Alcott and Dawn Coe-Jones. (AP)


Poll of Teen-Agers: Battle of the Sexes On Roles in Family
A nationwide poll of teen-agers found that boys are substantially more traditional than girls in their expectations of the family life they will have as adults.
The girls surveyed were more likely than the boys to say that they could have a happy life even if they did not marry and that they would consider becoming a single parent.
And 86 percent of the girls said they expected to work outside the home while married, while only 7 percent said they did not.


HBO Gets Foundation Grant for Specials
The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, which sponsored a two-hour NBC television special last month about health care, has announced another substantial television grant -- $3.3 million to HBO for programs on substance abuse.
Both sides called the grant a first.
The foundation said the award was its first to a cable channel, and HBO said the project would be its first programming partnership with a foundation.


A Cloud Hangs Over Midsummer Classic
Strike.
Like a giant storm cloud, that word will hang over Pittsburgh this week, obscuring what would otherwise be baseball's most joyful event -- the annual All-Star Game.
The game will be played tomorrow.
And the anticipation this time around is described by some in major league baseball as being greater than last year's, when baseball staged a highly successful All-Star week in Baltimore.


Prison Term For Fraud
A former top executive of a Florida security company was sentenced on Friday to eight and a half years in prison and ordered to pay more than $59 million in restitution for conspiring to defraud the Securities and Exchange Commission and for other violations of Federal securities law.
The executive, Aarif Dahod, 43, was convicted in February on charges that he and other officers of Sahlen &amp; Associates had falsified company records and S.E.C. filings to inflate the value of company stock.


People
*
Bob Mackall, an executive vice president and managing partner at DDB Needham New York, has resigned, as expected, shortly after his longtime creative partner, Jack Mariucci, left the agency.


YELTSIN NOW SAYS HE PLANS TO KEEP TROOPS IN ESTONIA
Despite prodding from President Clinton, President Boris N. Yeltsin said today that he would not meet a commitment to withdraw all Russian forces from the Baltic countries by Aug. 31.
While promising that Latvia would join Lithuania by that date in finally being free of Russian troops, Mr.
Yeltsin said he would not pull the remaining 2,000 Russian soldiers out of Estonia until Estonia agreed to grant wider rights to retiring officers who stay.


The Uninsured: Who Are They? A special report.; Frayed Nerves of People Without Health Coverage
At the age of 52, unemployed after an international career as a manager, Bob Hughes is astonished to find himself without health insurance and wishes Washington would do something about it.
"I don't want a dole from the Government," said Mr.
Hughes, who lives with his wife next to a golf course near Houston and cannot afford the $568 monthly premiums they were quoted this year.
"Just a little help, a little protection until I get re-employed."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Seeking 'killer ideas,' a small agency enlists a well-traveled executive.
A SMALL creative New York agency, seeking to lift itself to the next level of growth and prominence, will bring in a top executive with experience at shops small and large, in and out of New York, creative and, well, less so.
Altschiller Reitzfeld, an 18-year-old agency with $85 million in billings from accounts as disparate as Liz Claiborne fragrances and Boar's Head cold cuts, has hired Scott Flood, senior vice president and director of business development at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, to be executive vice president and general manager.


Wildcat Academy, Class of 1994
The first graduation at Wildcat Academy in Manhattan meant more than the success of 14 students.
It vindicated a new program for young people who founder in New York City's mammoth, impersonal public high schools.
"None of these kids would have made it anywhere else," said Amalia V. Betanzos of the students who graduated last month.
Ms.
Betanzos, the school's founder, is a former Board of Education member who was appointed by Mayor Edward I. Koch and served until 1990.


Cabby Shows Brass In Dispensing Cool
To the Editor:
In view of "Wanted: An Air-Conditioned Taxi" (editorial, July 6), I think New Yorkers might take heed of the dog days to come and what it might cost.


At CBS's Wedding, Disney's Shadow
As the boards of CBS and QVC prepare to meet this week to vote on a merger of the two companies, Wall Street and Hollywood executives continue to raise the possibility that the Walt Disney Company may emerge as a wild card in the deal.
Ever since the merger announcement 11 days ago -- and even before -- many people in the television industry have been looking at Disney as a logical fit with a broadcast network.
CBS is now at the center of much speculation about Disney simply because the network's merger plan with QVC opens a door to other potential bids.


Europe Talks Are Called To Pick Chief
Germany today called a special summit meeting of the European Union for this Friday in Brussels to pick a successor to Jacques Delors, the president of the 12-nation group's executive commission.
The meeting was set by Chancellor Helmut Kohl just before he departed at the end of the Group of Seven summit meeting here.
Germany took over the European Union presidency on July 1, just after the European leaders failed at a meeting in Corfu, Greece, to pick a successor to Mr.
Delors because of objections by Britain to a candidate backed by all the other member countries.


Historic Turnberry Charming and Magical
There is not one Turnberry.
There are two, three, perhaps even four Turnberrys.
Now fair, now foul, now warm, now cold, the climate and mood here on the stark northwest coast of Scotland change more often than in the European financial markets.
And the swiftness and variety of the changes can be just as breathtaking.
The Turnberry we encounter this particular day, the weekend before the 123d British Open golf championship is to begin, must be a close kin to the day the Scots decided to invent whiskey.
Wind, like the poet's whetted knife, slices across the Ailsa Course, blowing pinpoint, cold raindrops that hit the skin with a buck-shot sting.
Whitecaps bare their teeth across the gray waters of the Firth of Clyde, and just one solitary golfer is brave enough to make his way around the links.


At Home Abroad; To Love and Be Wise
For 60 years Glyndebourne has been a gem of the musical world: superbly produced opera performed in a country house amid English lawns and gardens.
All that was put at risk when the company's chairman, Sir George Christie, decided to replace the theater with a new and larger building.
It was an extraordinary gamble: a piece of folly, many said.
But the gamble has worked.
Glyndebourne now has an opera house that seats 1,200 instead of 800, has far better acoustics than the old house and is much better looking, inside and out.


Study Shows Grim Portrait of Deadly Families
When a spouse kills a spouse, wives are the victims in nearly 60 percent of the cases, a study released today by the Justice Department found.
The survey of 8,063 homicides in urban areas around the country provided a sketch of murder in families as national attention focused on domestic violence because of the O. J. Simpson case.
On Friday, a judge ordered Mr.
Simpson to stand trial on charges that he killed his former wife and her friend.


Bankers Competing to Lend In New York's Poorer Areas
When Robert Cohen wanted to buy two Tudor-style buildings at the corner of Cruger Avenue and Pelham Parkway in the Bronx in 1991, he had trouble finding a bank that would lend him the money.
Taking the one loan he could find at the time, he purchased the buildings and renovated everything from the boilers to the elevators to the mortar holding the rust-red bricks together.
Now, as Mr.
Cohen tries to refinance the buildings, he has four or five banks competing for his business.
His next-door neighbor has also been able to borrow enough money to renovate his building.
They are among many landlords benefiting from new sources of money streaming into working-class neighborhoods like theirs in the Bronx and the city as a whole.


Ialy's Triple Threat: Baggio, Baggio, Luck
Everything was tranquil on the Italian front this morning, following the triumph over Spain a day earlier that put the three-time World Cup champion Azzurri in the semifinals of this World Cup of surprises.
Coach Arrigo Sacchi, his dark glasses over his bald head, his maroon shirt unbuttoned, had a cordial meeting with the news media at the Italians' training center at the Pingry School here this morning.


Don't Let Health Care Go the Mississippi's Way; Doctors in the Cold
To the Editor:
The insurance industry argues that excluding qualified physicians from health maintenance organization plans when the plans are "full" in their specialty keeps down costs through less paperwork and increased physician incentive to work within the system.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Friday, about Schroders P.L.C.'s plan to buy the remaining 50 percent stake in the company's investment-banking affiliate in the United States, misspelled the name of the American firm.
It is Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company.


A Mezzo-Soprano Steps In As Dalila at Tanglewood
Though the traditional opening of the Tanglewood season on Friday night in the main music shed was overshadowed by the triumphant inauguration of Seiji Ozawa Hall the night before, and though the concert's premiere box-office draw, Jessye Norman, had called in sick, further diminishing its gala character, the event still displayed one of Tanglewood's strengths.
This summer festival is important not because of the virtues of its stars, but because it nourishes music in isolation from the familiar urban universe; careerism is replaced by relaxed musicianship.


Corrections
A report in the Pop Life column on Wednesday about the release of an Aerosmith song in the form of a computer file misstated the reason that it is of broadcast sound quality rather than of CD quality.
Standard telephone lines cannot transmit CD-quality sound to computers in a reasonable time, although the lines can transmit digital information.


Agency Is Renamed Greenberg Seronick
Rossin Greenberg Seronick of Boston has overhauled itself and changed its name to Greenberg Seronick &amp; Partners after the departure of Jack E. Rossin, the former president and chief executive who left in April to open Jack Rossin Strategic Marketing in Newton, Mass.


Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc.(PHYB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Unitrin Inc.(UNIT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Death by Social Convention, This Time in the Postwar Era
The actress and film star Kelly McGillis may have a thousand and one expressions at her command.
As the title character in the Roundabout Theater Company's unsatisfying revival of "Hedda Gabler," she relies largely on two.
Baring her teeth in a full, wide smile, holding her head high, she conveys a kind of grand conviviality that wants the world to believe she is in perfect control of herself and her life.
The gracious magnanimity is, however, a false front.
Behind it lurks Ms.
McGillis's other expression: a dark and fluttery discontent.
That's when anxious furrows ripple her broad forehead, her chin quivers and she chews on her lower lip.


I.R.S. Ruling Wrote Script For the Shubert Tax Break
In 1969, the Federal Government passed a tax law declaring that private charities generally could no longer own a controlling stake in a profit-making business.
Yet in 1979 the Shubert Foundation, through an inspired strategy, managed to avoid giving up its ownership of the Shubert theater chain.
This was not illegal, although some have questioned it.
It met the letter of the law and represented a great coup for the foundation.


Apple Offering New System for Macintosh PC's
Stung by a growing industry perception that the Microsoft Corporation is borrowing its best ideas, Apple Computer Inc. has introduced a version of its Macintosh software intended to maintain its lead in the personal computer ease-of-use wars.
The announcement on Friday came as the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit prepared to hear Apple's appeal of a Federal District Court ruling in 1993 that Microsoft and the Hewlett-Packard Company did not unfairly copy the distinctive on-screen appearance and functions of the Macintosh computer.
The appeal will be heard on Monday.


PRESSURE BY SERB ON ALLY IN BOSNIA
Maneuvering to bring an end to trade sanctions against his country, President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia has opened a campaign to discredit his erstwhile ally, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadzic.
The apparent aim is to force Dr.
Karadzic to accept a settlement of the Bosnian war proposed last week by major powers including the United States.
That would in turn lead the United Nations to ease the crippling trade embargo imposed two years ago against Yugoslavia to punish Serbia, its dominant republic, for its military support of the Bosnian Serbs.


Seeking Ballot Spot, Outsiders Brave the Petition Trail
For politicians scorned by their parties' conventions, the only way to earn a spot on the primary ballot in New York State is to get 15,000 voters to sign their petitions -- an endeavor that is both legally contentious and politically treacherous.
But this year, five credible candidates for statewide office, an unusually large number, are collecting signatures for the right to challenge the official choice of their party.


World Economies


From Spelling, a New Programming Adventure
In 1990, for the first time in 15 years, Aaron Spelling had no series on network television.
Hollywood weather vanes rotated toward the position that Mr.
Spelling, the producer of 1970's and 80's hits like "Charlie's Angels" and "Fantasy Island," had finally lost touch with public tastes.
In a measure of how this perception -- and the very nature of the television business -- has changed, Mr.
Spelling will probably have five programs running concurrently on Fox, CBS and NBC next season.
And in a new venture, he will also find himself competing directly for viewers against the very networks who are again clamoring for his services.


Armstrong's Rainbow Jersey Draws a Crowd
The Curse of the Rainbow Jersey sounds like the title of a novel that Lance Armstrong might read during a bicycle race, but it's not.
He insists it's an autobiography.
Since he won the rainbow-striped jersey of the world champion in the professionals' road race in Oslo last summer, Armstrong has had problems winning again in Europe.
Everybody knows who he is now, he says accurately, and nobody will let him make an unaccompanied attack in a race.


Mulholland Is Roughed Up by Angels (and Yankee Fans)
After only one California batter yesterday afternoon, the big crowd at Yankee Stadium was grumbling about Terry Mulholland, the starting pitcher for the home team.
The batter was Chad Curtis and he walked.
The grumble swelled into a loud chorus of booing when the second hitter, Spike Owen, put a home run over the left-field wall to give the Angels a 2-0 lead.
The vocal locals might have been harsher when Mulholland left the mound for good early in the fifth inning had not Buck Showalter, the manager, insisted on walking back to the dugout alongside him, a move that helped hold the catcalls to a gentle roar.


Owens Camp Says Opponent Fabricated Petition Theft
With the police saying they have turned up nothing in their investigation of the reported theft of petitions from the Congressional campaign office of Eric Adams, supporters of the incumbent, Representative Major R. Owens, claimed the break-in was a ploy to hide Mr.
Adams's lack of support.
"He never had the petitions," said Chris Owens, son of the 12-year Congressman and his campaign manager.
"He hasn't done his homework."


A Would-Be Salesman Buys Dream for Sweden
Just before this sun-drenched lottery of a World Cup began, Thomas Ravelli was asked to assess his Swedish team's chances.
He scratched his increasingly prominent forehead and responded with quiet confidence: "It has been 20 years since Sweden has had as good a team as we have now."
Four weeks later, Ravelli might want to revise that statement.
Thanks in large part to his timely performance in today's victory over Romania, this Swedish team is not merely the best in 20 years; it is the best since 1958, when another cohesive band from the land of short summer nights made it all the way to the final before losing to Pele and Brazil.


Bias Crime
Reports of bias crime incidents continued to rise across the region last year but declined in New York City.
Blacks and Jews were by far the most victimized groups, though in New York state offenses against homosexuals were also prevalent.
New York City experienced 60 percent of the state's total crime but just 51 percent of the bias crime reported.
Last year the United States Supreme Court ruled that states may impose harsher sentences on criminals who choose their victims on the basis of race, religion or other personal characteristics.
Connecticut and New Jersey have provisions for harsher penalties for bias offenses; New York does for offenses against religious institutions.
A broader bias crime bill has been debated for years in New York's Legislature but died each year in the Republican-led Senate.


Third Suspect Emerges in Series Of East Side Armed Robberies
A third suspect believed to be linked with two Queens men in a series of armed robberies on the Upper East Side of Manhattan is in custody, a police official said yesterday.
Investigators also are closing in on two jewelry stores in Manhattan that detectives suspect acted as fences for $500,000 in jewelry garnered in eight robberies dating to March 1993, said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


Professor's Plan Backfires: E-Mail Project Was Hoax
As hoaxes go, Samuel Brown's was pretty harmless, but he is taking no chance.
He has apologized to the people he fooled, and he readily admits that he was wrong.
His sin?
Mr.
Brown, an assistant professor of sociology at Fordham University, was curious about what kind of response his students would get to an assignment that would require each of them to reach 150 strangers by E-mail, or electronic mail.
So, posing as a student, he tried it himself, sending electronic messages to 150 residents of Abilene, Tex., telling them he needed more information on their city for a class project.


Giglio Tradition Continues in Brooklyn


Market Place; One manager, two funds and a shortage of places to invest.
WHAT'S a mutual fund manager to do when the public is so eager to throw money at him that he can't find places to spend it?
And, if that is the case, should the same manager be trying to sell a closed-end fund to invest in the same kind of stocks?


GBF/Ayer Acquires Pool of Los Angeles
GBF/Ayer of Los Angeles has bought Pool Communications, an agency based in Los Angeles that specializes in health care, hotel and resort advertising.
The terms were not disclosed.


Aluminum Co. of America (AA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bulgaria Ends Germany's Reign


No Headline
"But when all those boys who want their wives to stay home get married to all these girls who want to work, there's going to be a whole lot of fights." -- LAQUITA BROWN a 14-year-old from Chesapeake, Va.  [ B7:6. ]


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Borrowings the World Over, With a Pinch of Electronics  Supper Club
Toni Childs's show on Thursday night was a bit ethno-fuzzy.
Ms.
Childs, a Los Angeles-based singer, has spent a good part of her career nosing around in the music of other people, and her new album, "The Woman's Boat" (DGC), borrows from all over the globe.
In concert, with some electronic help, sitars buzzed away and African drumming made an appearance, as did a bit of reggae and other borrowings, all layered over a rock groove; the press release for the album boasts a "list of exotic instruments." Ms.
Childs herself came out with an African-styled headdress and a shell necklace.


Ernst Beadle, 73, Photographer, Dies
Ernst Beadle, a photographer whose work was published in Vogue, Harper's Bazaar and other magazines, died on June 21 at the Southwestern Vermont Medical Center in Bennington, Vt.
He was 73 and had lived since the 1980's in Vermont, most recently in the Bennington Convalescent Center.
The cause of death was heart failure, and he had diabetes and had suffered heart attacks, said Wini Hawkes, a friend.


When Opportunity Knocks (Again), Branco Gets Busy
His time had come and gone.
That is the way it seemed for Branco, as the national team of Brazil pushed through this World Cup with the style of its offensive skills and the substance of its defensive play.
Branco's time was four years ago in Italy, or four before that in Mexico.
He turned 30 in April, the fifth-oldest name on the national team's roster.
He was once considered one of his country's best defensive players, with a powerful leg in free-kick situations.
But as the Brazilians prepared to come to America, and the smallest detail of the national team became subject to debate, Branco's spot on the team became an issue.


For Police Corruption Battler, a Bitter Retirement; A 24-Year Career Marred by Ostracism for Blowing the Whistle on Misconduct
In one New York police precinct station house, Capt.
Gary Carey found a dead rat in his mailbox.
At another, he received a Christmas card wishing that he contract stomach cancer.
At a third station house, his locker was defaced and graffiti on the bathroom walls asserted that he was having an affair with his male driver.
In the last couple of years, while he was a commander in Coney Island, his subordinates ignored his orders to arrest prostitutes and their customers, he said -- and when he tried to make the arrests himself, they jammed his radio calls for backup support.
The tires of his cars were slashed in police precinct parking lots so many times in his 24-year career, he said, that "I considered buying stock in Firestone or Goodyear."


Coors Brewing Plans Sun Can Promotion
The Coors Brewing Company is introducing an unusual promotion for its Coors Light beer brand, with cans that reveal summertime images when they are chilled and exposed to sunlight.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Nature's Timeless Setting With a 20th-Century Dimension  Bargemusic
If there is a chamber-music space in New York more entrancing than Bargemusic I do not know it.
Docked just to the south of the Brooklyn Bridge on the Brooklyn side, this floating concert hall has a certain unquantifiable magic; the room is small and the acoustic warm, with the audience right in the thick of the sound.
Yachts silently glide past the windows, and the skyscrapers at the south end of Manhattan seem to sway gently as the barge rocks back and forth.


Chip Cipolla, Sports Announcer, 64
Chip Cipolla, a radio announcer for the New York Giants and other professional sports teams in the area, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 64.
According to a family friend, the cause of death was complications from cancer.
He had lived in Point Pleasant, N.J., in semi-retirement.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Networks' Simpson Vigil: A Low-Cost Reply to CNN
The three big broadcast networks had few second thoughts last week about clearing out almost all of their daytime schedules to cover the preliminary hearing in the O. J. Simpson murder case.
Their decisions were relatively easy for two main reasons: the courtroom coverage wasn't costing them all that much, and there was just too much interest in the story to allow viewers to slip away somewhere else, like CNN.


New Principals in the Royal's 'Sleeping Beauty'
The Royal Ballet from Britain, which has been showing off its grandly conceived if eccentric new "Sleeping Beauty," will plunge into its contemporary repertory this week with local premieres by Kenneth MacMillan and David Bintley, as well as "Mayerling," MacMillan's familiar and powerful costume drama about lust and strife among the Hapsburgs.
The more ordered world of Petipa's "Sleeping Beauty" was still on view Friday night at the Metropolitan Opera House when Miyako Yoshida and Irek Mukhamedov were the new principals.
The same performance featured an exceptional Bluebird danced by Stuart Cassidy, who will be the Prince when "The Sleeping Beauty" returns at the end of the season on July 18.


One Man's Free Journey Through World of Railroads
David F. Peters retired last month after nearly 33 years as a machinist for Amtrak in New Haven and was given the traditional farewell of an explosion of railroad flares set up along the tracks where he drove his last locomotive.
But in the basement of his home here, an outgrowth of his lifelong love of railroading still thrives -- a private railroad museum to which admission is free.


From Isolated Land, News Is Sparse
Kim Il Sung's death was the most important event on the Korean peninsula in decades, but because North Korea routinely refuse visas to journalists, they must follow the events from countries where broadcasts from North Korea can be monitored.
North Korea is one of the most secretive countries.
Before the collapse of the Soviet Union, a small number of journalists from other Communist countries visited Pyongyang, the capital.
But Western journalists have generally had access only on special occasions.


French Institute Series Of Films by Women
French films directed by women are the focus of a series at the French Institute/Alliance Francaise, starting Wednesday and running weekly through August.
The films deal with a wide range of social and emotional issues, from incest, divorce, aging, illness and death to love, friendship and religion.
Several films have never been shown in New York.
These include "Le Jour des Rois" (1991), starring Danielle Darrieux, Micheline Presle and Michel Galabru; "Max et Jeremie" (1992), starring Philippe Noiret and Christopher Lambert; "Simeon" (1992), filmed in Guadeloupe with members of the music group Kassav, and "Le Petit Prince a Dit" (1992), with Richard Berry and Anemone.


Shelter From the Sun


In Once-Peaceful Village, Roots of Rwanda Violence
Gesturing toward hills crisscrossed with small patches of corn and banana plants, Louise Kanzihira recalled how a gang of armed men swooped down on this village in April.
"They came from everywhere," she said.
Most of the attackers were from other villages, but she recognized a few as being from her own.


For This Court Choice, Policy Is Passion
When the Senate Judiciary Committee takes up the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Stephen G. Breyer on Tuesday, the focus of the discussion will probably be profoundly different from confirmation proceedings of recent years.
The issues expected to be considered most intensively with Judge Breyer are not emotion-laden subjects like abortion, the death penalty and freedom of speech.
Rather, the focus will most likely be on economic regulation: the authority of the Government to affect the marketplace, the responsibilities of corporations and the choices available to citizens.


Bulgaria, a Small Foot in Soccer, Steps Closer to Glass Slipper
With the same audacity he uses to score his many goals, Hristo Stoichkov has insisted, twice now, that God is a Bulgarian.
That's a bit much, but in this World Cup, Cinderella certainly is a Bulgarian.
The unglamorous, little-noticed team from Eastern Europe sent the regal defending champions home early today, upsetting Germany in the quarterfinals, 2-1, on two late goals.
One came, almost inevitably, from the magic foot of Stoichkov.
The other came from the bald head of Yordan Lechkov.


Unclimbed Summit; The Talks Begin With Modest Aims And Indeed End With Much Undone
Last year's economic summit conference, President Clinton said on Saturday, ended by "not accomplishing very much." This year, he suggested, "there was a real sense of confidence," and the achievements would therefore be greater.
If so, they were subtle, incremental and not very easy for most people to discern.


In Wake of Drive-By Shootings, Texas Contractor Sells Bullet Shields for Homes
There were 1,262 drive-by shootings in this city last year, in which at least 19 people died.
Scott Shaheen says he sees much shame in that statistic.
But he sees something else as well: a business opportunity.
At a cost of anywhere from $3,000 to $7,000 and up, Mr.
Shaheen, a general contractor, can make a house bullet-resistant, he says.
He will fortify the front doors, walls and ceilings with a bullet-blocking, fiberglass-based material that is a half-inch thick, throw in special panels to cover the windows and offer tips for avoiding the line of fire.


Memorial Services End Mourning Period for Rabbi Menachem Schneerson


Don't Let Health Care Go the Mississippi's Way
To the Editor:
Health care is about to suffer the same fate as the Mississippi River.
Recall that the Government tried to change its direction too.
Last spring's floods showed the folly of that attempt.
A similar prospect awaits health care: unintended consequences that won't surface for years.
Civil engineers now acknowledge their blunder with the Mississippi.
Congress should learn from this mistake, not repeat it with health care.


A Chip Off the Glorious Ryan Arm
From a distance, the resemblance is uncanny.
As he stares from the mound in the midday sun with glove poised at face level, the stance is the same.
So is the kick, the stride, the motion, the delivery.
Even the No. 34 on the jersey is there.


Berlin Journal; The Elite of the Classless Society, Now Declasse
The group of slightly shabby retirees chatting outside a library in eastern Berlin one recent afternoon hardly looked like former members of an international elite, comfortable with power and at ease in the company of kings and presidents.
But until 1990, these men and women were East German diplomats, among them specialists with unique webs of contacts in foreign lands.
As punishment for their service to East Germany, they are now banned from diplomatic posts, forbidden to practice the only trade most know.


Simpson Case Tells America About Itself
To the Editor:
The O. J. Simpson fracas has been debated enough from the pulpit, in the media and at the nation's barbershops and beauty salons.
America will just have to wait as the wheels of justice grind to their conclusion.
But because nothing takes place in a political vacuum, consider the following:


Notre Dame Draws Big East's Approval
Four months after Notre Dame's interest in the Big East was said to have lessened considerably, the Fighting Irish have been approved as the 13th member of the conference.
A person familiar with the discussions between the university and the league, speaking on the condition of anonymity, confirmed reports published over the weekend that a commitment was imminent and added that announcements were planned for today.
Notre Dame joins the league after what is believed to be a unanimous vote of the 12 members, including Rutgers and West Virginia, who were admitted last March 9.
According to the source, Notre Dame's participation will take effect during the 1995-96 season for all sports except football, in which the Irish will remain an independent.


Koch, Mellower Than Ever
That ubiquitous citizen and former municipal chief executive Edward I. (Call me Ed) Koch is writing up a storm these days.
He has the useful habit of circulating photocopies of everything written by or about him.
It makes for a thick folder, especially when you count his movie reviews. (Hated "Wolf," loved "Speed.")
There are some persistent themes.
Things have not worked so well since you-know-who left office.
Some Kochian ideas were so far ahead of their time that their true brilliance is only now being recognized.
Sometimes he perceives that city, state, nation and world are on a toboggan to doomsday.
In his darker moods, he can even identify the pushers of that toboggan.
These satanic forces include, we blush to report, this editorial page.


Oat Spray's Use Troubles General Mills
Consumers of Cheerios and other popular General Mills products scarcely noticed.
General Mills investors shrugged it off.
But lawyers will dine for months, if not years, on the cereal giant's woes with sprayed oats.
General Mills announced on June 15 that a contractor had been spraying imported oats headed for storage at its terminals in Duluth, Minn., and in Superior, Wis., with a pesticide called Dursban, instead of the federally approved and closely related product called Reldan 4E.


Korean Summit Talks Postponed As Northern Military Backs Heir
As North Korea entered a week of mourning for Kim Il Sung, its leader of nearly five decades, and his son appeared to consolidate his position as successor, the Government indefinitely postponed this morning the first summit meeting between the two countries.
In a one-sentence letter released by the South Korean Government, Kim Yong Sun, chairman of the North's Unification Policy Committee, said, "Because of the unusual state of affairs on our side, which has already been made known through urgent news reports, I have been instructed to inform you that the scheduled South-North summit meeting will have to be postponed."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on June 20 about the legal battle between the Towers Financial Corporation and its investors used an outdated name for one of the law firms involved.
The firm that represented Towers is Squadron, Ellenoff, Plesent, Sheinfeld &amp; Sorkin; it ceased to be known as Squadron, Ellenoff, Plesent &amp; Lehrer about two years ago.


Dividend Meetings


Patents Keeping Track of Federally Aided Technology Is the Subject of a Congressional Hearing Today
AN Inspector General's report scheduled to be the subject of a Congressional hearing today suggests that the National Institutes of Health, by failing to track patented technologies developed in part through Federal financing, may have abdicated the Government's rights to valuable medical inventions.
"We're talking about billions of dollars of taxpayer money that goes toward developing these technologies," said Representative Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, who is conducting the hearing by the House subcommittee on regulation, business opportunity and technology, of which he is the chairman.
"The N.I.H. isn't minding the store."


Partners, Not Allies, for Peace
Poland, like other countries in Eastern Europe, is unhappy that it is not being offered a firm timetable for full membership in NATO.
President Clinton was reminded of that when he visited last week.
The Partnership for Peace -- established in NATO to allay the insecurity of Russia's neighbors while not antagonizing Russia -- still leaves the East Europeans uneasy.
But Mr.
Clinton was wise to defer his decision.
To include countries such as Poland now invites the redrawing of lines in Europe and the start of a second cold war.
The Partnership for Peace is two things: an effort to integrate Russia into the rest of Europe, not leave it out in the cold, by developing the rudiments of collective security; and a hedge against failure, and the revival of Russian imperialism, by preparing to expand the alliance eastward.


Ozite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


You Can Indeed Go Home Again
In a 10-day jamboree of highlights at the United States Olympic Festival, which ended this afternoon, the most touching and perhaps defining moment took place Friday evening at the Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville track as St.
Louis welcomed back Jackie Joyner-Kersee.
Joyner-Kersee left East St.
Louis, Ill., for U.C.L.A. 14 years ago, launching a legendary career as a collegiate and Olympic heptathlete.
She has set world and Olympic records, won three Olympic Gold medals and with each new meet consolidates her status as one of the greatest athletes of the 20th century.


Buildings Department Irks Niche Professionals
Can't fight City Hall? Try the New York City Department of Buildings.
"They are trying to prevent me from earning a living," said Carlos Burbano, owner of CCBS Consulting, as he stood in line the other day at the department's fortresslike headquarters in lower Manhattan, his arms filled with paperwork and his voice rising in anger.


French Political Espionage Is Again a Cause Celebre
It seemed like a stroke of luck.
Assigned to "cover" a closed-door gathering of the opposition Socialist Party on June 19, the secret agent from the French political intelligence service bumped into a friend, who led him to an empty interpreter's booth overlooking the meeting room.
From there, he could watch and listen to the debate among top Socialists lamenting their latest electoral setback.
To make his job even easier, there was a telephone in the booth, and when Michel Rocard announced he was stepping down as Socialist leader, the agent promptly called his boss.


Rate Rise Is Widely Expected
Interest rates, particularly those controlled by the Federal Reserve Board, are headed higher, many credit market analysts and traders seem certain.
The only unresolved questions, they say, are the timing and the size of the next Fed increase.
What they had viewed as a likely increase in the overnight Federal funds rate turned Friday into a virtual certainty, when the Labor Department released a skein of new and revised employment figures for April, May and June that suggested the economy was boiling along in the second quarter.


CHRONICLE
As a first baseman for Yale, GEORGE BUSH was known for his smooth fielding and leadership, not for his bat.
Nonetheless, the former President was inducted -- along with eight others -- into the Maine Baseball Hall of Fame in Portland yesterday, The Associated Press reported.
The man who may be the state's most famous summer resident used to play summers for the Kennebunk Collegians, a group of college and prep school students that played other Maine teams.


After Battle of Nerves, Sweden Takes a Bow
As he stood in goal, balding at 34, disliking this moment when a soccer game of infinite possibility is distilled into the harshness of penalty kicks, Thomas Ravelli of Sweden knew that the outcome would be a matter of nerves, not skill.
"I wasn't nervous at all," Ravelli would say later.


For Disabled, a Voyage Toward Independence
Cathy O'Sullivan doesn't remember running through the fields on her grandmother's farm in Ireland on a trip with her parents 33 years ago, when she was 3.
But all last week Ms.
O'Sullivan, 36, had another chance to collect memories in Ireland.
She and three other developmentally disabled adults from the Venture East group home in New City, N.Y., returned home Saturday from a weeklong trip to Killarney.


CHRONICLE
An abandoned 35-pound setter-chow mix in St.
Louis got instant fame when it ran into RUE MCcLANAHAN, who is an animal lover as well as an actress.
Ms.
McClanahan and the cast of "Annie" found the frightened stray during a rehearsal on Thursday at the Muny Opera, an outdoor theater in a park, The Associated Press reported.
Ms.
McClanahan is playing Miss Hannigan, the orphanage administrator, in the musical.


Judaica Stolen From Budapest Is Reported Found
The bulk of a rare collection of Jewish artifacts stolen from the Budapest Jewish Museum late last year has been found in Romania, the police have announced.
Many of the 179 stolen pieces were found in the village of Dascalu, near Bucharest, the Romanian capital.
The police in Romania said two suspects of Romanian birth holding Romanian and German citizenship had been arrested in Austria and Germany.
The two men, Stefan Emilian and Nicolae Chirita, will be extradited to Romania, the police said.


Bratton May 'Beef Up' Brutality Review Squad
As part of a strategy to fight corruption, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that he was considering expanding a special squad in the Police Department's Internal Affairs Bureau so that it could respond more quickly to deaths of people in police custody and serious allegations of brutality.
The squad, called Group 54, now has about a dozen members and reviews brutality complaints monthly with the independent Civilian Complaint Review Board.
But, said John Miller, the Deputy Commissioner for Public Information, there is no mechanism for Group 54 members to respond immediately to controversial cases.


CHRONICLE
The British are coming! To eat, drink and study the American food market.
Britain's "minister of food," the Hon.
NICHOLAS SOAMES, M.P., officially the Parliamentary Secretary at the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, arrived in New York on Friday to attend the Summer International Fancy Food and Confection Show at the Javits Center.


Accounts
*
Clothestime Inc., Anaheim, Calif., to Mendelsohn/Zien Advertising, Los Angeles, to handle the women's apparel retailer's account, previously at Kresser/Craig, Santa Monica, Calif.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Crystal Brands Jewelry Group, New York, to Partners &amp; Shevack, New York, to handle advertising for its Monet jewelry brand.
The agency had handled the account three years ago; it has recently been dormant.
Billings were not disclosed.


Bridge
Woodstock '94, now a month away, is proving to have a minor impact on the New York bridge scene.
One of the chief organizers, in 1969 and again today, is John Roberts of Manhattan, who is also involved in the final of the Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Teams.
His Woodstock commitment will force a postponement of the second stage of the final until late August.
His Von Zedtwitz team is led by Claire Tornay of Manhattan and includes George Tornay and Judy Tucker, both of Manhattan, Tom Smith of Greenwich, Conn., and Gene Saxe of Stamford, Conn.
In the first stage of the final, played Thursday at Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street, they won by 45 imps against a hitherto undefeated group consisting of Jerry Goldberg of Yonkers; Bob Jaffe of Long Island City, and Jane Dillenberg, Jeff Rothstein and Nancy Kalow, all of Manhattan.


Dr. Arthur Hecht, Internist, Dies at 67
Dr.
Arthur Hecht, an internist and endocrinologist, died on Wednesday at the Beth Israel Medical Center.
He was 67 and lived in Stuyvesant Town in Manhattan.
The cause was non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, said his wife, Dr.
Pauline G. Hecht, who is a general surgeon.


The 6-10 Lefty Who Has Batters Trembling in Their Boxes
A nightmare. Enough to question one's faith.
That's the general mix of alarm, apprehension and dismay major league batters feel when they have the privilege of stepping in against Randy Johnson, the Seattle Mariners' left-hander who has raised the art of pitching and winning through intimidation to new heights.


Mourning Those the Fire Claimed


Keyes Fibre Hires Jerry &amp; Ketchum
The Keyes Fibre Company of Norwalk, Conn., has named Jerry &amp; Ketchum of New York to handle advertising for its Chinet brand of disposable dinnerware, previously at Gregory &amp; Clyburne Inc. of Stamford, Conn.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.
Jerry &amp; Ketchum was awarded the account after a two-month review that was narrowed to one other finalist, Chiat/Day of New York.
A campaign is expected to begin in September.


INSIDE
Questioning a 'Technocrat'
When the Senate takes up the nomination of Judge Stephen G. Breyer to the Supreme Court, his views of regulation will take center stage.
Page A13.
Worried by CNN
Dropping soap operas for the O. J. Simpson proceedings, the big three networks showed a fear of their cable rival.
Business Day, page D1.
A Vote on United Airlines
Shareholders will decide tomorrow on the employees' offer of wage and work-rule concessions in return for 55 percent of the company.
Page D1.
A2 Arts


The Harm in a Budget Ideology
The House plans to vote soon on proposals that would amend procedures for passing the budget.
The sponsors say their goal is to cut out fat and reduce the deficit.
But the unstated, and ominous, impact would be to stop Congress from switching money from low-priority to high-priority programs.
President Clinton's pledge to retilt spending toward long-term investments would be destroyed.
Representatives Charles Stenholm of Texas, Tim Penny of Minnesota and John Kasich of Ohio have proposed a number of harmful new rules.
Among them is a proposal to alter the way Congress compares year-to-year changes in discretionary programs.
Under current procedures, Congress compares future spending levels to current spending adjusted upward by inflation.
That way Congress can instantly see if benefits under a program will expand or shrink.


Canandaigua Wine reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Patents Keeping Track of Federally Aided Technology Is the Subject of a Congressional Hearing Today
AN Inspector General's report scheduled to be the subject of a Congressional hearing today suggests that the National Institutes of Health, by failing to track patented technologies developed in part through Federal financing, may have abdicated the Government's rights to valuable medical inventions.
"We're talking about billions of dollars of taxpayer money that goes toward developing these technologies," said Representative Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, who is conducting the hearing by the House subcommittee on regulation, business opportunity and technology, of which he is the chairman.
"The N.I.H. isn't minding the store."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  RUSSIA BALKS ON BALTIC ISSUE
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, not yielding to President Clinton's prodding, said at the Group of Seven summit meeting that he could not withdraw all Russian troops from Baltic countries by August 31.
A1


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about a judge's decision that O. J. Simpson should stand trial for murder referred incorrectly in some copies to the testimony heard by the parents of one victim, Ronald L. Goldman.
Mr.
Goldman's parents were in court during the deputy medical examiner's testimony about the other victim, Nicole Brown Simpson.
They were not in court for the testimony about Mr.
Goldman's wounds.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Producer Prices . . .
June  Consumer Borrowing . . .
May  Wednesday  Consumer Prices . . .
June  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Retail Sales . . .
June  Friday  Industrial Production . . .
June  Capacity Utilization . . .
June  Business Inventories . . .
May


AIDS Babies: O.K., Now Prove It
The State Legislature's failure to take any action whatever that would speed the testing and treatment of babies infected with the AIDS virus leaves the shameful status quo unchanged.
Scores if not hundreds of AIDS-infected babies will continue to be born in New York every year without anyone trying to identify them or treat their disease until they become visibly sick.
The surest way to identify these unfortunate youngsters early would be to test them -- either by using the results of an anonymous testing program that now tests all babies to track the epidemic or by administering a separate test.
But that approach was blocked by strong opposition from AIDS activists and women's groups; they complained that testing the baby amounts to testing the infected mother as well, invading her privacy and rendering her vulnerable to discrimination.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
American Homestar Corp., Webster, Tex., an initial public offering of two million shares.
Rauscher Co.


A Vision for an Asbury Park Hotel
Bruce Springsteen crooned tributes to this beach town in the 1970's, but it has long since fallen from grace.
Years of economic decline have left the Palace Amusements building dilapidated and the souvenir shops deserted.
On most days, gulls share the weathered boardwalk with sad-faced wanderers.
Now an unlikely champion -- the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi -- has offered the city hope, not just for the comeback of its tourism business but, his followers say, for a revival in more ethereal ways as well.


The New Military Order
As the House and Senate prepare to confer on the Defense Authorization bill, Democrats and Republicans have largely set aside their conflicts and are sticking with the spending target of $252 billion -- a cut of 4 percent, adjusting for inflation, from last year.
But a growing number of lawmakers and military commanders are arguing that the planned cuts go too deep and could endanger military readiness.
By the end of the decade, defense outlays are projected to decline in real terms by more than one-third from the highs of the 1980's.
No complex organization can be reduced so quickly without incurring problems.
And, as troubles from Haiti to the former Soviet republics underscore, the world remains an uncertain place.


Saberhagen Gives Mets A Reason To Smile
Bret Saberhagen will not be satisfied, or even pleased, when he boards his flight to Pittsburgh this evening.
That is not going to happen -- not with the Mets seven games under .500 and 13 back of the division-leading Montreal Expos as baseball enters its annual All-Star break.
It would be impossible, though, for Saberhagen to depart without at least a small sense of personal pride and a slight feeling of second-half hope.


METRO DIGEST
I.R.S. TAX BREAK IS SHUBERT'S BIG SCRIPT
Despite a 1969 tax law generally forbidding charities to control profit-making businesses, the Shubert Foundation, through an inspired strategy, managed to avoid giving up its ownership of the Shubert theater chain.
The unusual 1979 tax ruling represented a great coup for the foundation, letting the Shubert theater empire remain intact, and enabling the foundation to grow and prosper.
A1.


Don't Let Health Care Go the Mississippi's Way; Take the Profit Out
To the Editor:
The hysteria that has overtaken many physicians, hospitals and medical schools, who are scrambling to form their own alliances in advance of health care reform, will not save us money, any more than the greedy opportunism of the largest health insurance companies and for-profit health maintenance organizations.
The reason is the for-profit health industry is counting on profits of as much as 30 cents on the dollar.


Twice Over Lightly, With Comedy and Claws
PBS is on a campaign devoted to what it calls "lightening up public television's summer season." Much lighter and the schedule will need sandbags to keep it from floating into commercial ether.
Among the trifles on tap: "The Story of Lassie," "In Search of Angels" and "Dr. Joyce Brothers Asks, 'How's Your Love Life?' " This is what passes nowadays for alternative television.
Tonight PBS weighs in with two new series on the lighter side.
One is a sort of sitcom spinning off from a comedy special on Showtime; the other is a talk show imported from the BBC.
Both are indeed decidedly offbeat, not the kind of fare likely to pop up on the commercial networks.


Little to Do in Baconton But Wait for the Flood
Somewhere, drifting through the back waters of Irvin Jackson's memory, is a 15-year-old boy who tried to become a man by swimming the Flint River on a hot summer day in 1930.
The undertow, invisible under the deceptively sluggish brown water, pulled him under three times before he finally touched the other side, and he has never really gotten over his fear of the river.
"I got no use for it," said Mr.
Jackson, who is now 79.
"I can't drink it and I sure can't walk on it."


2 Hurt as Party Draws a Crowd And Youths Argue, Then Brawl
MINEOLA, L.I., July 10 --
A summer night birthday party for a 17-year-old girl turned into a brawl in a quiet neighborhood in Mastic early this morning, ending with two young men hospitalized with head injuries and stab wounds, the police said.
The fighting began shortly after 1 A.M. when the party, attended by at least 75 youths between 17 and 22 years old, "turned sour," according to Detective Sgt.
George Horvath of the Suffolk County police.


WORLD CUP '94: Sports of The Times; The Bulgarians Speak Soccer With Fluency
THE road to the World Cup championship goes through western Europe.
It blasts down the Autobahn through Germany, makes a screeching dip down the Autostrada into Italy, careens back into the Autoroute of France and then races down the Autopista of Spain, toward the riches of Barcelona and Madrid.
This is reality.
It just sounds like wild and crazy outsiders from Bulgaria and Sweden are invading the sacred precincts of the World Cup semifinals.
They are not auslanders or stranieri at all.
These are tried and true practitioners of western European football.
It's all about money.


Banks' Supervision Faulted In Theft at Cash Warehouse
When the operators of a Long Island armored-car company were charged last year with stealing as much as $45 million from their own vaults, many wondered how the victims, some of the nation's largest banks, could have been deceived so badly.
Now, a court-appointed overseer has placed some of the blame on the banks themselves, saying that the six banks who hired Revere Armored Inc. of Bohemia, L.I., appeared to be lax in their monitoring of that company and that one bank's dealings with Revere may involve a felony.


CHRONICLE
PATRICK PACHECO, a freelance journalist, has just received -- or rather, eaten -- the last payment for an assignment he undertook about two years ago.
Mr.
Pacheco was the ghostwriter for ANGELA LANSBURY on the preface to "The Little Pie Company of the Big Apple Pies and Other Dessert Favorites," published last year by Harper Perennial.
Mr.
Pacheco said: "Arnold Wilkerson, one of the shop's owners, said, 'Would you take the fee in pies?' and I said, 'Sure.' We decided $800 worth of pies would be fair."


Court Expert Told to Draw Nassau Map
Exasperated by the failure of feuding Republicans and Democrats to agree on district lines for a new legislature in Nassau County, a Federal judge today appointed a Manhattan lawyer to propose the political map for them.
The judge, Arthur D. Spatt of Federal District Court here, issued an order giving Edwin J. Wesely, an expert in complex litigation and multiparty disputes, the authority to develop and recommend a legislative districting plan the judge could impose on Nassau.
Mr.
Wesely is to meet with the disputing parties and their lawyers starting Wednesday.


Philip H. Long, 78; Forced Tax Agency To Be More Open
Philip H. Long, whose 15 years of litigation forced the Internal Revenue Service to make its operations less secretive, died last Wednesday at Overlake Hospital in Bellevue, Wash.
A longtime resident of Bellevue, he was 78.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Amerco reports earnings for Year to March 31


First Virginia Banks Inc.(FVB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article and a headline on Sunday about a meeting planned between Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Vietnam's Foreign Minister described it incorrectly.
It would be the fifth between an American Secretary of State and a Vietnamese Foreign Minister since the country was unified, not the first.


Sports of The Times; Four Stars On Baseball's Mountaintop
BARRY BONDS was considered "the best player in baseball" in recent years but now that title has been awarded to Ken Griffey Jr.
Or should it be awarded to Frank Thomas?
Or by the end of the season will all the headlines belong to Matt Williams if he, rather than Griffey or Thomas, were to break Roger Maris's record of 61 homers?
If, that is, the 162-game season isn't interrupted or shortened by a strike.


Clean Harbors (CLHB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday about the ribbon cutting for a housing project in Harlem referred incorrectly in some copies to State Comptroller H. Carl McCall's location in the picture.
He was gesturing at the right.


First Empire State Corp.(FES,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Climbers Stage Aerial Protest in Midtown


No Time for Funnies: Brazilians Must Win
Carlos Alberto Parreira, the national team coach of Brazil, used a security-guard escort for his crowded news conference today, but at least his inquisitors were asking questions this time instead of demanding changes.
Twelve days ago, he was Pariah, not Parreira, having subjected his country to a "national tragedy" by drawing 1-1 against Sweden in the first round of the World Cup.
The news media, Pele, Brazilian President Itamar Franco, even Parreira's own mother were calling for changes in the lineup.
Now, with Sweden on the schedule again in Wednesday's semifinal, Parreira has reversed his fortunes.
He is a momentary hero, a rainmaker on the verge of ending Brazil's 24-year title drought.


President Had to Answer Far Right's Attacks; Give 'em Hell, Bill
To the Editor:
"Now, Focus the President" (editorial, June 28), on changes in Mr.
Clinton's staff and on his striking out at the media for uniquely unfair attacks on him, chides the President and calls his description of that unfairness ahistorical, citing Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
This is not the first time journalists have shown mistaken ideas of the media of the past.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  HAITI EJECTING U.N.
OBSERVERS  Haiti ordered United Nations and Organization of American States human rights monitors to leave, saying they were disturbing public order, after they reported an increase in rights violations.
A1


Key Patent On AIDS To Favor The French
French and American health agencies today announced a scientific peace treaty that is intended to end a 10-year-long dispute over the division of royalties from the patent on the AIDS blood test.
The reapportionment of the royalties is designed to let each side earn an equal amount of money over the full 14-year life of the patent, due to end in 2002.
That was the original intent, but because more American tests were sold than French tests, the Americans had made more money until now.
The French will make more in the last years of the patent.


UKRAINIANS ELECT A NEW PRESIDENT
A former director of the Soviet Union's largest missile factory won Ukraine's presidential election on Sunday after promising to cooperate more closely with Russia and to speed economic reform.
The victory by the industrialist, Leonid D. Kuchma, shocked nationalists, who fear he will push Ukraine back into Moscow's orbit.
He denies any such intention but he must deal quickly with a deepening split between nationalistic western Ukraine and the Russian-speaking eastern part of the country.


Clues to the Irrational Nature of Dreams
FIRST comes drowsiness and a sense that it's time to rest.
Eyelids grow heavy.
Stray thoughts flicker through the mind as sleep begins, often with a sudden twitch.
And then the human brain falls into a state of profound madness filled with hallucinations, delusions and confabulations.
Dreams unfold.
We walk, run, fly and float through strange landscapes.
Characters appear and turn into different people.
Objects are transformed.
A rope becomes a snake.
Uncle Harry turns into a Tibetan monk and it all makes sense in some screwy, dreamlike way.


President Had to Answer Far Right's Attacks; Why No Troopergate?
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis accuses the "nasty, irresponsible British press" of right-wing bias and cites a column I wrote for The Times of London last January concerning, strangely enough, liberal bias in the United States media ("Down the Tabloid Slope," July 4).


Bertucci
Shares of Bertucci Inc., an operator of 55 casual-dining Italian restaurants, rebounded yesterday from a 37 percent slide on Friday that took them to a record low.
The drop followed the company's announcement that quarterly earnings would fall to about 12 to 14 cents a share, below analysts' estimates of 18 cents.


Chess
The final knockout match in the Intel World Grand Prix in Manhattan ended in an upset of the world champion, Gary Kasparov of Russia, by his protege, 19-year-old Vladimir Kramnik, also of Russia.
Kramnik's score of 1 1/2- 1/2 in their two-game contest earned him the $30,000 first prize and relegated Kasparov to second place and a $20,000 prize.
Sixteen of the world's best players took part in this tournament, which was run under the "active" format of all moves in 25 minutes for each player in each game.
Kramnik and Kasparov cut a swath through the opposition to set up their dramatic finale in the Jacob Javits Convention center on June 30.


Leslie Fay and Garment Union Reach Pact
The Leslie Fay Companies and the International Ladies Garment Workers Union said yesterday that they had reached a tentative agreement that would end a six-week strike.
Under the terms of the agreement, which must be approved by a bankruptcy judge, some 600 production jobs will be retained in the Wilkes-Barre area of Pennsylvania for three years.
When negotiations began in March, the company said it planned to move all production offshore, eliminating more than 1,000 jobs.


Doctors Are Sparring With Insurers Over Right to Join Health Networks
In a battle that will profoundly shape the way American medical care is delivered, doctors across the country are pressing for state and Federal laws to make it harder for insurance companies and health maintenance organizations to exclude doctors from health care networks.
These managed-care networks generally have lists of doctors who agree to work for discounted fees; patients must choose from among these doctors to receive insurance reimbursement.


Patterns
Knockoffs vs. the Real Thing
Gianni Versace became so frustrated with the speed at which knockoffs make it into stores that he discussed moving his ready-to-wear show to New York from Milan, giving copyists a month's less time.
But he seems to have settled on another method of slowing the pace.
He banned Bloomingdale's from his men's collection in Milan on June 26 and said he would not invite Kalman Ruttenstein, the store's fashion director, to his July 17 couture show.


An Individualist Widens Her Reach
Maybe you know who Yeohlee is, but you shouldn't feel too bad if you don't.
She is not a superstar designer, but she has a loyal following of customers who appreciate her distinctive style, which is more timeless than trendy yet never evokes a yawn.
And in a precarious business with a high dropout rate, she has proven her staying power.
For nearly 14 years, she has owned her own company, called simply Yeohlee, and she has built it up to annual sales of nearly $10 million.
She has never had a financial backer, preferring instead to gamble with her own money to keep total control over what she designs and produces.


Prisoner Dies in Custody
A 29-year-old Long Island man, who had been smoking crack cocaine in a Queens motel and creating a disturbance, died in police custody on Sunday, the police said yesterday.


Big Payday at the Brickyard
The Brickyard 400, the first stock car race at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway scheduled for Aug. 6, will very likely pay a bigger purse than the Daytona 500 does.
The race, for which more than 280,000 seats were sold out within days last year, now has a posted purse of $2,687,249, Bob Walters, a Speedway spokesman, said yesterday from Indianapolis.
That is less than the $2,756,845 paid last Feb. 20 at the Daytona 500, the race generally considered the biggest stock car race in the world before the Brickyard 400 was announced.
But added awards expected before race day could push the Brickyard purse beyond $3 million, Walters said, making it the richest race on the Winston Cup tour.


Here's My Team. See It Soon at Your Own Risk.
The primary marketing campaign the Yankees are now waging is one of fear.
For over a year, George Steinbrenner and his many minions have agitated about how crime, parking, sanitation, traffic and bad highways conspire to hold down Yankee Stadium attendance.
The campaign is only too obviously aimed at scaring up a new stadium like Jacobs Field in Cleveland.
The campaign stepped up on July 6 when the Yankees circulated a press release lamenting the 22,021 attendance on July 4.
Its headline read: "Yankees Say Fear of Crime, Lack of Parking Kept Fans Away on Fourth of July." Take note, it was "Yankees Say," with no evidence of the team's assertion from fans.


No. 21, a Hero With Both Bat and Heart
Inside Three Rivers Stadium, Ruben Sierra talked of the impact a man had made on the life of a young boy from a poor family and a poor town in Puerto Rico.
"I knew last year the All-Star Game was going to be here," Sierra said.
"Ever since then, I wanted to be here where he played. He was the greatest. That's why I wear his number, in honor of him. Not because I can be like him but because of an honor for him."


METRO DIGEST
CORRUPT OFFICER SENTENCED TO PRISON
Apologizing for disgracing his fellow police officers, Michael Dowd was sentenced to spend at least 11 years in prison for a career of crime in uniform that when it came to light two years ago, touched off New York City's worst police scandal in two decades.
A1.


Death Penalty Politics in New York
Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York believes that he is being unfairly accused of playing politics with his proposal to hold a referendum on the death penalty.
His claim, of course, is naive or disingenuous.
For a seasoned opponent of the death penalty to put out a press release calling for such a vote in the middle of a campaign year is by definition a political act.
Moreover, it can reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to get off the hook with voters who do not share his opposition to capital punishment.
That said, Mr.
Cuomo has beat such a hasty retreat that there is probably little harm done, except to the Governor's reputation for constancy.
In fairness to him, the idea of a referendum is one that he has floated from time to time, but this time it came in the trappings of a legislative proposal.
That contributed to the sense of betrayal among capital-punishment opponents who have long regarded Mr.
Cuomo as their champion.


Under Cover


THE HEALTH CARE DEBATE: WASHINGTON MEMO Health Plans Set Congress On Swift, Fateful Course
Nothing about the last 18 months of the health care struggle has been easy, least of all for a public trying to make sense of it all.
But Congress is now leaving the rapids of health care and heading for the falls.
The next five weeks, leading up to what Democratic leaders hope will be a vote on a health care law, will test Congress, the White House, the two parties and the masses of organized interest groups in ways they have never been tested before.


Carl Barnett; Newspaper Foreman, 76
Carl Barnett, a general foreman for the delivery department of The New York Times for more than 30 years, died on Saturday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 76 and a resident of Port Washington, L.I.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his wife, Mary, said.


Ear May Distinguish Bipeds From Monkeys
THE quest for understanding when and why human ancestors began walking on two feet has traditionally involved analyses of the motor components of fossil skeletons and the footprint trails of early hominids.
Now a team of European scientists has begun focusing on the bony labyrinth of the inner ear.
Because good balance is critical for bipeds, the researchers decided to examine the fossil record to determine whether clues to human evolution could be found in the bony semicircular canals preserved in the skulls of early hominids.
In living vertebrates, the fluid-filled semicircular canals of the inner ear form the sense organs that control balance.


Tyson Tells Sentencing Judge His Conduct Was 'Inexcusable'
MIKE TYSON yesterday asked the judge who has presided in his case to reconsider her decision not to let him out of prison early, saying he knows his behavior toward a teen-age beauty contestant was "inexcusable."
Tyson was sentenced in March 1992 to six years in an Indiana prison after a Superior Court jury convicted him of rape.
The former heavyweight champion is scheduled to be released in May 1995.


A New Tape Taints Colombian Election
Almost three weeks after the release of tapes that tainted the presidential elections with accusations of connections with members of the Cali drug cartel, another, similar tape has surfaced.
The furor had just died down over the first tape, which indicated that President-elect Ernesto Samper Pizano had accepted drug money as campaign contributions, when the new tape was delivered Sunday to foreign news organizations and embassies here.


And They Also Let Women Into the Club
To the Editor:
Six months ago, the Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, Judith S. Kaye, was asked to leave the dining room of an all-male club in New York City because she happens to be a woman.
I am surprised that your July 4 legislative update of the session in Albany fails to mention the passage of the private clubs bill, legislation that was pending in Albany for 13 years and which will finally make it illegal for clubs where business is conducted to discriminate against women and minorities.


Somali Kidnapping: Should Press Be Mum?
News organizations all over the world agreed not to report the kidnapping of a reporter for The Associated Press in Somalia during a 20-day captivity that ended on Friday.
The kidnapping -- and the information that news organizations did not report it -- was first disclosed publicly in an Associated Press dispatch printed by many newspapers on Saturday.
The reporter, Tina Susman, was released in good health on Friday.


Market Place; After a selloff, the auto stocks may hold new promise.
THROUGH the spring and into the summer, the auto makers and almost all financial analysts who cover them firmly predicted robust sales and earnings for the industry well into 1996.
But the auto makers' stocks kept falling.
"The stock market has been saying for months now, 'We don't believe any of you guys,' " said Harvey Heinbach, an auto industry analyst for Merrill Lynch in New York.
Then, after an upbeat report on June sales last week, investors shed their doubts and aggressively bid up the stocks on Thursday.
Although they have retreated a bit since then, General Motors, Ford and Chrysler have held on to most of their recent gains.


Doctors vs. H.M.O.'s
In a crucial battle on health, medical groups say H.M.O.'s are unfairly excluding doctors from their networks.
Page A16.


It's Called Targeted Stock; Shun It, Some Experts Say
If some of Wall Street's financial engineers have their way, an exotic corporate financing tool known as targeted stock will be coming soon to a company near you.
When it does, some experts advise, run for the hills.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.31
4.32
3.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.50
4.35
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.94
4.81
3.14
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.45
7.41
5.73
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.72
7.69
6.62
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.48
8.47
7.36
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.52
6.48
5.70
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Auto Finance Charges Jumped in Spring
Finance charges for buying new cars and trucks spiked upward this spring at a pace not seen since 1988, a Labor Department economist said today.
After declining steadily for three years, the charges moved up in April, after the Federal Reserve raised interest rates.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Paul Carey, first baseman, from the 60-day disabled list and optioned him to Rochester of the International League.
Sent Rick Forney, pitcher, outright to Bowie of the Eastern League.
National League


U.S. Gets Its Money's Worth in Science
To the Editor:
Re "Congress Versus Science" (Op-Ed, June 27) by Robert L. Park: As a member of an apparently dispensable generation of scientists, I would like to speak in favor of support of basic research and against Congressional micromanagement of national science policy.


Not Simply Statistics As Key Has Starter Role
In baseball, strutting peacocks and petulant superstars often drain the energies of managers and take attention away from their quieter and yet equally productive peers.
But not always, not even at All-Star Games.
That was evident today when Jimmy Key, one of the most unassuming but most proficient pitchers in the game, was rewarded not only for his fine numbers, but also his teamwork and gentlemanly approach.


How Can We Instill Democracy in Haiti?
To the Editor:
As an American who lived and worked for a United States corporation in Haiti for three years in the 1950's, and who has followed our State Department's vacillating Haitian policy since then, I am bemused to read that the latest of many unreal justifications for invasion is "the protection of Americans in Haiti" (news article, July 4).


HAITI ORDERS OUT FOREIGN MONITORS OF HUMAN RIGHTS
The army-backed Government defied the international community today by ordering human rights monitors from the United Nations and the Organization of American States to leave Haiti by Wednesday morning.
The United Nations spokesman, Eric Falt, said the Government, in a written order delivered at 9 A.M., warned the human rights mission to leave Haiti to avoid an incident or provocation.


Q&amp;A
Silver Tarnish
Q.  What makes silver tarnish? Is tarnish the same thing as rust?


First Bancorp. of Ohio (FBOH,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Time Warner cable moves local spots into a tonier neighborhood.
CABLE television commercials for local retailers that don't assault viewers' eardrums or insult their intelligence?
It's not "The Twilight Zone," it's "The Neighborhood Spot."
Time Warner City Cable Advertising -- which sells commercial time on three cable systems in New York City, reaching nearly a million households -- has introduced an innovative series of 60-second commercials, produced in a feature format, called "The Neighborhood Spot." The initial commercials began appearing in mid-May and are scheduled to run through this week.


Media General (MEG.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


McDonald's and EMI Join on a Promotion
The McDonald's Corporation and the EMI Records Group North America said yesterday that they would team up in the fall for the fast-food chain's first national music premium promotion.
Customers at more than 9,500 McDonald's restaurants will be able to buy compact disks and cassette tapes featuring songs by popular groups and singers.
Their sale will raise funds for the Ronald McDonald Children's Charities.


Vexing Pursuit of Breast Cancer Gene
MY TATE of Richmond is thinking about something no 23-year-old should have to consider: getting rid of her healthy young breasts.
Already her family has suffered enough misery to satisfy Sophocles.
Her grandmother was diagnosed with breast cancer at age 39 and died of it eight years later, her body a brutal tapestry of surgical scars and radiation burns.
In 1989, Ms.
Tate's aunt, Mary Jo Ellis Kahn, also learned she had breast cancer, at age 39.
As Ms.
Kahn was in the hospital having her mastectomy, Ms.
Tate's mother, Judi Ellis, discovered that she, too, had breast cancer, at age 41.
Both women went through months of harsh chemotherapy, which was enough to persuade Ms.
Tate's other two maternal aunts, Charlynn Ross and Lauran Ellis, to have prophylactic mastectomies in their mid-30's.


Concord Fabrics Inc.(CIS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Roger H. Wells, 100, Expert on Germany
Roger Hewes Wells, a political scientist and authority on Germany who taught for four decades at Bryn Mawr College, died on June 16 at the Barton Stone Christian Home in Jacksonville, Ill.
He was 100.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his daughter Elsa Wells Kormann.


Bandag Inc.(BDG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a chart on Monday about a poll of teen-agers misstated a question on teen-age girls' view of boys' attitudes.
The poll found that 49 percent of all respondents, 42 percent of girls and 56 percent of boys agreed with the statement "Do most girls you know think of boys as lesser than themselves," (not as "better than themselves").


Paul M. Naghdi, 70, Expert on Designing Safe Tall Structures
Paul Mansour Naghdi, a mechanical engineer who spent four decades studying how to build tall structures so that they can withstand the caprice of nature, died on Saturday at his home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 70.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Observer; The Joy of Being Earnest
There is an old story that Ernest Hemingway once saw Zelda and Scott Fitzgerald cavorting in the fountain outside New York's Plaza Hotel and felt challenged.
Being intensely competitive, Hemingway cried, "I can do a fountain cavort twice as good as Scott's and, what's more, I can do it without even getting my knees wet." With which he leaped into the fountain and started to do the classic cavorter's veronica, which Manolete had taught him in the fountains of Andalusia.


Israeli-Palestinian Talks Start
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators began talks today in Cairo on expanding Palestinian autonomy in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and settling outstanding security issues in the self-rule areas.
The talks marked a new phase in the Middle East peace effort.
They opened as Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, landed in Cairo after leaving Tunisia, home to the P.L.O. for the last 12 years.
On Tuesday, he will travel to his new home in the self-rule areas of Gaza and Jericho.


There's Always Room for Another Stage on Broadway


Last Respects to North Korean Leader
North Korean leaders paid tribute to Kim Il Sung in Pyongyang yesterday.
The North Korean television broadcast showed, from right, Vice President Kim Yong Ju, Prime Minister Kang Song San, Kim Jong Il, the heir apparent to Kim Il Sung, and Defense Minister O Jin Wu.
Page A3. (Agence France-Presse)


Astronomers Prepare for Comet's Collision With Jupiter
In the forlorn hope that Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 will kindle some fireworks when it begins hitting Jupiter next Saturday, astronomers will aim virtually every major telescope on earth or aboard an airplane, rocket or spacecraft at the giant planet to look for reflections and remnants of the unseen show -- if one occurs.
When the first of about 21 large chunks of the disintegrating comet slams into Jupiter at 3:54 p.m.
EDT on Saturday (give or take about 20 minutes), thousands of scientists from the South Pole to Canada and from the Hawaiian Islands to the Canaries will have to content themselves with observing and measuring the wrong side of the planet.
Even the cleverest scientific techniques cannot change the fact that the vast bulk of Jupiter will stand squarely between the show and the audience.


CHRONICLE
JEFF BRIDGES, 44, received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame and the services of someone to care for it at the same time.
Mr.
Bridges, a three-time Oscar nominee, received the Walk of Fame's 2,030th star yesterday from the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce, The Associated Press reported.
The star is next to that of his father, the actor Lloyd Bridges.


It's Called Diplomacy, Senator
Bob Dole, the Senate minority leader, is preparing to run for the Republican Presidential nomination in 1996.
He thus invites us to measure his words and actions against that lofty aspiration, to treat him not just as a partisan politician but as a potential world leader.
By that standard, his captious criticism of President Clinton's comments following the death of the North Korean leader Kim Il Sung is disturbing.
What provoked his ire was Mr.
Clinton's statement extending "sincere condolences to the people of North Korea" and expressing appreciation for Mr.
Kim's leadership in resuming talks with the United States.
Whatever stumbles Mr.
Clinton may have made in foreign affairs, in this case he struck the right note.
After months of nervous diplomacy, Mr.
Kim had offered to resume conversations about North Korea's nuclear program; it was clearly in Mr.
Clinton's interest to thank him for that and to encourage Mr.
Kim's successors to continue along the path of accommodation.


Pharmaceutical Giant Is Buying Operator of Drug-Benefit Plans
In the latest consolidation of health care providers, Eli Lilly &amp; Company announced yesterday that it would buy PCS Health Systems, the country's largest manager of drug benefit programs, from the McKesson Corporation for $4 billion in cash.
The deal will give Lilly, a pharmaceutical manufacturer based in Indianapolis, better access to the insurance companies and employer health plans that are customers of PCS and that buy billions of dollars worth of drugs a year.
PCS provides drug benefits for about 50 million people.


Ear May Distinguish Bipeds From Monkeys
THE quest for understanding when and why human ancestors began walking on two feet has traditionally involved analyses of the motor components of fossil skeletons and the footprint trails of early hominids.
Now a team of European scientists has begun focusing on the bony labyrinth of the inner ear.
Because good balance is critical for bipeds, the researchers decided to examine the fossil record to determine whether clues to human evolution could be found in the bony semicircular canals preserved in the skulls of early hominids.
In living vertebrates, the fluid-filled semicircular canals of the inner ear form the sense organs that control balance.


Cliburn Concert at the Met
Van Cliburn and the Moscow Philharmonic, currently on a United States tour, are to give a concert at the Metropolitan Opera House on Aug. 2 at 8 P.M.
The pianist will play the two concertos most closely associated with him -- the Tchaikovsky First and the Rachmaninoff Third -- and is to be the narrator of Copland's "Lincoln Portrait." Vassily Sinaisky is to conduct.
Tickets are $30 to $150.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


Macy Likely to Get a Federated Ultimatum
Allen I. Questrom, chairman and chief executive of Federated Department Stores Inc., is scheduled to meet today with Myron E. Ullman 3d, chairman and chief executive of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, to issue an ultimatum: Cooperate with Federated's proposal to merge the two retailers or risk filing a plan to get out of bankruptcy protection that has no creditor support.
Officially, the meeting was scheduled for Federated to provide answers to some questions about a potential merger that have been raised by Macy's board members.
"It's a follow-up session to review the outstanding issues the board has," said Gilbert Harrison, an investment banker advising Federated.
"Federated wants to be responsive to the board."


2 Jail Barges May Be Sold At Shortfall Of Millions
After more than two years sitting empty off the docks in lower Manhattan, two floating jails that cost the city $41 million may be sold for a fraction of the price.
Two years ago the city passed up an offer of $3.2 million as too low.
Now, city officials say, the jail barges would fetch only $900,000.


Pilobolus on Clothing, And the Lack Thereof
The choreographers of the Pilobolus Dance Theater seem to love to dress up dances with fancy titles and have dancers take off their clothes.
Verbal extravagance and physical nudity were combined once again in "Vestidigitations," the solo that received its New York premiere on Friday night at the Joyce Theater.
The whimsical title suggests words like "vested," "vestiges," "vestments" and "prestidigitation." All those linguistic free associations were surely intended by Robby Barnett and Jonathan Wolken, who choreographed the piece in collaboration with Kent Lindemer, its performer.
The solo, costumed by Gail Fresia, is a genial sermon in the guise of a striptease.


Satisfying a Hunger for Excitement
Camaro City  By Alan Sternberg  219 pages. Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $19.95.
With "Camaro City," Alan Sternberg's first collection of stories, we are immersed in the daily life of a small Connecticut town.
This blue-collar community -- nicknamed Camaro City for its residents' fondness for those fast, sporty cars -- is one of those factory towns, reeling from the recession of the early 90's and filled with disappointed people who have fallen behind in their mortgage payments and have reluctantly mortgaged their dreams.
All over the city, one character thinks, "people were irritable with one another and were fed up with what they were doing."


Notre Dame Joins the Big East
After all the blessings were finally received, after years of flirtation and subtle courtship that led to the secretive mating dance of the last few weeks, the Big East Conference and the University of Notre Dame acknowledged a celebrated marriage of convenience yesterday.
Each side, having overcome its own doubts and sense of risk, enthusiastically presented the other with a sizable dowry.
Just four months and two days after the league declared a moratorium on any expansion beyond 12 teams -- one that Commissioner Mike Tranghese said yesterday had been misunderstood, even by some school presidents -- the Big East added a 13th.


Giuliani Fund-Raiser Gave Rent Deals to Mayor's Aides
Several campaign workers and high-ranking aides to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani rented apartments from a real-estate executive who was one of the Mayor's largest fund-raisers under terms in which they paid no rent for the first five weeks to three months of their leases, officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Giuliani yesterday defended the arrangements with the executive, William W. Koeppel, saying his workers were all paying fair market rents, which made up for the first free months over time.
"No one got free rent here," he said in a telephone interview.


It's Hats Off to Griffey and His Home Runs
Ken Griffey Jr. wore his baseball cap in the traditional way today, then hit home runs in a most untraditional way, by repeatedly visiting the upper deck of Three Rivers Stadium.
That Griffey did so en route to winning baseball's annual home-run hitting contest served only to strengthen his hold on the collective imaginations of baseball fans who cheered him above all others in this, the season of the full-fledged assault on home-run records.


School Is Alternative to Prison for Drug Offenders
Dexter Frederick spent 14 months at Rikers Island awaiting his trial and sentencing for drug possession before he was given a choice: serve his sentence or attend Phoenix Academy, a residential high school in the suburbs for young drug offenders and substance abusers.
Mr.
Frederick, a Brooklyn native arrested three times on drug charges as a teen-ager, chose the school.


Dollar Falls Sharply Vs. Mark
The dollar posted one of its largest one-day drops today against the German mark and edged down to another low against the Japanese yen, as the Clinton Administration took no substantive steps to brake the dollar's monthlong fall and after the Federal Reserve left short-term interest rates unchanged.
Without action by the Federal Reserve, traders and Wall Street economists predicted, the dollar could fall much further.
"The dollar can go down wherever the markets want, and frankly it can go down anywhere," said Allen Sinai, chief economist at Lehman Brothers.
"I wouldn't even try to foresee where the dollar will be in a week or two."


Discontent of Belarus Voters Fueled Landslide for Outsider
Suggesting a deep unhappiness that has surfaced in other former Soviet republics, voters in Belarus have elected as their first President a man who promised to dismiss everyone connected to the Government "within a day."
Aleksandr Lukashenko, 39, a crusader against corruption who comes to the job with no significant experience in domestic or international politics, rolled to a thunderous victory, receiving more than 80 percent of the vote.


Burmese Junta Leader Agrees To Meet Imprisoned Dissident
The head of Burmese military intelligence said today that he would accept an invitation to meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the imprisoned opposition leader and Nobel laureate, in a demonstration of his Government's willingness to "work hand in hand with politicians who have opposed us in the past."
The intelligence chief, Lieut.
Gen.
Khin Nyunt, is often described as the most powerful man in the military Government of Myanmar, and a meeting with Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi would be at least a symbolic step toward political reform in the country formerly known as Burma.


Salvaging the Law of the Sea
Washington appears to have pulled the Law of the Sea Convention from the murky deep.
Work on this global charter for the oceans began in the Nixon years and resulted in the most complex international instrument ever negotiated: 320 articles and 9 annexes, most of them welcomed by the U.S. and other maritime nations.
What sparked heated opposition was its creation of an International Seabed Enterprise to control mining on the ocean floor.
"Socialism run amok" and "third-world giveaway," charged the Reagan Administration and its press supporters.
But objections were practical as well, which is why no industrial country is a party to the convention.
Even so, enough other nations have ratified that the convention will provisionally come into force this November.
Anticipating that, major holdouts have been working for years with the United Nations to modify unacceptable provisions.


Convicted Police Officer Receives A Sentence of at Least 11 Years
Apologizing for disgracing his fellow police officers, Michael Dowd was sentenced yesterday to spend at least 11 years in prison for a career of crime in uniform that, when it came to light two years ago, touched off New York City's worst police scandal in two decades.
He had shaken down drug dealers, sold cocaine himself and shielded other dealers from arrest, but as he stood before Judge Kimba M. Wood in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Mr.
Dowd pleaded for a lenient sentence.


Ear May Distinguish Bipeds From Monkeys
THE quest for understanding when and why human ancestors began walking on two feet has traditionally involved analyses of the motor components of fossil skeletons and the footprint trails of early hominids.
Now a team of European scientists has begun focusing on the bony labyrinth of the inner ear.
Because good balance is critical for bipeds, the researchers decided to examine the fossil record to determine whether clues to human evolution could be found in the bony semicircular canals preserved in the skulls of early hominids.
In living vertebrates, the fluid-filled semicircular canals of the inner ear form the sense organs that control balance.


Facing Limit on Spending, House Reduces Clinton's Requests
Squeezed by the rigid spending ceilings that were enacted last year to lower the budget deficit, the House of Representatives has approved only a fraction of the new money President Clinton sought this year for his main domestic initiatives.
In the appropriations bills it passed last month, the House voted, for example, to give the President only 30 percent of the increase he wanted for Head Start, only half the increase he requested for the main Federal education program for poor children and less than half of the additional money he wanted for his national service program.


Where Hispanic Merchants Thrive; In Westchester, Growth of Businesses Bolsters Economy
A decade ago, when Rafael and Roberto Ochoa began selling Mexican spices and food here, parts of this Westchester city's downtown business district were a forlorn patchwork of boarded-up storefronts and lifeless streets.
These days, though, the district has taken on some of the verve and flavor of a Latin American bazaar amid a steady influx of new businesses begun by Hispanic entrepreneurs, who like the Ochoas worked long hours and saved their money to go out on their own.
Cuban, Peruvian and Mexican restaurants abound as well as several groceries that sell chili peppers, green tomatoes and tender cactuses, and a cluster of travel agencies, social clubs and bodegas that cater to Spanish speakers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Eli Lilly said it would buy PCS Health Systems, the country's largest manager of drug benefits, from McKesson for $4 billion in cash.
The deal will give Lilly better access to the insurers and employer health plans that buy billions of dollars' worth of drugs a year.  [ Page A1. ]  Lilly's deal to buy PCS is essentially two transactions that would occur almost simultaneously.  [ D2. ]


Man Faces Charge in Shooting
A man who says he accidentally shot the L.P.G.A. golfer KIM WILLIAMS will be charged in connection with the shooting, authorities in Niles, Ohio, said yesterday.
GARY SWANEY, 35, of Howland, Ohio, will be charged this morning with negligent assault, police Capt.
AL KIJOWSKI said.
Swaney turned over to the authorities a 9-millimeter handgun the day after the July 2 shooting.
He said he and a friend were taking target practice in a wooded area about a mile from where a bullet struck Williams as she was about to enter a pharmacy.


Eli Lilly Deal Involves A Spinoff With a Twist
Whenever Wall Street constructs a complex deal with lots of moving parts, investors can be sure that investment bankers have found a sophisticated way to sidestep some problem.
That holds true in Eli Lilly &amp; Company's tangled plan to acquire PCS Health Systems, where the complications were dictated by the Federal tax code.
Perhaps the best way to view this deal is to see it as two transactions that would occur almost simultaneously.


Indurain of Spain Has Raced to the Front in the Tour de France
Big Mig is back.
Riding with his accustomed power, Miguel Indurain trashed the Tour de France pack today in an individual time trial and started toward his fourth consecutive victory in the world's greatest bicycle race.


Haggar Chooses Goodby, Silverstein
The Haggar Apparel Company said yesterday that it had ended a 53-year relationship with Tracy-Locke, a DDB Needham Agency of Dallas by selecting Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners of San Francisco to handle its account.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $20 million.
Stuart Redsun, Haggar's vice president of marketing communications in Dallas, confirmed a report of the change this week in Adweek, adding that Goodby, Silverstein was selected because it "had the creative firepower and strategic insights to best change consumer perceptions about Haggar." A campaign is expected to begin in late October, he said.


For 'Client,' a Survivor, Age 10
Casting Susan Sarandon and Tommy Lee Jones was smooth sailing for Joel Schumacher, the director of "The Client," the film adaptation of the thriller by John Grisham.
But finding someone for the important title role, a streetwise 11-year-old boy on the run from the Mafia and Federal prosecutors, was a far more turbulent experience than Mr.
Schumacher had expected.
"I wanted an intelligent kid who's a tough and savvy survivor, a kid with an authentic Southern accent, a kid from a trailer park, like the character in the movie," said Mr.
Schumacher.
"I wanted a kid who understood in the marrow of his psyche what it was like to grow up too soon."


Summer's Tides: A periodic look at the season nationwide.; Beach Curfews Are Clouding California's Endless Summer
A 17-year-old surfer named Brian Doorley, his peroxide-bleached hair glowing in the night, kissed his ponytailed summer love, 16-year-old Shauna Meneses, one more time.
It was 10 P.M.
The last beachgoers were packing up their Frisbees and blankets.
The lifeguards, Matt Norton and Eric Dieterman, were patrolling in their four-wheel drive, enforcing the new curfew.
"Time to go home, folks," they called out over the public address system.
And people did.


CHRONICLE
JAMES FARMER, the civil rights leader, has been hospitalized with pneumonia and complications from diabetes, said his secretary at Mary Washington College in Fredericksburg, Va., where he has taught history since 1985.
"His blood sugar was very high and he was kind of shaky," Kay Baker, the secretary, told The Associated Press yesterday.
Mr.
Farmer, 74, was admitted to Mary Washington Hospital on Thursday and was listed in stable condition yesterday.


By Design; Shade Up Top
Even the woman who doesn't consider herself a hat person will often plop one on on a summer day.
Next to a 30-SPF sun block, a wide-brimmed hat is the best way to protect the skin from the sun.
And it can be fashionable, too, if it's a well-shaped straw with a minimum of trimming.
Bergdorf Goodman has a totally unadorned pale straw hat with a rounded crown and adjustable brim ($45) on its fifth floor, a wide-brimmed cream straw with a crushed linen crown by Deborah Harper ($95), a braided straw in dark tones by David Cohen ($100) and a corn-colored straw with a black grosgrain band, also by David Cohen ($175).


A Prize for David Ferry From Poets' Academy
The Academy of American Poets has named David Ferry the recipient of its 60th fellowship for poetic achievement, a $20,000 award.
Mr.
Ferry is a professor of English at Wellesley College; his most recent book is "Gilgamesh: A New Rendering in English Verse," published in 1992 by Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


DOW JONES &amp; CO. (DJ,N)
Dow Jones &amp; Company reported yesterday a 15.6 percent increase in earnings for the second quarter.
Despite the rise, the price of the company's shares declined on the New York Stock Exchange.
The reported earnings of 46 cents a share were at the low end of analysts' estimates, which had ranged from 46 cents to 52 cents a share.


Can Ballesteros Rebuild the Fire?
He stood in the bunker near the practice green today, his face nearly as clouded and brooding as the Scottish skies.
Digging his feet into the sand, he went to work.
With each smooth swing that sent sand and ball floating onto the green, Seve Ballesteros's expression seemed to grow more grim, more determined.
Here it was Monday of British Open week, and already he was talking to himself.
From a distance, it was hard to tell if the mutterings were of admonishment or encouragement.
Then he bounced a ball off the flag stick.
He sent another rolling just past the cup.
The next one went in.


People
*
Marty Mitchell was named president and managing director at Burkhardt &amp; Christy, New York.
As president, he succeeds Ralph Doran, who left.
Managing director is a new position.
Mr.
Mitchell was previously an executive vice president at AC&amp;R Advertising, New York.


Stocks Decline, With the Dow Falling 6.15
Stocks declined yesterday, but the good news for investors was that the market recovered nearly all of its losses by the close.
The weakness in the dollar and bond market had more of an impact in blue-chip issues, which took the brunt of the selling, with the broader market ending only slightly lower.
Disappointment concerning the lack of effort by the industrial nations to support the dollar in either words or deeds following the Group of Seven meetings allowed the dollar to get battered again in the currency markets, traders said.
Even an interest-rate rise by the Federal Reserve, though not many traders really expected one, would have given the market a lift, they said.


Jaaa! Sweden Is Excited About Its Team
Roland Nilsson was talking about the pass, talking about how it sailed off his right foot and traveled 30 yards in the air toward Romanian goalkeeper Florin Prunea.
"I think Prunea thought he had that ball easily, and then all of a sudden, he had this 6-foot-4 guy jumping right over him," Nilsson said.


President Had to Answer Far Right's Attacks
To the Editor:
"Now, Focus the President" (editorial, June 28) seriously misjudges the significance of President Clinton's recent, and greatly overdue, response to the deadly demagogic attacks on him and his Presidency by the vastly powerful religious-political far right.


Rwanda's Capital Calm After War Moves On
A week after rebels took control of this capital, ending three months of deadly daily bombardment, residents have slowly begun to return, trudging up steep streets, pushing wheelbarrows stuffed with suitcases and rolled-up mattresses.
Surrounded by bullet-pocked buildings in streets littered with burned-out carcasses of cars, people embraced joyfully as they discovered friends they had feared were killed in the violence.


North Korea's Heir Apparent Meets Foreign Diplomats
In yet another sign that he will become the new leader of North Korea, Kim Jong Il suddenly came out of seclusion tonight and met with foreigners for the first time since the death of his father, Kim Il Sung, on Friday.
Ambassadors stationed in North Korea's capital of Pyongyang were invited on short notice tonight to the presidential palace to see the body of Kim Il Sung and pay respects to his survivors.


Players Aren't Setting Strike Date. Yet.
The head of the baseball players' union said today the players would have to think about not striking later this season if the owners pledged not to implement a salary cap after the season.
But the owners' chief labor executive said there was no chance the owners would take such a step.
"Baseball will be in one heck of a mess if we get to Nov. 1 without an agreement," Richard Ravitch said at a news conference after one held by Donald Fehr, the players' labor leader.
"The owners will not continue under the current economic system. If we reach a genuine impasse, I see no reason why we should forgo the remedies that are available to us under the law."


Tall Kids Lose on Buses
To the Editor:
Just the other day, I used a New York City bus to take my cousin's daughter and her friend to a museum.
I was asked to pay full fare for my 6-year-old relative, while her 8-year-old friend paid nothing at all.


Mercantile Bankshares Corp.(MRBK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mayor Agrees To 2 Advisers On Bond Sales
Settling for now a major dispute with the city's Comptroller, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the city would retain two financial advisers for its forthcoming bond sales, including the black-owned company that the Giuliani administration sought to remove as a cost-cutting measure.
By backing down on its demand that only one company be hired, the administration can go forward with two important bond sales that are estimated to provide $225 million that the Mayor has counted on to close the budget gap and to help improve the city's cash flow.


An Easier Way to Get Into Print
"DON'T be a wimp," Robin Williams exhorts readers of her wonderful new "Nondesigner's Design Book: Design and Typographic Principles for the Visual Novice" (Peachpit Press; $14.95).
She means that "for contrast to be effective, it must be strong," and that the beginner must approach contrast and the three other basic principles of the design of printed material, repetition, alignment and proximity, boldly and without fear.
Preparing reports, brochures, letterheads and business cards in the office with a computer rather than sending the work out to a professional shop has introduced many an unprepared soul to the craft of publishing.
A secretary who types, takes shorthand and finds files can now design reports.
A sales manager who can make a customer reach for his checkbook in the middle of an oral delivery can prepare presentations for the mail.
Neither knows Bodoni from Helvetica, and why should they?


Scientists Find a Plant That Dupes Birds Into Spreading Its Seeds
FEW things are more effective for speeding a sluggish digestive tract than a helping of fruit, whether it is a handful of potent prunes or a ripe peach.
Scientists now have evidence that the biological effect of these tasty treats is the result of chemical manipulation in which animals are drugged into transporting and dropping the precious seeds quickly.
In a study in last month's issue of the journal Ecology, researchers found a chemical laxative in the cherry-sized fruit of a Costa Rican shrub.
The drug appears to act on the bowels of birds, to the plants' and not the birds' advantage.


Paul B. Gibney Jr.; Lawyer, 59
Paul B. Gibney Jr., a lawyer and president of a charitable foundation, died Sunday at his home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 59.
Mr.
Gibney died after a long bout with brain cancer, according to Alan Kroll, a partner in Davis &amp; Gilbert, the Manhattan law firm in which Mr.
Gibney was a senior partner.


Federal Paper Board (FBO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 18


AT&amp;T Sees McCaw Tie
The AT&amp;T Corporation said yesterday that it was confident Federal regulators would approve its proposed $12.6 billion acquisition of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., despite legal hurdles that now prevent AT&amp;T from participating in the cellular phone business.
The merger requires an exemption from a 1982 landmark judicial order that led to the breakup of the Bell monopoly.
The merger, which would join the world's largest telephone and cellular companies, was announced last August.
AT&amp;T said it expected the deal would close by the end of September.


L.I.R.R. Workers Approve Contract
Workers who struck the Long Island Rail Road last month have overwhelmingly approved the new contract that ended the two-day walkout, a union official announced today.
Edward J. Yule Jr., the general chairman of the United Transportation Union, said the results of a mail ballot were 1,681 in favor of the three-year contract and 259 against.


Galway Journal; Defining 'Quality of Life' on the Crisp Celtic Coast
While many of Ireland's cities are trying to fight their way out of economic recession with ambitious urban development, this clean, windy city of 55,000 on the Atlantic Coast has decided that it has gone about as far as it should go with bricks and mortar.
The Galwegians, the residents of this 500-year-old city, say that they have enough new buildings pushing against the ancient gray walls of the port, and that a high quality of life does not require more construction.


SHL Systemhouse reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A. Kenneth Pye, 62, S.M.U. President Who Restored Sports
A.
Kenneth Pye, who resigned as president of Southern Methodist University in Dallas on June 22 because of his health, died yesterday at his vacation home in Lake City, Colo.
He was 62.
The cause was cancer, said William H. Lively, a spokesman for S.M.U.


Yanks Are Wobbling In First-Place Role
The Yankees disassembled for the All-Star Game break still clinging to first place in the American League East.
So why all the worried faces?
Why have some bleak forecasts cropped up?
And why does a team that possessed the elite record in baseball two weeks ago suddenly seem vulnerable?
Blame it on the 10 lousy days before the break, the 10 days that nudged the Yankees from quality to somewhat questionable.
Perhaps the numerous injuries during the last month became too much of a burden.
Perhaps the tantalizing thoughts of three straight days off after 36 games in 38 days had some Yankees thinking about fun and friends instead of first.
Perhaps their four-and-a-half-game lead was only a mirage because this race was supposed to be tighter.
Perhaps they skidded at an inopportune time and will regroup and rectify their plummet.
Meaningful Games
But by losing 7 of their last 10 games, at Yankee Stadium and against teams from the supposedly inferior American League West, the Yankees have caused fresh doubts to be dumped upon their pursuit of post-season play.
In a season when they are attempting to play meaningful games in October for the first time since 1981, the Yankees had four games chopped off their lead in 10 days and escaped to their homes with a one-half game advantage over the Baltimore Orioles.
The race is on.
"I thought," said Luis Polonia, "we were going to run away with it."
Not so fast, Luis.
While Manager Buck Showalter would categorize this losing as a "perceived trend," the perceptions are that the Yankees will have some concerns when they initiate the second half of the season on Thursday in Seattle.
Showalter has already wondered whether Don Mattingly (tendinitis right wrist) and Mike Gallego (strained calf muscle) will return promptly and effectively from injuries.
And he will probably rely on 23-year-old Sterling Hitchcock in the rotation because 31-year-old Terry Mulholland's repertory has turned into Homers-R-Us for hitters.
There is also the need for Jimmy Key to continue dazzling, for the other starters to imitate Key on his worst day; for Danny Tartabull to start dazzling and for the bullpen to remain bearable.
Showalter must instill in his players that they are still the finest team in the league, or at least the best in the division, despite the sputtering.
Encouraging Sign
"To realize we're capable of better and are still in first place is encouraging," said Showalter, after the Yankees reached the All-Star break with a 50-35 record.
"We still have to get even better as the season progresses."
When the Yankees stormed ahead of the pack to grab the top record in the majors for 26 days in May and June, with Paul O'Neill hitting over .400 and Key winning virtually every start, Showalter rarely smiled.
He talked about challenges and winning every series because he did not want the Yankees to think their job was complete.
Although Showalter does not think the Yankees relaxed with the decent lead, he admitted that having an edge allows teams to relax.
He did not have to concede that the Yankees never boosted the lead from decent to devastating.
"When you have a four and a half or three and a half game lead, you don't play with that sense of urgency," Showalter said.
"When you're behind, every game creates more tension as far as making every at-bat and every day count. You can't afford to fall back."
The urgency has returned.
With a half-game lead, the Yankees will be studying the scoreboard to see how BAL is doing.
Since they snatched first place by themselves on May 9 and stretched their lead to three and a half games by May 27, the Yankees had the opportunity to forge a sizable edge and make the other teams pursue the wild card berth.
But now they are one defeat from having the fourth-best record in the league.
"At that point, you would have said everybody was going to stay behind us," said Polonia, recalling when the Yankees were winning at a remarkable .700 percentage.
"But we lost a lot of games and Baltimore kept winning. You still have to think of the possibility of a wild card." Thoughts Are Urgent
O'Neill did not mention the wild card, but his thoughts were urgent.
"I think there's an urgency anytime you are in position to win," he said.
"You don't know when you're going to be in that position again. When you're in first after the All-Star break, it's a clear chance."
Showalter added: "I'd rather be controlling our own destiny. I know if we win, we don't have to worry about what they did."
How did the Yankees forfeit the chance to make it easier on themselves?
One answer is that until Melido Perez regained his form in the last month, Key was their only dependable starter.
Another is that winning 7 out of every 10 games is nearly impossible.
And let's not overlook the injuries that struck, as well as the loss of their touch at home; the Yankees have lost 14 of their last 22 games at Yankee Stadium.
Over all, the Yankees dropped 20 of 37 games while limping to the break.
Still, Showalter hopes this team does not mimic the club that was tied for first place a major league record 18 days in 1993.
"We hope," Showalter said, "to make Baltimore, Detroit, Toronto and Boston feel like we did last year." A Lot of Ifs
If the starters are sturdy, the injuries heal, the Yankees regain their earlier form and there is no strike, the second half could still be joyous for them.
Jim Abbott thinks it will be.
Sitting at Fenway Park two weeks ago, Abbott surveyed the lineup and told himself he was part of a special team.
He saw Key, Mattingly, Wade Boggs and O'Neill and thought about first and beyond.
"It would be nice to do something with this group of guys," said Abbott, who figures to leave the Yankees as a free agent after the season.
"I'm happy to be part of this team. I want to remember these times. I want to be a part of something with these guys."


Mark Morris's Way With Music
The audience at the performance by the Mark Morris Dance Group on Friday night at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival here seemed to be mostly vacationers in the Berkshires who were informed about the arts but had few preconceptions about dance styles and novelties.
The theater was filled with an invigorating sense of meeting the dances head-on, in much the same way Mr.
Morris appears to respond to music.
For music was a key to the program's four dances, a thread that connected four quite different themes and approaches to movement, from "A Lake," the bounding, plotless dance to Haydn that opened the program, to the uncategorizable new "Lucky Charms."


In Austria, Two Festivals for the Few, Who Eventually Became Too Many
The very notion of the European summer festival evokes grand scale and splashy glamour, with famous orchestras and lavishly produced operas.
But there are more refined gatherings for the connoisseur, as well, and right now perhaps the two most refined music festivals of all take place at the extreme opposite ends of Austria.
The festivals are the Schubertiade Feldkirch, tucked at the foot of the imposing Vorarlberg Alps at the west end of the country, next to Switzerland and Liechtenstein, and the Lockenhaus Chamber Music Festival here, 90 minutes south of Vienna on Austria's eastern border with Hungary.
Feldkirch ran this year from June 13 to 26; Lockenhaus began on June 30 and ended Sunday.


Review Narrows to 2 On Liqueur Account
Schieffelin &amp; Somerset, which is scheduled to acquire the American distribution rights to Grand Marnier liqueur on Jan. 1, said yesterday that it had narrowed a review on the account, with billings estimated at $10 million, to two of its roster agencies from four.
TBWA Advertising of New York has handled advertising for the brand under its present distributor, Carillon Importers Ltd.


A New, and Bitter, Mara Emerges
There is very little that Wellington Mara has not seen in over 60 years of experience with the National Football League.
He is the president and co-chief executive officer of the New York Giants.
He has done everything from scouting to sitting on many of the league's ownership committees.
He is respected and cherished for his knowledge and care for the game, so much so that according to several owners, league officials and others close to him, Mara has become increasingly bitter over the last several weeks about his role in the organization.
Most of Mara's feelings, they say, stem from the unceremonious release of quarterback Phil Simms.
Mara may have been closer to Simms, who had been with the Giants for 15 years, than any other of his players in team history.


Panel Clears Top Teamster Of Mob Link
Ron Carey, who became president of the nation's 1.4 million-member teamsters union on an insurgent pledge to uproot mobsters and corruption, was cleared yesterday by an independent oversight panel of allegations that he had ties to organized-crime figures.
The panel also said it had found no evidence to support an accusation that Mr.
Carey had engaged in improper financial deals.
The most serious allegations were raised by Alphonse D'Arco, the former acting boss of the Lucchese crime family in New York City, and by union rivals seeking to oust Mr.
Carey as the head of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.


Loving Love Canal Once More
THIS is the busy season everywhere in the real-estate world.
But still.
Michael Costantino had to wait almost two hours on the street to see a few modest ranches.
Love Canal, it seems, is becoming quite a seller's market.
"That house went," Mr.
Costantino said.
"I heard that house went." He was crossing out addresses from a list of available Love Canal homes.
He'd been looking for a while and was worried that people would beat him out.


On the Receiving End of Onstage Violence
Viviana Durante was a princess kissed by the fates and by a handsome prince in the Royal Ballet's production of "The Sleeping Beauty" last week at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Tonight, she will transform herself into an ordinary young woman of the 1990's for whom innocent flirtation ends in rape, murder and suicide, in "The Judas Tree."
The one-act piece was the last work Sir Kenneth MacMillan, who died in 1992, created for the London-based classical ballet company.
"Sir Kenneth told me she was basically just a girl," Miss Durante said of her character in a recent interview.
"He talked about Mary Magdalene." The choreographer, known for his dramatic story ballets, has dealt with violence before.
One of his earliest pieces, "The Invitation," was about a rape.
But in "The Judas Tree" Miss Durante is the only woman onstage with 14 men, one of them a youth, played by Irek Mukhamedov, with whom she flirts and who then turns on her and encourages the others to rape her.


No Headline
"The first thing I'd like to do is apologize to each and  every police officer that has had to work under the guise I left them two years ago. It's a very difficult job and I made it much more difficult, and for that I apologize." -- MICHAEL DOWD, a former police officer, as he was sentenced to prison.  [ A1:3. ]


Dell Computer to Abandon Retail Store Sales
Seeking to play to its strengths, the Dell Computer Corporation said yesterday that it would stop selling computers in stores and concentrate instead on direct sales to consumers.
The move is expected to have little overall impact on Dell.
The company has already pared its retail business to roughly 2 percent of its annual sales of $3.5 billion, and the operation is not profitable, Michael S. Dell, chairman and chief executive, said in a telephone interview.


Eagles' Pick in Police Dispute
BERNARD WILLIAMS, a first-round draft pick of the Philadelphia Eagles, filed a complaint against the police in Memphis yesterday following his arrest on a disorderly conduct charge.


Cheap Rooms at Hotel Giuliani
Several aides to Mayor Rudolph Giuliani got breaks on rent payments for New York apartments run by a real estate executive who has been a big Giuliani fund-raiser.
The Mayor denies this amounts to free rent.
His chief of staff called it a "lease arrangement," where favored tenants did not pay rent until some weeks or months after they moved in.
Well, whether or not the deal was free, it sure was cheap.
It is also textbook conflict of interest, whatever you call it, and certainly at odds with clean government.


Quirks in Juvenile Offender Law Stir Calls for Change
Gregory Morris had wanted a bicycle.
He wanted it so badly that he and his friends went hunting for one last summer in Prospect Park.
When Allyn Winslow, a 42-year-old drama teacher, rode by on his blue mountain bike, Gregory handed his .22-caliber revolver to a friend and shouted "Get him! Get him!" The friend shot Mr.
Winslow in the back, but the dying man managed to pedal away.
In losing out on the bicycle, the young Mr. Morris got a legal break.


THE HEALTH CARE DEBATE: WASHINGTON MEMO Health Plans Set Congress On Swift, Fateful Course
Nothing about the last 18 months of the health care struggle has been easy, least of all for a public trying to make sense of it all.
But Congress is now leaving the rapids of health care and heading for the falls.
The next five weeks, leading up to what Democratic leaders hope will be a vote on a health care law, will test Congress, the White House, the two parties and the masses of organized interest groups in ways they have never been tested before.


Clinton Calls On Germany To Be Partner
Acknowledging that a united Germany is now the powerhouse of Europe, President Clinton urged the Germans today to become America's main partners in integrating the former Communist nations of Eastern Europe with the economic and military institutions of the West.
Mr.
Clinton's message was that the German-American military alliance must be replaced with a less lopsided partnership focused on economics and the unification of Europe.
As Mr.
Clinton noted, "Trade, as much as troops, will increasingly define the ties that bind nations in the 21st century."


F.B.I. Chief Backs Black Ex-Agent Criticized in Book on Agency
Faced with a possible lawsuit, Louis J. Freeh, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, issued a highly unusual official statement today, supporting a former black agent whose performance was criticized in a book authorized by the agency, the agent's lawyer said today.
Mr.
Freeh agreed to "clarify" passages in the book about Donald Rochon, whose complaints of racial harassment in the 1980's came to symbolize problems of racial discrimination at the bureau and forced the law enforcement agency to re-examine its approach to hiring, training and promoting minorities.


Rabbi Withdraws Plea
A Hasidic rabbi yesterday withdrew his guilty plea to a lesser charge and will stand trial on charges of kidnapping a Jewish teen-ager from his parents.
The rabbi, Shlomo Helbrans, is accused of kidnapping Shai Fhima Reuven, 15, who disappeared in April 1992 while attending a Brooklyn yeshiva that was run by the rabbi.
The boy resurfaced publicly early this year, saying he had not been kidnapped but had run away from his mother because she was abusive.


10 Are Hurt in String of Police Car Collisions
Four police cars, responding to a report of a robbery yesterday in South Jamaica, Queens, were involved in a string of accidents that injured eight officers and two civilians, the police said.
Three separate collisions came as officers raced to 139th Street and Rockaway Boulevard, near the Van Wyck Expressway, where a a robbery was reported to be under way, said Detective Kim Royster, a spokeswoman for the Police Department.
The report was later found to be false.


France Calls Rwanda Mission a Success; Asks for U.N. Force
France told the Security Council today that its military intervention in Rwanda had largely succeeded in its aim and that the time had come for the United Nations to deploy its 5,000-member peacekeeping force.
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur told a special meeting of the Council that it was important to the United Nations' credibility that the African peace force be sent in quickly now that the French have created a safe area in the southwest, ending the bloodshed there and taking in more than a million refugees.


Ulster Protestant Slain
A leading Protestant political figure was killed today, and the Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility in a message to news outlets.


Software Spectrum Inc.(SSPE,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Breyer Is Challenged on Apparent Conflict on Eve of Hearing
Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum said today that Judge Stephen G. Breyer, President Clinton's nominee for the Supreme Court, may have been insensitive to ethical considerations when, as a judge, he participated in pollution cases that might have indirectly affected one of his investments.
Mr.
Metzenbaum, an Ohio Democrat who is a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said he expected to raise the issue of Judge Breyer's investment in a Lloyd's of London insurance syndicate, which had great financial losses because of pollution cases, when the committee took up his nomination on Tuesday.


Abbott Laboratories (ABT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In the Realm of Marketing, 'The Lion King' Rules
The Burger King at the corner of La Brea Avenue and Sunset Boulevard on the edge of Hollywood is usually dead on Sundays.
But in recent weeks the staff has hardly had time to sweep the kitchen floor.
Since the store hung cartoon banana leaves from the ceiling and began packing its "Kids Meals" with toy characters from Disney's new animated film, "The Lion King," its Sunday sales have doubled and increases during the week have been even more spectacular.


A Nice, Pretty, Quiet Online Neighborhood
APPLE COMPUTER INC.'s new online information service, called E-World for Macintosh, is the prettiest and friendliest town in cyberspace.
The service, which Apple is promoting with each new Macintosh computer it sells, has cute little buildings, including an entertainment center, a post office, a computer center, a school, a marketplace, a community center, a corporate skyscraper and a newsstand.
While other online services are about as easy to navigate as the New York City subway system, E-World's pathways are logically laid out.


Nailz the Wrestler Testifies He Was Told to Use Steroids
A former wrestler testified in Federal court here today that Vincent K. McMahon, the wrestling promoter, personally asked him to use steroids.
The testimony, by Kevin Patrick Wacholz, whose professional wrestling persona was a convict called Nailz, came after three days of more general testimony about the use of anabolic steroids by Hulk Hogan and other professional wrestlers.
It was the first testimony directly linking Mr.
McMahon to steroid use.


Discount Auto Parts Inc.(DAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


INSIDE
Teamsters Chief Cleared
Ron Carey, who became head of the teamsters union on a pledge to uproot corruption, was cleared of allegations of ties to organized crime.
Page B2.
U.S.
Challenge to Germany
President Clinton urged Germany to join in a partnership to integrate the former Communist nations of Eastern Europe with the West.
Page A7.
AIDS Test Royalties Revised
The royalties on the AIDS blood test will be reapportioned in favor of the French co-discoverers, a Federal official said.
Science Times, page C10.
Vexing Search for a Gene
The gene for the hereditary form of breast cancer has proven surprisingly elusive.
Science Times, page C1.
Dollar Continues Its Slide
The dollar fell against the mark and yen as the White House took no major steps to brake its descent.
Page D1.
A2 Arts


Safeway Inc.(SWY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 18


Flood Brings Danger Now, Worry Later For Georgia
Long after the muddy waters go down in Albany, after the stench of human waste and 300,000 dead chickens disappears from Montezuma, after workers start repairing 1,700 roads, 600 bridges and 100 dams damaged by last week's flooding, the Southeast's answer to last year's Midwestern flooding will continue to haunt this battered state.
The waters were still rising today in the southwest corner of Georgia, and officials in Bainbridge worked to move residents out of danger as they awaited the Flint River's record crest later this week.
But from Atlanta south, the area battered by the rains brought by Tropical Storm Alberto, residents and officials were beginning to ponder the long-term effects of the worst flooding in Georgia history.


Gene May Solve Puzzle: Why Some Cells Resist Cancer Treatments
ALTHOUGH chemotherapy and radiation have been standard cancer treatments for decades, it sometimes seems to be almost dumb luck that they work.
Cancer researchers readily confess that they do not know why cancer cells are more susceptible to these poisons than normal cells.
Nor do they always know why some cancers are resistant to chemotherapy and radiation while others are sensitive.
But new research on the molecular biology of cancer cells is leading to a compelling hypothesis.
One of the cells' best studied genes, called p53, seems to be the cancer therapy gatekeeper.
New studies indicate that if a cancer cell has an intact p53 gene, it commits suicide when it is damaged by chemotherapy or radiation.
But if a cancer cell's p53 gene is mutated -- as it often is -- the cell seems to be impervious to chemotherapy or radiation.


As Fires Scorch West, Forest Policy Is Concern
Between the radiant sky and the parched earth, the only sign of fire in the rugged Boise National Forest was a glowing ember of fear in the eyes of the forest supervisor, Stephen P. Mealey.
"I am sitting here terrified," he said on Sunday.
"The only thing between us and disaster is a lightning strike." Foremost in his mind and the minds of many other forest officials in the drought-stricken West is the explosive fire in Glenwood Springs, Colo., where 14 firefighters died on Wednesday.


Earl Strom, Ex-N.B.A. Referee Known for His Flair, Dies at 66
Earl Strom, the fiery National Basketball Association referee who spent more than three decades calling fouls with flair, ejecting players with style and occasionally backing up his rulings with his fists, died on Sunday at his home in Pottstown, Pa.
He was 66.
The cause of death was a cancerous brain tumor that had been diagnosed in January, his family said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FORSTMANN &amp; CO., New York, a designer and manufacturer of fabrics, agreed to acquire certain assets of Marion Fabrics from Texfi Industries , Rocky Mount, N.C., a producer of woven finished fabrics, for $14 million to $15 million in cash.
MARUBENI AMERICA CORP., New York, a unit of the Marubeni Corp. of Japan, said its Helena Chemical Co. subsidiary had acquired Agripro Biosciences Inc., a seeds business, from Shell Oil Co. for an undisclosed amount.
Agripro has annual sales of less than $50 million.


In the East, the Unexpected Becomes Routine
The theme was sounded after the first round: This is a World Cup full of surprises.
Colombia losing to the United States, and failing to advance; South Korea tying Spain and nearly upsetting Germany; Saudi Arabia making the round of 16; Maradona letting banned ephedrines somehow seep into his system, thus getting banned himself.
But as the tournament draw narrowed and became bicoastal, there have been more shocks on the East Coast -- where Bulgaria beat Germany -- than out west.
In the western half, the only real surprise was Argentina losing to Romania in the Round of 16, but even then, there was the excuse of Maradona's soap-operatic exit and Claudio Caniggia's injury.


Union Supports Reforms to Dismiss Incompetent Teachers
To the Editor:
"Teachers and Tenure: Rights vs. Discipline" (front page, June 28) was an accurate portrayal of how a system that is intended to provide a fair hearing for accused teachers can be perverted.
Unfortunately, however, your article left the incorrect impression that the teachers' union condones such abuses.


Texas Plan For Refunds By Met Life
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, as part of a promise to make refunds to customers who were sold life insurance improperly described as a retirement or savings plan, reached an agreement yesterday with the Texas Department of Insurance to mail a questionnaire to nearly 76,000 clients in the state to help determine eligibility for a refund.
The agreement comes several months after Met Life, the nation's second-largest life insurance company, agreed with a committee of state insurance regulators that improper sales tactics originating in its Tampa, Fla., office were widespread enough to justify a record $20 million fine.
The Texas share of that fine was $1.3 million, state officials said yesterday.
Mail and Advertisements
The potential refund being offered to the 75,864 Texas customers duplicates the Met Life offer made earlier this year to customers across the country, except that the company will notify its Texas clients by mail, rather than rely on advertisements.


A Boom for On-Line Services
Spurred by the success of America Online, Prodigy and other consumer information services that together are attracting more than a million new customers a year from home computer users, developers ranging from giant corporations to tiny start-ups are racing to build electronic communities in cyberspace.
In the last year the consumer response translated into a 25 percent annual growth rate, bringing total consumer subscriptions to on-line services to more than 5 million.


Executive Changes
R.
H.
MACY &amp; CO., New York, named Scott Bowman, president of its I. Magnin stores division, to the additional position of chief executive.
He replaces Joseph Cicio, who will be leaving I. Magnin at the end of July.
STARBUCKS COFFEE CO., Seattle, named Sharon Elliott senior vice president of human resources.


If Today Is Tuesday, It Must Be Mets Baseball
It was in Atlanta on a Tuesday in June, the temperature over 90 degrees and the humidity making it seem even more oppressive.
Bret Saberhagen was complaining about the pitching rotation.
John Franco was criticizing both ownership and management.
And Bobby Bonilla was cursing his manager's name.
With veteran leadership frustrated and fractious, the mood in the clubhouse was grim at best.
At that point, exactly three weeks ago, the Mets had no idea that a bombshell was right around the corner, ready to further decimate their hopes.


Accounts
*
Stroh Brewery Co., Detroit, to Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco, as the first agency to handle advertising for the Old Milwaukee Ice brand, and to Wyse Advertising, Cleveland, as the first agency to handle advertising for the Schlitz Ice Light brand; both brands are new lower-priced ice beers.
Riney and Wyse already handle advertising for other Old Milwaukee and Schlitz products.
Billings were not disclosed.


Man Charged in Shooting
In Niles, Ohio, a man was charged yesterday with negligent assault in the accidental shooting of a professional golfer, KIM WILLIAMS.
GARY SWANEY, 35, of Howland, pleaded innocent to the misdemeanor charge in Niles Municipal Court.
A pretrial hearing was scheduled for Aug. 1 before Judge THOMAS TOWNLEY.
Williams was shot on July 2 in a parking lot. (AP)


A Breather for Young People in Sarajevo, and a Pause for Bosnia as a Whole


Executive Changes
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morris Township, N.J., a manufacturer and marketer of aerospace, automotive and engineered products, named David Hill, former president of its fibers business, to be president of its performance materials group.
He will also become the group's chief technology officer.
In addition, Paul Norris, former president of chemicals and catalysts, will become president of the fibers business; he will operate from the company's Fibers Technical Center in Petersburg, Va.
And Mark Byrne, former head of the engineered materials' fluorocarbons business, will become president of fluorine products; he will be based in Morris Township.


Philip Morris Posts Income Gain in Quarter
Despite a rocky year and a tumultuous spring, the Philip Morris Companies, the world's largest tobacco concern, announced its first quarterly earnings increase yesterday since it cut cigarette prices in April 1993.
The company reported strong performance from its domestic and international tobacco business, sharp gains in the sale of its Marlboro cigarettes brand, and good results from its food and beer sales in North America.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  GERMAN MILITARY ROLE APPROVED  Germany's high court ruled that the country could take part in military operations beyond its borders if Parliament approved, clearing the way for a broader world role.
A1  CLINTON SPEAKS TO BERLIN  President Clinton, in Berlin, paid tribute to the end of the city's schism, crossing where the Berlin Wall once stood and speaking to a crowd of some 50,000 people.
A12


2 Drugs Get a New Use: Soothing Mania
THERE is another choice for treatment of the manic side of manic-depression, the exuberant, agitated state that breeds boundless -- and sometimes disastrous -- enthusiasm.
The standard medication, lithium, fails to help about half the patients who take it.
But with the discovery that some medications for epilepsy can calm manic episodes, psychiatrists have found a way to treat many of those patients.


Help the Poor Help Themselves
To the Editor:
As the founder and president of TechnoServe, a nonprofit, international development organization that has worked with the poor in the developing world for more than 25 years, I have learned some valuable lessons.
The lessons of a quarter-century of experience in Latin America and Africa helping the working poor establish and expand their own small businesses are the operating principles in what we call participatory development: helping people to help themselves.
Here are the most important, which translate into any language and will work in America's cities as well as in the developing world.


After 7 Years, Employees Win United Airlines
Concluding one of the longest-running buyout efforts in the history of corporate America, employees of United Airlines gained control of their company today, exchanging deep cuts in pay and benefits for a majority stake in one of the largest employee-owned companies in the country.
Except for a new advertising campaign that United began tonight to publicize the deal, passengers will notice few changes.


WPP Group Backs Multimedia Study
The WPP Group said yesterday that it would become the sole agency company sponsor of the Electronic Access Study, which will survey 1,400 American households on multimedia use and access.
Other sponsors include the American Express Company, the BellSouth Corporation and Fidelity Investments.
WPP's participation is part of the activities of a multimedia group formed to assess the importance of interactive marketing.
Jerry Pickholz, chairman of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct in New York, will head the group.


METRO DIGEST
PAYING FOR NEW JERSEY'S SCHOOLS: MONEY, EDUCATION AND POLITICS
For the third time since 1973, the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that the state's system of financing public education violated the State Constitution because the law fails to guarantee parity in spending between the poorest and the most affluent school districts.
A1.
The court gave Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman enough time to face up to the painful struggle over school finances to assure that the worst pain will probably not be felt until after the next election.
News analysis, B6.


TV Blocking Is Endorsed
Despite stiff opposition from ABC, NBC and CBS, the television industry moved a step closer yesterday toward adopting a new technology that would allow viewers to automatically block violent programs.
A technical subcommittee of the Electronic Industries Association, a industry trade group that sets common technical standards for consumer electronics, endorsed a technology that allows a television set to recognize special identification signals attached to programs that contain violence, sex or profane language.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DIAGNOSTEK INC., Albuquerque, N.M., said its Health Care Services Inc. unit had received a $100 million contract from the Department of Defense for mail prescription services.
DUKE POWER CO., Charlotte, N.C., said 1,200 employees would leave the company under a voluntary separation program.


A Feminist Writer's Defiance Fuels Militants in Bangladesh
After more than a month in hiding, a feminist writer who has been threatened with death by Muslim clerics remains out of sight.
And the controversy surrounding critical remarks she is alleged to have made about the Koran continues to foster an atmosphere of political crisis.
The Government brought criminal charges of insulting the Muslim religion against the writer, Taslima Nasrin, on June 4, prompting her to go underground.
Rumors then swept this capital that she had sought refuge from angry demonstrators in a Western embassy.


The Law of the Fugue, as Laid Down by Bach
On Monday night in Avery Fisher Hall, when the Juilliard String Quartet reached the famous theme that spells out Bach's name in the last, unfinished fugue of "The Art of the Fugue," one could almost feel the small audience that remained draw in its breath.
The players, who have made this work a specialty in recent years, did not bear down on the four notes with portentous solemnity.
Instead, after two hours of exploring Bach's inventiveness and spiritual grandeur, in a work in which themes were expanded, contracted, turned upside down, combined with themselves and their variants in an encyclopedia of possibilities, the quartet played the theme with quiet, eloquent simplicity.
The tension immediately increased; it was as if a spring were being pulled back.
Two themes had already been heard in the majestic fugue.
But this third, signature theme, which has long been used as a tribute to the composer (in German, B is B-flat and H is B-natural), was clearly an announcement of something more sublime than had yet been achieved.
A hint of what was to come was heard as the three themes intertwined, awaiting some sort of fulfillment.
Then, without warning, the first violin fell mute, the second violin followed, as did the cello, and for brief moments there were only the eighth notes of the viola, which ended in silent space.
That is where Bach is said to have left the manuscript at his death.


Book Notes
McGinniss Goes to Crown
For the last several weeks, Morton L. Janklow has been hunting for a publisher for his client Joe McGinniss's next book, which is to be about the O. J. Simpson case.
It's a tricky situation because of the subject's saturation in the news media and because of the shadow on Mr.
McGinniss's career following the disastrous 1993 publication by Simon &amp; Schuster of "The Last Brother," a novelized biography of Senator Edward M. Kennedy.
Yesterday, Mr.
Janklow announced that he had sold world rights to the book -- and another McGinniss book whose subject hasn't yet been chosen -- to Crown Publishers, a division of Random House, for a seven-figure advance.
He said he couldn't be more pleased.
Crown felt good, too, particularly, the publisher stressed, because the book was to be about far more than just Mr.
Simpson.
"His book, while examining all aspects of the crime and the trial, will more importantly explore modern-day heroes, sports mythology and the incredible power of the media," said Betty Prashker, Crown's editor in chief, who acquired the book.


Max F. Baer, 81, Longtime Leader At B'nai B'rith
Dr.
Max Frank Baer, who was associated with B'nai B'rith for 65 years -- 43 of them in staff and leadership positions -- died on Monday at his home in Washington.
He was 81.
The cause was a heart attack, the organization reported.


It Takes 10, but American League Streak Ends at 6
The instant Fred McGriff's fly ball sailed over the fence in left-center field, the American League should have known its longest winning streak in All-Star Game history was in serious jeopardy.
McGriff's pinch-hit two-run home run against Lee Smith only tied the game, 7-7, but at the least it would send the game into extra innings, where the National League has never lost.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Concluding one of the longest-running buyout efforts in the history of corporate America, employees of United Airlines gained control of their company, exchanging deep cuts in pay and benefits for a majority stake.  [ Page A1. ]


In School
Antonio Strano, a 51-year-old junior high school art teacher, has a teen-ager's soul trapped in an adult's body.
The message on his answering machine is a cacophony of stupid noises, the electronic equivalent of a whoopee cushion.
And he is planning a purple-food party on his houseboat here, with invitations begging guests to be imaginative so that everybody doesn't show up with eggplant.


At a food show, the exotic, ingenious and simply weird. C10.


For Now, Just Call It a Truce
When the striker Bebeto put Brazil ahead of the Netherlands, 2-0, in the World Cup quarterfinals last Saturday, he bolted for the sideline and began swinging his arms, rocking an imaginary baby in homage of his two-day-old son, Matthaus, named after the German star Lothar Matthaus.
Joining Bebeto was Romario, a teammate generally known for rocking the boat, not the cradle.
Bebeto and Romario, though teammates on the Brazilian national team, are fierce rivals in the Spanish League.
Bebeto led the Spanish first division with 29 goals in 1992-93 and Romario led it with 30 goals in 1993-94.
It was Romario who gave Bebeto the nickname Chorao, or Crybaby, for his habit of pouting to referees.
It was also Romario who called a news conference before the World Cup to announce that he would not sit next to Bebeto on the team's flight to California.


Television Coverage Of Senate Hearings
The Senate Judiciary Committee's confirmation hearings on Judge Stephen G. Breyer's nomination to the Supreme Court will be covered live today, beginning at 10 A.M., by the Public Broadcasting Service.
The service will provide gavel-to-gavel coverage to its affiliates, which have the option of carrying the hearings or running other programming.


Peruvian Ceviche: A Spicy Delicacy
SIT down to a plate of ceviche here and it is clear that Japan does not have a monopoly on raw-fish recipes.
Ceviche (pronounced seh-BEE-chay) is raw fish, or pescado crudo, marinated in lemon juice and seasoned with garlic, onions and hot peppers.
Although it is commonly found elsewhere in South and Latin America, it is this country's national dish, as much a part of the culture as Andean music.


Will Smith Still Save The Orioles?
He came sauntering out of the bullpen the way he always does, slowly.
He would pitch the way he always does, hard.
Lee Smith has more saves, 430, than any pitcher in major league history, including 29 for the Baltimore Orioles this season.
And last night he had the opportunity for his first save in the 65th annual All-Star Game until he threw what he later described as a "perfect pitch" to Fred McGriff.


Dead Woman's Spouse Fled Before Search Began
Hours after the police found the body of Nihal Abequa hidden under her bed last Wednesday, a search began for her husband, Mohammad.
But it was too late. He was already in his native Jordan.


Corrections
An article on Monday about a New York City police supervisor who said he had been ostracized for reporting corruption misstated the location of a precinct where the supervisor, Capt.
Gary Carey, received a Christmas card with offensive messages.
The precinct was in the Midwood-Flatbush area of Brooklyn, not in Coney Island.


Moore Signs One-Year Contract With Jets
Rob Moore, the Jets' fifth-year wide receiver, was an unrestricted free agent, free to sign with any team.
The only hitch was that the Jets had made him a transition player, allowing them to match any offer he received.
So yesterday, Moore forgot about moving and agreed to a one-year contract with the Jets.
Unless the Jets make him a franchise or transition player next year, Moore will become a free agent in February.
But General Manager Dick Steinberg said he hoped to work out a long-term contract "somewhere along the way."


Drinking Night Ends in Fatal Shooting of One Brother by Another
An argument between two brothers who had gone drinking with a third brother for the evening ended in gunfire early this morning as one shot and killed the other while the third looked on in horror.
The police charged Sean Messmer, 29, an employee at Jones Beach, with manslaughter in the death of his oldest brother, Patrick, 33, a former marine who was unemployed.


Battling in Trenton on School Financing
The New Jersey Constitution was amended in 1875 to require the Legislature to establish a system of "thorough and efficient education." Almost 100 years later those words set off a legal battle over how New Jersey finances local school districts. 1970 FEB. 3: A lawsuit, Robinson v.
Cahill, contends that the state's system of financing local schools discriminates against poorer districts and creates disparities in education. 1973


Eli Lilly Chief's High-Stakes Gamble
His friends portray Randall L. Tobias as a "fun guy" whose small-town style and Midwestern affability sometimes mask his steely business-minded core.
Both faces have been showing at Eli Lilly &amp; Company, the staid old Indianapolis-based drug maker, where Mr.
Tobias became chairman and chief executive last year.


A Transition in Definition for Serious Fun
Jed Wheeler says he started using the phrase "serious fun," an oxymoronic tag he later bestowed upon Lincoln Center's annual summer festival of performances by hard-to-describe artists, because he got tired of the term "avant-garde." And it's probably true that by the time serious fun (the concept) became Serious Fun (the festival Mr. Wheeler ran for the first time in 1987 and the last time a year ago), the idea of avant-garde art had begun to lose its bite.
It had become hard to define.
Who could tell what distinguished the avant-garde from the merely idiosyncratic?
Or from the just plain weird?
Now in its eighth season, the Serious Fun festival, which began last Wednesday and is to run through July 30, has spawned the sort of confusion that comes with growth and change.
Critics say the whole thing has gotten too serious.
Or maybe that it's too much fun.
In any case, as Lincoln Center, with a new director of programming, Jane S. Moss, is mulling over a restructuring of all its special-performance series, no one seems entirely certain what Serious Fun is supposed to be.
And though Ms.
Moss said plans for next year's festival were under way, she acknowledged that performance-art programming under the Serious Fun rubric at Lincoln Center was not immune to change.


Court's Decision Gives a Grateful Whitman Some Breathing Space
The New Jersey Supreme Court today assured that Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman would have to face up to the state's painful struggle over school finances before she faces the voters again.
But it also gave her time enough that the worst pain will probably not be felt by voters and taxpayers until after the next election, in 1997.
The state had faced a deadline of the 1995-96 school year for equalizing school spending between rich and poor districts.
But today the court gave the administration until the 1997-98 school year to bridge a gap estimated at between $350 million and $600 million a year.


Racial Discrimination Or Righting Past Wrongs?
From Cheryl J. Hopwood's point of view, if overcoming past hardship was counted as a plus when applying to the University of Texas Law School, she should have been among the more qualified candidates.
Ms.
Hopwood's father died when she was a girl and she was reared under difficult circumstances by her mother.
She worked all through high school and put herself through both community college and the California State University at Sacramento, where she graduated with a 3.8 grade point average.
Then, having become a Texas resident, she did well enough on the law school admissions test to get into a category of law school applicant that is almost automatically admitted at Texas.


Corrections
A chart in Science Times yesterday showing estimated times for fragments of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 to strike Jupiter misstated the time of impact of the first one, designated A. As the related article said, it will be 3:26 P.M. on Saturday, Eastern daylight time, give or take about seven minutes.


With a Few Strides, Clinton Celebrates Germany's Unity
President Clinton paid tribute today to the end of Berlin's long and bitter schism, striding across the line that once divided the city and lowering for the last time the flag of the American forces whose vigil here began on July 4, 1945.
From the Brandenburg Gate, a symbol of a divided Europe, Mr.
Clinton faced east in celebration and told some 50,000 Berliners who thronged Pariser Platz that he rejoiced with them that "Berlin ist frei!"


Eight Lives to Go
Tabitha, two pounds lighter and richer by 30,000 frequent-flier miles, has finally emerged from the cargo hold of the Tower Airlines 747 in which she's been hiding for 12 days.
Which, as anyone who has ever known a cat knows, she was sure to do if the person routinely in charge of her menu were sent in to seek her.
Cats respond very quickly to the voice behind the hand that serves the Friskies.
Tabitha escaped from her cargo crate while accompanying her owner, Carol Ann Timmel, on a flight from New York to Los Angeles on June 30.
Ms.
Timmel begged to search the hold on her own; the airline begged to differ, and Tabitha began her life as a traveling tabby.


No Good Reason to Invade Haiti
If the Clinton Administration is looking for a pretext to invade Haiti -- a distinct possibility -- it has just been handed a dandy one.
The army-backed Government's abrupt expulsion of foreign human rights monitors is a defiant slap at the United Nations and the Organization of American States.
By threatening the safety of these international civil servants, Gen.
Raoul Cedras and his crew have conveniently internationalized what has been essentially a domestic political crisis, finessing the objection that an invasion would violate Haitian sovereignty.


Court Permits German Troops A Foreign Role
Germany's highest court cleared the way today for German forces to take part in military operations beyond the country's borders if Parliament first approves.
The ruling by the Federal Constitutional Court makes possible a broader German role on the world stage, which has been sought by the United States and other allies within NATO.
The decision also swept aside a psychological barrier that has inhibited Germany ever since the defeat of the Nazi regime in 1945.


Charles Burr Lamar; Architectural Designer, 69
Charles Burr Lamar, an architectural and interior designer, died on Monday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
Mr.
Lamar, who lived in Manhattan, was 69.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Cable Company in QVC Bid, Upsetting CBS Merger Plan
In a last-minute move that apparently scuttles the planned merger of CBS Inc. and QVC Inc., a minority shareholder in QVC surprised the entertainment industry last evening with an unsolicited bid to take over QVC.
The new bidder, the Comcast Corporation, which is the nation's third-largest cable television company, was unhappy that QVC's chairman, Barry Diller, was aligning his cable televison home-shopping channel with a network broadcasting company and taking it away from its core cable business.
Comcast, which owns 15.5 percent of QVC, was reluctant to become a minority shareholder in the over-the-air television business.


DLJ Merchant To Buy Katz Stock
DLJ Merchant Banking Partners, an investment fund of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, said yesterday that it would acquire a substantial interest of the common stock of the Katz Media Corporation of New York in a transaction worth about $287 million.
The companies said the acquisition, for a combination of $99.6 million in cash and the assumption of outstanding debt, is expected to be completed next month.


Mary Anna Meyer, Charity Official, 74
Mary Anna Meyer, who took part in civic affairs and charitable causes for many years, died on Sunday in North Shore University Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
She was 74 and a Glen Cove resident.
She suffered a brief illness, her family said.


When Juries Flout the Facts, And Sentiment Is the Issue
With polls showing that Americans are divided by race over the O. J. Simpson case, tonight's look at the jury decision in the Reginald Denny trial takes on disturbing relevance.
Mr.
Denny, of course, was the truck driver who had the misfortune to find himself in the epicenter of the Los Angeles riots in April 1992.
A helicopter camera caught the beating of the white man by several black youths.
Despite the evidence of the video tape, the jury acquitted two defendants of the most serious charge of attempted murder, finding them guilty only of relatively minor charges like assault.
"Reginald Denny: Jury Under Siege" does not reveal much of what went on in the jury room, but the lawyer for Damien Williams, seen on the tape hurling a concrete slab into Mr.
Denny's head, concedes that he appealed especially to black jurors in his summation.
Moreover, as the jurors deliberated, they could hear the shouts of street demonstrators, reminders of the eruption after an all-white jury acquitted the white police officers who were seen on another famous videotape beating Rodney G. King, a black man.


R. J. Reynolds 3d, Tobacco Heir, 60
Richard J. Reynolds 3d, a grandson and namesake of the founder of the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, died on June 28 at his home in Pinehurst, N.C.
He was 60.
The cause of death was emphysema and congestive heart failure caused by smoking cigarettes, his half-brother, Patrick Reynolds, an anti-tobacco crusader in Los Angeles, said on Tuesday.


Food Notes
At the first Fancy Food and Confection Show in New York 40 years ago, most of the 82 exhibitors had imports from France like escargots and canned baby vegetables.
At this year's show, which opened Sunday and ends today, about 80 percent of the products at the more than 1,000 booths are from the United States.
But the foreign influence is still strong.
Italy's pavilion was larger than ever, a mini trade show in itself.
"I think the Italians took this opportunity because of the World Cup," said Leo Bertozzi, a representative of Parmigiano Reggiano.


Stocks Fall With Dollar, but Both Recover
It was another day, another dollar on the stock market yesterday as the value of the currency was again the focus of investors' concerns.
Stocks fell sharply as the dollar continued to slide but the Dow Jones industrial average recouped a loss of more than 30 points to close almost unchanged as the currency and bond markets strengthened.
The Dow slipped 0.33 point, to 3,702.66, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks fell 0.11 point, to 447.95


Wine Talk
Leonardo Bellaccini opened five small bottles of wine in his laboratory here in the Chianti region of Tuscany and asked some American guests to try them.
The wines, all of them red, tasted vaguely like sangiovese, the principal grape in Chianti wine.
The informal tasting was part of a three-day symposium held earlier this month at San Felice, a large wine estate in the southeastern corner of Chianti, about 20 miles from Siena, where Mr.
Bellaccini is the wine maker.
The symposium's focus was on the sangiovese grape and the need to define its role in Tuscan wine making.


NBC Reported To Be Uniting Its Magazines
NBC News is close to a decision to combine its news-magazine programs into one, using a new three-night-a-week format with a centralized staff and anchor team, NBC News staff members said yesterday.
Under the new concept, the Wednesday-night news magazine "Now" would be eliminated and the two anchors of that program, Tom Brokaw and Katie Couric, would scale back their activity to occasional appearances on the new program.
That program would carry the title of the network's other incumbent news magazine, "Dateline NBC."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ads that crawl across the bottom of television screens during sports shows are scoring.
ANDRES CANTOR, the announcer covering World Cup '94 for Univision, the Spanish-language television network, has become celebrated for his ebullient shouts of "GOOOOOL!" every time a goal is scored.
Now the sponsors of Univision's soccer coverage have come up with their own cry: "CRAAAAAWL!"
Those shrieks of glee are for crawls, or crawlers, as Univision calls the short commercial vignettes it runs in lieu of traditional spots during the 52 matches it will have broadcast through Sunday.
The crawls, which last about 10 seconds each, are so named because the graphics crawl across the bottom of the screen or are superimposed there as the matches are played.


Applause for Drabek, Boos for Bonds
To no one's surprise, Pittsburgh Pirates fans, staying in character, used the forum of the 65th annual All-Star Game tonight to shower affection on one they used to call their own, cheering wildly as pitcher Doug Drabek of the Houston Astros was announced as a member of the National League squad.
Also in character was this city's continuing love-hate relationship with another prodigal son who, like Drabek, followed the trail of free-agent riches away from Three Rivers Stadium.
That onetime Pirate favorite, outfielder Barry Bonds, was booed, just as he has been every time he has returned here as a member of the San Francisco Giants.


Breyer Has Opportunity To Recount His Story Account Is Enthusiastic and Thorough
Judge Stephen G. Breyer today began the process of defining himself for the Senate Judiciary Committee and the public, neither of which is likely ever again to hear him discuss his life and thoughts at such length.
There is no doubt that Judge Breyer will be confirmed as a Supreme Court Justice, as senators of both parties emphasized in welcoming him to a confirmation hearing that was sometimes lighthearted, sometimes ponderous and occasionally revealing of the nominee's tastes and values.


New Island Is Proposed For Harbor
Senior environmental regulators offered a striking solution yesterday to the problem -- economically important if not often talked about -- of where to dump safely the muck that is regularly dredged to keep the harbor channels clear for shipping.
They want to build a two- or three-mile-long island in the harbor where sediments tainted with dioxin and other toxic materials could be disposed of.


Edna O'Brien Takes Her Pen to a Wider Canvas
House of Splendid Isolation
By Edna O'Brien
232 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.
How tired Edna O'Brien must get of being compared to James Joyce's Molly Bloom because she is Irish and lusty, and to Colette because she is lusty and literate.
Having published fiction for more than 30 years, she is at a stage in her career when she could canonize past glories, as some of her contemporaries do.
She could write novels about lusty, literate Irish female writers, for instance, and their encounters with celebrated people whose names are changed to avoid libel and incite speculation.


Relatives of Drowned Girl Charged in Fight at Hospital
A drowned 14-year-old girl's body was found by her family near Bloomfield, Conn., on Monday, and frantic relatives, who accused the police of calling off their own search too soon because the victim was Puerto Rican, became involved in a melee at a Hartford hospital.
Family members had consulted an adviser versed in the African-Caribbean religion of Santeria and said she told them how to locate the body.


CHRONICLE
Dame BARBARA CARTLAND, the prolific romance novelist, celebrated her 93d birthday yesterday with a luncheon in London and an announcement that she has just published her 600th book (and her fifth autobiography), called "I Reach for the Stars."
At the gathering at the Berkeley Hotel, which was attended by 60 friends and relatives, she noted that she had signed a deal to have three million copies of her works published in Russia and that she was a big hit in China.
"In China, they've taken out all the books with sex in them and only mine remain," she told The Daily Telegraph, adding that she was a literary champion of "real love" and not sex.


Is Sloppy Security Military Tradition?
To the Editor:
Nothing new about sloppy security within the military as reported by Jeff Stein in "The Mole's Manual" (Op-Ed, July 5).
Here's an example.


Berlin Says Farewell to G.I.'s


NFL Properties Chooses President
NFL Properties, the National Football League's licensing, marketing and sponsorship arm, said yesterday that Sara Levinson, co-president and business director of MTV Music Television, would become its president, effective immediately.
She is the highest-ranking female official ever at the league's headquarters in New York.
Ms.
Levinson, 43, succeeds John Flood, 43, who was dismissed in March for not disclosing a personal investment in Pro-Set Press, an affiliate of the league's official trading card company, when he was general counsel.


Arafat Back in Gaza, to Little Fanfare
With little of the fanfare that accompanied his triumphant visit here earlier this month, Yasir Arafat arrived with his wife, Suha, to settle permanently in Gaza today and to take up the task of governing this impoverished coastal strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
Though Mr.
Arafat again swept in from Egypt in his now familiar high-speed motorcade trailed by truckloads of armed Palestinian police officers, his entry today, which formally ended decades of exile, was deliberately low-key and businesslike.


School Poll Finds Harsher View of Drugs
Running counter to a national trend, a survey released yesterday suggests that the attitudes of New York City schoolchildren are hardening against drugs.
The survey of more than 15,000 children in public and parochial schools last year showed an increase in the perceived risk of taking drugs, as well as sharp decreases in the perceived benefits, compared with a similar poll the previous year.


NEW JERSEY COURT ORDERS NEW PLAN FOR SCHOOL FUNDS
For the third time since 1973, the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled today that the state's system of financing public education violated the State Constitution because the law failed to guarantee parity in spending between the poorest and most affluent school districts.
The court's unanimous ruling gives New Jersey three years to raise spending levels in 30 "special needs" districts -- essentially hard-pressed cities like Newark, Camden and Paterson -- to "substantial equivalence" with what the state's affluent communities spend on their schools.


Pro Bono Accounts
* John F. Kennedy Library, Boston, to the Martin Agency, Richmond, for its new museum.


McEnroe Back in the Hunt
He may be 35 and he may have stopped playing competitively on the men's tour, but that does not mean JOHN McENROE has ruled out picking up a racquet for his country.
During a teleconference from his SoHo art gallery to promote his exhibition Saturday against ANDRE AGASSI in Mahwah, N.J., McEnroe admitted he would not mind playing again for the national team.
"I would consider playing doubles in the Davis Cup if I was approached," the world's No. 1 player from 1981-84 and a member of five Davis Cup champions, said. (AP)


Top Editor at Self Magazine Named to Conde Nast Post
Alexandra Penney, editor in chief of Self magazine since 1989, was named yesterday to the new position of director of new media development at Conde Nast.
A successor to Ms.
Penney at Self has not been appointed.
S.
I.
Newhouse, chairman of Conde Nast Publications, announced the change to the staff of the magazine with Ms.
Penney standing at his side at the magazine's office in Manhattan, people at the company said.


Federated and Macy Merger Seems to Be Inching Closer
A merger of Federated Department Stores Inc. and R. H. Macy &amp; Company inched closer to becoming reality yesterday.
But the two companies and Macy bondholders continued to haggle over unresolved questions standing in the way of a deal.
The official bondholders creditor committee met yesterday to discuss Federated's latest offer.
Robert Miller, the lawyer representing the bondholders, said that while the committee did not decide to pledge its allegiance to a merger proposal, "the momentum is moving in Federated's favor over all."


Ukrainian Leader's Defeat Worries Kiev Bureaucrats
After using their votes to oust their first President, who was only halfway through his term, Ukrainians woke to a summer's day like any other.
Some worried about the fate of the nation; some worried about the freshness of the bread.
But in the corridors of the Government, officials said, there was a kind of hushed panic in the face of the biggest prospective change in Ukraine since independence.
Leonid M. Kravchuk, the former Communist Party ideology secretary who led Ukraine to independence, stayed locked in his office, silent.


In Victory for N.R.A., House Backs Hunting in the Mojave
In a victory for the National Rifle Association, the House today approved legislation to allow hunting to continue in the East Mojave Scenic Area in the California desert.
The amendment, which passed 239 to 183, was among the most disputed aspects of the landmark California Desert Protection Act, which would grant Federal protection to nearly eight million acres of the desert.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 8
July 1
July 9
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
7.6
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.3
3.2
Gasoline stocks
214.5
215.0
221.9
Distillate stocks
122.7
118.7
114.6
Crude imports, daily
8.0
7.4
7.1
Product imports, daily
2.1
1.6
1.8
Crude stocks
327.2
325.9
353.8
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
94.9
96.5
96.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Mullen Resigns Rest of Digital
Mullen Advertising of Wenham, Mass., said yesterday that it had resigned the final portion of its Digital Equipment Corporation account because of a conflict with an account that the EMC Corporation awarded the agency earlier this month.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Missed Chances in Europe
It is no secret that President Clinton is trying to demonstrate to the American public that he is capable of consistent, credible foreign policy leadership.
On that score, the summit meeting of industrial democracies in Naples -- the centerpiece of his latest European tour -- was a missed opportunity.
It is also no secret that it is not as easy nowadays for an American President to dominate the world stage.
Absent a common Soviet threat, America is seen as one more player in a complex and increasingly parochial post-cold war world.
In the past, for example, Mr.
Clinton's plea to the industrialized nations to open their markets to Eastern Europe might have commanded a respectful hearing; troubled by unemployment, the industrialized nations turned a deaf ear.


INSIDE
Producer Prices Hold Steady
Inflation at the producer level was nonexistent in June for the third straight month, the Labor Department reported.
Page D1.
Costly Scandal for Prudential
Prudential Securities added $305 million to reserves for settlements.
The limited partnership scandal has now cost the firm $1.1 billion.
Page D1.
Suit Over Admission Policy
If a lawsuit against the University of Texas Law School succeeds, affirmative action admissions policies nationwide will be at risk.
Page B8.
National League Wins
The National League ended a six-year All-Star Game drought with an 8-7 victory in 10 innings.
SportsWednesday, page B9.
Haiti Monitors Urged to Stay
Supporters of the exiled President urged human rights monitors to stay in Haiti despite the Government's orders for them to leave.
Page A2.
Bringing Bosnians Home
Bosnia is considering pardoning draft evaders, to lure back skilled refugees to rebuild the country, but the plan angers many who stayed.
Page A3.
Cat, World Weary, Returns
Tabitha slipped through a ceiling panel into her owner's arms, ending a long trip lost in a Boeing 747.
Page B3.


Bosnia Prepares to Offer Pardons to Draft Dodgers
In two years of civil war, more than a million Bosnians have fled the country, many of them inmates released from Serbian concentration camps or escaping threats to their lives.
But some have been young men who have fled to avoid being drafted into the Bosnian Army.
Now the new Muslim-Croat coalition that dominates Bosnia's Government is preparing a law that would, despite the grumbling of its military, pardon draft evaders in an effort to lure home thousands of skilled refugees to rebuild this war-battered country.


How Fire Island Prepared for Beach Erosion
To the Editor:
The rebuilding of New York's storm-eroded Fire Island dunes (news article, July 4) shows people will tax themselves to protect their property without waiting for government help.
But it is only a start.


Gary Kildall, 52, Crucial Player In Computer Development, Dies
Gary Kildall, a pioneering computer scientist who created the first popular operating system for personal computers, died on Monday at the Community Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula in Monterey, Calif.
He was 52.
An autopsy performed yesterday failed to determine the cause of death, said John DiCarlo, Monterey County's deputy coroner.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the judge handling the sexual harassment suit filed against President Clinton misstated part of Mr.
Clinton's election history.
His loss in a 1974 Congressional race was not his only electoral defeat; he was also defeated when he ran for re-election as Governor in 1980.


ResultsPlus
TRACK AND FIELD Double Diamond Day  Irina Privalova of Russia set two track records in the DN-Galan Grand Prix meet in Stockholm yesterday and came away with a couple of diamonds.
Meet organizers offered a diamond worth $10,000 for each track record set, and Privalova was the day's only double winner.
She set records in the women's 100 meters (10.90 seconds) and the 200 (22.02), narrowly beating Gwen Torrence of the United States in the latter event.
Two other Americans, Dennis Mitchell and Jeff Williams, came up with diamonds for their efforts in the men's 100 and 200, respectively.
Mitchell was clocked in 9.97, shaving .14 seconds off the track record set by Valery Borzov of Russia in 1975.
Leroy Burrell set the world mark of 9.85 last week at Lausanne, Switzerland.
Williams was timed in 20.19 seconds, edging Frank Fredericks of Namibia, who was clocked in 20.29. (AP) TENNIS  Top Paycheck: $3,000  It took Mike Zimmerman just 55 minutes to match the biggest paycheck of his tennis career.
Zimmerman, who led Harvard to a 36-0 Ivy League record from 1989 to 1992, traveled to the other side of the Charles River yesterday and beat Kenny Thorne of Gainesville, Fla., 6-1, 6-2, in the first round of the United States Pro Tennis Championships in Brookline, Mass.
Zimmerman, a native of Great Neck, L.I., had lost in the qualifying tournaments at three English events -- including Wimbledon -- in June, and spent much of the spring playing at minor tournaments in Mexico.
Thorne never broke Zimmerman's serve and had only two break points in the match.
Zimmerman, who is ranked 447th in the world, made $3,000 for beating Thorne, who is ranked 188th. (AP)


Strong Funds' Parent Is Censured by S.E.C.
One of the country's fastest-growing mutual fund companies has been censured by the Securities and Exchange Commission for improper trades among its funds and for not telling investors about conflicts of interest.
Strong/Corneliuson Capital Management, which manages $8 billion of mutual funds, announced yesterday that it had settled an S.E.C. complaint over problems that occurred at the Milwaukee-based fund group from 1987 to 1990.


Norman's Best Image Reflected in Claret Jug
It sat glittering in his field of vision for a year, always just a glance away.
Wherever he happened to be sitting in his office on the grounds of his home in Hobe Sound, Fla., Greg Norman could look at the silver claret jug emblematic of his greatest achievement, and remember.
Reflected in the surface of the jug, the ancient cup that goes to the winner of the British Open, were some of the trophies from Norman's other 66 tournament victories.
They dot the walls and sit in glass cases around the room.
But all those images diminish in comparison to the claret jug, which is the centerpiece of Norman's golf career because it represents his only major championship successes.


Leaders Begin The Shaping Of Final Bills
Democratic Congressional leaders today began the delicate process of trying to reshape health care legislation, seeking some formula that could transform varying bills adopted by four committees into new measures capable of winning 218 votes in the House and 51 in the Senate.
The leaders' first efforts were tentative.
There were meetings and telephone conversations intended to make clear to the committee chairmen, as gently as possible, that their bills would have to undergo changes before the full House and Senate voted on them.


With Rizzuto in Full Dress, Yanks Have a Presence
New York came to Pittsburgh this week and the sentimentality was obvious.
In one league's All-Star Game clubhouse, Phil Rizzuto, the Hall of Famer in waiting, donned a Yankee uniform, fulfilling his role as the honorary captain of the American League stars.


One Last Flight for Tabitha the Cat
Tabitha the cat slipped through a cargo-compartment ceiling panel on a Tower Air jet yesterday into the arms of her gleefully weeping owner, ending a crisscross-country voyage that could put a strain on frequent-flyer stipulations.
For 12 days, Tabitha, a 3-year-old domestic shorthair, hid within the nooks and crannies of the vast, temperature-controlled body of the Boeing 747.
In that time, she logged 30,000 miles zigging between New York and Los Angeles, with occasional zags to Miami and San Juan, P. R.


Fans Put the Wizard Back on Star-Studded Road
Ozzie Smith long ago stopped trying to figure out the major leagues.
"A lot of strange things go on in baseball these days," Smith said.
Millions of fans would undoubtedly agree.
And they might offer as Exhibit A the 1993 All-Star team, which did not include Smith, the man who is to shortstop what Brooks Robinson was to third base, Willie Mays to center field and Roberto Clemente to right field.


Market Place; Federal cleanup funds may aid the greening of Tetra Tech.
THE fortunes of environmental companies are closely linked to the performance of the economy.
When the economy falters, fewer products are made and thrown out, depriving haul-and-dump companies of raw material.
Similarly, when resources are scarce, even mandatory cleanups slow down, pinching the engineering and consulting companies that investigate and analyze sites, as well as the companies that do the actual cleaning.
But one customer is not likely to be at a severe loss for funds: the Federal Government.
Several analysts have identified Tetra Tech Inc. of Pasadena, Calif., as an engineering and consulting company poised to take advantage of Government business.


Corrections
A brief article by Reuters in some editions of Business Day yesterday about Mattel Inc.'s takeover offer for J. W. Spear &amp; Sons of Britain misstated Spear's involvement with the game of Scrabble.
J.
W.
Spear owns the rights in certain markets outside the United States.
The company did not invent the game; it was invented during the Depression by Alfred M. Butts, an architect in Queens.


Daniel L. Blum; Newspaperman, 69
Daniel L. Blum, who worked for 30 years in the news departments of The New York Times and The New York Herald Tribune, died June 26 at the Clinica Biblica in San Jose, Costa Rica.
Mr.
Blum, who lived in Atenas, Costa Rica, was 69.
The cause was pulmonary edema, said his wife, June.


ANTITRUST INQUIRY FOR MAKERS OF COMPACT DISKS
The Justice Department's antitrust division is investigating the licensing practices of several leading makers of compact disks, the platinum-colored platters that store music, video and computer data.
The investigation, first reported in The Wall Street Journal, is aimed largely at the practices of the Sony Corporation and Philips Electronics N.V.
Both have significant patents on CD technology and jointly license their patents to other manufacturers.
People familiar with the inquiry say it may also extend to Pioneer Electronics of Japan and Thomson Consumer Electronics of France, both of which own disk manufacturing companies.
Sony and Philips are particularly dominant, by virtue of their patent positions.


White House Says Growth Is Pushing the Deficit Down
Clinton Administration officials today reduced their forecast for this year's Federal budget deficit by $14.7 billion because stronger-than-expected economic growth has produced more than enough tax revenue to offset the cost to the Federal Government from higher interest rates.
But they cautioned that unless long-term interest rates fell to their levels of earlier this year, higher interest on the national debt would result in slightly higher deficits later in the decade.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.31
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.44
4.50
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.87
4.94
3.13
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.41
7.45
5.74
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.68
7.72
6.61
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.48
8.48
7.36
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.51
6.52
5.70
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Opponents of Haiti's Military Urge Rights Monitors to Stay
Supporters of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, urged international human rights monitors today to remain in the country and continue investigating increasing reports of abuses.
The monitors, a joint civilian mission of the United Nations and the Organization of American States, were ordered Monday by the military-backed Government to leave.
They are to go Wednesday.


AT LUNCH WITH: Peter Gabriel; Art, Music, Experience Unbound
AS midlife transitions go, Peter Gabriel's is a doozy.
After a quarter-century of singing his own words and music, he has become a micro-mogul: running a world-music festival and record company while plotting projects from CD-ROM's to theme parks.
After 17 years of marriage, he's single again.
What unifies his energies for the 1990's is his continuing passion for world music, a troubling term for music from Africa, Asia and other places beyond rock's beaten path.
Since the 1970's, when he was the lead singer of the English rock band Genesis, Mr.
Gabriel has stayed true to the ambitions of progressive rock, writing songs that aren't ashamed to be intelligent.
His is a loyal audience, largely in its 20's and 30's, while his eye-popping videos are MTV favorites.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Our Towns colum yesterday referred incorrectly in some copies to a homebuyer in Love Canal, N.Y.
It was Michael Costantino, not Sam Giarrizzo, who was looking for a new home.


In America; When Kids Say 'Enough!'
Elba Clark is 13 years old and lives in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
She just finished the eighth grade.
Much of her summer will be spent doing volunteer work at a neighborhood nursing home.
In her spare time she likes to jump rope, and every now and then the delightful vision of a double-dutch championship will slip into her head, and that will make her smile.
As she is a child in a big, big city, there is a certain dissonance to the music of Elba's daily life.
She is frightened, for example, by the frequent gunfire in the neighborhood.
"The shooting and the arguing scare me," she says, "but I pretend like it doesn't scare me because I don't want to scare my brother. I just want to calm him down and keep it to myself."


Health Care Caravans
Supporters of the Clinton health care proposal unveiled plans for bus caravans to Capitol Hill when Congress debates the issue.
Page A15.


Heeding the Hard Lesson of Capriati
The good news, if you happen to be offended by the notion of 14-year-old professional tennis players and appalled by the drug-related defection and despair of Jennifer Capriati, is that 14-year-old Venus Williams will not be making her debut next month at the Virginia Slims of Los Angeles.
The bad news, if you happen to market this cradle-robbing sport and reap personal profit from multimillion dollar careers like Capriati's, is that 14-year-old Venus Williams will not be making her debut next month at the Virginia Slims of Los Angeles.


N.A.A.C.P. Leader Tries To Build a Bridge to Youth
When the Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr. talks about reaching out to the young and the disillusioned in black America, he is talking about people like 22-year-old Alturo Rhymes.
Mr.
Chavis is executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, which is holding its annual convention here this week, but as far as Mr.
Rhymes and his buddies are concerned, the 85-year-old civil rights organization might as well be called the National Association for the Advancement of Middle-Class and Old Colored People.


Health Care Caravans To Deliver a Message
Supporters of President Clinton's proposal for national health insurance announced plans today for cross-country bus caravans that will deliver hundreds of people to Capitol Hill next month just as Congress begins to debate the issue.
Administration officials, while uncertain how much public excitement can be generated in the middle of the summer, describe the caravans as an effort to duplicate the successes of the Presidential campaign, when Mr.
Clinton, Al Gore and their wives went on a six-day bus tour in July 1992, immediately after the Democratic National Convention in New York.


Cam's Card Shark 3-2 Choice
Cam's Card Shark, the leading horse in harness racing who has dominated the 3-year-old division, was installed yesterday as the 3-2 morning-line favorite over nine rivals in Saturday night's $1 million Meadowlands Pace.
Owned by Jeffrey Snyder of New York, the Cam Fella colt has 10 victories and two second-place finishes in 12 starts for a season-leading $1,247,922 in earnings.


Yankees' Top Pick Is Starting Out Fast
Brian Buchanan, the power-hitting University of Virginia outfielder who was the Yankees' top choice in the amateur draft, hasn't wasted any time in making his mark on the club's farm system.
Hours after signing a contract on Monday, Buchanan went 3 for 5 in helping the Class A Oneonta Yankees to a 9-5 victory over Elmira.
The impressive debut against the Florida Marlins' farm team in Elmira, N.Y., was hardly unexpected.
A 6-foot-4-inch 220-pounder, Buchanan, who was the 24th pick over all, was widely regarded as the premier power hitter in the June draft, largely because he maintained a .396 batting average this season while setting school records of 22 home runs, 37 extra base hits and 66 runs batted in in 54 games.


Excerpts From Court Ruling Ordering Parity in New Jersey School Funding
Following are excerpts from the New Jersey Supreme Court's unanimous ruling yesterday on the state's system of financing public education.
We affirm the judgment of the Chancery Division declaring unconstitutional the Quality Education Act (the act or QEA), N.J.S.A. 18A:7D-1 to -37.
Our decision is based on the act's failure to assure parity of regular education expenditures between the special-needs districts and the more affluent districts.
The state informs us that it does not anticipate that the act in its present form will continue to control financing of public education.


Swedes to Confront Brazil's Glorious Past
Brazil has Romario, Bebeto and enough World Cup trophies and skeletons in its closet to clog the Amazon.
Sweden has Martin Dahlin, Tomas Brolin and only one precedent for a soccer game of this importance.
It came 36 years ago in the final of the 1958 World Cup in Sweden.
On that occasion, the heavily favored Brazilians won, 5-2.


Where Paddle Ball Is Heaven; The Joys of Youth Are Relived Daily on a Patch of Concrete in Greenwich Village
Because the weather looked chancy for the next two days, Lu Benitez decided he had better go to the paddle ball courts after all.
He picked up a game at once and began dismantling his opponent with care.
Then he bore in on a second player.
He had been there the day before, and the day before that, but the wins were still smooth, dreamy pleasures.
When he feels overcome on all sides, he reaches for his paddle.
His deft play drives his opponents to mutter to themselves: "Man, how can you be so awful?" or "That's a ball there. See it. Hit it!"


Pepsi-Cola Redesigning Executive Tier and Ads
In a significant realignment of its corporate marketing activities, the Pepsi-Cola Company will announce today that it is shuffling executives and consolidating the advertising and packaging of its new products as well as its core brands like Pepsi and Diet Pepsi.
"Structurally, it's an important change because Pepsi is eliminating several layers in its decision-making process," said Jesse Myers, publisher of Beverage Digest, an industry newsletter.
"It's also important because it impacts two of the president's right-hand men," he said, referring to Craig Weatherup, Pepsi-Cola North America's president and chief executive.
Fortunes Diverge
The two executives are Brian Swette, Pepsi's senior vice president and general manager for new business, and Jeff Campbell, senior vice president for brand development.


Nations Envied for Schools Share Americans' Worries
When American officials embarked on efforts to improve public education a decade ago, the campaign was accompanied by hand-wringing over the well-run, results-oriented school systems of other nations.
Why, American analysts asked, are schools in other countries seemingly better off than those in the United States?
The answer is that they are not, as American officials discovered in a rare meeting with high-ranking education leaders from Australia, Canada, New Zealand and seven other Pacific Rim nations here.
The meeting ended over the weekend, but not before the foreign educators lamented problems that, to hard-pressed United States representatives, sounded reassuringly familiar.
Students need to achieve at higher levels. they said; teacher training needs improvement; vocational education and school-to-work transition programs fall short, and the need for them will only grow.
Finally, they said, there is too little money to overhaul schools.


A Taste of India Via New Jersey
THE smells of cayenne, cinnamon, cloves and cooked sugar are in the air.
Gold bracelets sparkle in the windows of jewelry stores.
Crowds fill the streets, with women in bright saris and some men in turbans.
Children clamor for glasses of fresh sugar-cane juice.
Yes, this is Little India.
But it isn't a slice of Bombay, or even a niche of New York City or Washington.
Would you believe central New Jersey?


TAKING INITIATIVE, NOMINEE DEFENDS CONDUCT AS JUDGE
Judge Stephen G. Breyer, President Clinton's Supreme Court nominee, moved swiftly today to defend himself against assertions that he might have acted improperly by ruling on pollution cases while he was an investor in an insurance syndicate facing heavy losses from pollution lawsuits.
In his first day of testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, which is considering his nomination, Judge Breyer said he was confident that his participation in eight pollution cases as a Federal appeals court judge violated no laws or judicial ethics guidelines.


The Guard Takes On The Gangs
One day just before dawn a year ago, 500 police officers and National Guard troops descended on Las Gladiolas public housing project here, searching apartments, confiscating drugs and weapons, and making arrests.
Afterward, nearly 200 of them stayed on.
They closed off a back entrance to the four buildings in the fenced-in project and built a bulletproof guard house with gates to control access to the property.
Three months later, the Guard and most of the police officers withdrew, but 18 officers remained, quartered at a mini-station house.


Eating Well
TWENTY years ago, nutritionists routinely predicted dire consequences for people who did not eat meat.
Today it's difficult to find a nutritionist who will not, at least grudgingly, admit that a vegetarian diet, especially a lacto-ovo one, which includes milk and eggs, can even be perfectly adequate for proper growth.
And there are those who will tell you that vegetarians are likely to have a better quality of life and live a lot longer than people who eat meat.
But even the most enthusiastic advocates of vegetarianism acknowledge that someone following such a diet has to know a lot more about nutrition than the ordinary omnivore.
And especially when it comes to the eating habits of growing children.


Mayor Backs Reform Plan To Break Up City Schools
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani publicly endorsed a plan yesterday that would largely eliminate the central administration of the New York City Board of Education, but he backed off recent statements in which he set a quick timetable for putting the plan into effect.
The Mayor called the proposals a "revolution in the way we think about the school system." But he acknowledged that he had not yet stitched together the support he would need for the plan from the city's educational and political establishment.


Judge Seeks N.B.A. Settlement
A Federal judge, wielding a prickly verbal scepter, warned the National Basketball Association and the players' union yesterday to settle their simmering labor impasse.
He said that if they did not, he would make a decision that would please no one.
"All this should have been resolved at collective bargaining," United States District Court Judge Kevin Duffy said.
"No two ways about it. Neither side is particularly well served by litigation."


The Pop Life
Heard in Two Worlds
For many musicians, drawing the line between making art and making entertainment can be a complex determination.
Before Branford Marsalis joined the "Tonight" show as a bandleader two years ago, before he started accepting bit parts in Hollywood movies seven years ago, before he joined Sting's band nine years ago, he was regarded as a prime mover in the jazz renaissance.
He still is, but to the millions of Americans who watch "Tonight," he's also a fountain of five-second versions of pop standards and a grinning sidekick to Jay Leno.
Mr.
Marsalis's new album, a collaboration with DJ Premier of the rap group Gang Starr called "Buckshot LeFonque" (Columbia), further muddles the issue of credibility.
It is a very pop-conscious blend of jazz, hip-hop, funk, soul, African music and reggae.


Post-Post Cold War
When President Kennedy visited West Berlin in 1963, the more than one million Berliners who turned out to greet him were the largest crowd he had ever seen.
So large, in fact, that Mr.
Kennedy said that when he left office he was going to leave his successor a sealed letter to be opened only when things got really bad at home.
The letter would read, "Go to Germany."
Times have changed.
What has been striking about Mr.
Clinton's trip through Europe this week, including Berlin, is how muted the response has been.
From Latvia, to Poland, to Italy, to Germany, the crowds have been substantial at times, but never huge, always embracing but hardly ecstatic.


Reactor Was Designed To Breed Plutonium
To the Editor:
The inaccurate information on the Integral Fast Reactor comes from Senators Paul Simon and Dirk Kempthorne (letter, July 5), not from your June 26 editorial.
The reactor was designed for breeding plutonium and can readily be converted to do so.
The Congressional Office of Technology Assessment recently concluded that for the purpose of evaluating the reactor's potential impact on proliferation risks, "it must be considered a breeder-capable reactor system."


Moscow Journal; Tattooed Lady, 2,000 Years Old, Blooms Again
A 2,000-year-old woman's body discovered frozen in the Siberian permafrost by Russian archeologists is undergoing a rejuvenating make-over by the same scientists who preserved Lenin's body.
Already, she doesn't look a day over 1,800.


A Suspicious Fire Tests Strength of a Synagogue's Members
For 90 years the grand but battered synagogue has stood by the sea in the Rockaways, weathering the loss of Jews and, eventually, everyone else as urban renewal stripped bare the land stretching for 150 blocks around it.
The dwindling and aging membership of Congregation Derech Emunoh somehow found the wherewithal to keep it open, cherishing the moments they could spend praying in the same pews that had supported their parents and grandparents.
But the determination of its 40 members came close to exhaustion yesterday morning when an early-morning fire destroyed much of the synagogue's ceiling and roof.
Fire department officials said the two-alarm blaze was suspicious in origin, and because it involved a synagogue, the case was being investigated by the police as a possible bias incident.
Though the 600-seat structure could be rebuilt, the president of the synagogue said he did not believe it was worth trying to raise the necessary funds when the congregation was already barely surviving on its memories. 'This Is the End'
"I doubt very much that we will have a congregation here any longer," said Robert Wein, the president, a third-generation member of Derech Emunoh who travels from Manhattan every week to pray next to the memorial plaque with his grandfather's name on it.
"To spend hundreds of thousands on the roof when there is no Jewish community here any longer -- it's just not practical. This is the end."


CHRONICLE
In Israel, cries of protest were instant when the Haifa Municipal Theater announced last month that VANESSA REDGRAVE would appear twice on its stage in "Brecht in Exile," a selection of works written by the dramatist Bertolt Brecht after he had left Nazi Germany.
The issue was not Ms.
Redgrave's acting ability but her ardent support of the Palestine Liberation Organization and her condemnations of Israel over the years.
Some critics argued it was an exercise in masochism for a tax-supported theater in Israel to invite someone who had spoken scathingly about "crimes of the Zionist nation." On the other side were those who argued that what counts is an actress's talent, not her politics.


Carl Barnett; Newspaper Foreman, 76
Carl Barnett, a general foreman for the delivery department of The New York Times for more than 30 years, died on Saturday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 76 and a resident of Port Washington, L.I.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his wife, Mary, said.


Small Victory for Huskies
The beleaguered Washington Huskies program finally won one off the field.
Or at least managed a partial victory, thanks to the school's president, Dr.
WILLIAM GERBERDING.
The N.C.A.A.
Committee on Infractions announced yesterday it was backing off a proposed one-year television ban for the Huskies.
Instead, Washington will be restricted to four football television games in one of the next two seasons, and the Huskies said they would take the penalty in 1995.
At issue were violations of N.C.A.A. rules concerning payments by boosters to student athletes for work not actually performed, "as well as a lack of institutional controls of a summer jobs program," the N.C.A.A. said in a release from its headquarters.
On June 5, a delegation headed by Dr.
Gerberding argued against the proposed one-year ban at a four-hour hearing before the infractions committee. (AP)


Treasury Bonds Show An Upturn
Treasury bonds rose for the first time in a week yesterday as a Government report surprised investors with the news that inflation was nonexistent in June.
The benchmark 30-year bond rose 13/32 , or $4.06 for each $1,000 bond, to yield 7.68 percent, four basis points lower than Monday.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.
Bonds gained as much as 3/4 point after the inflation report.


Foot-Dragging Is Said to Put GATT Accord in Jeopardy
The Democratic chairman of the Senate Finance Committee accused the Clinton Administration today of dragging its feet on a 117-nation free-trade pact, and warned that the measure might not win Congressional approval if action was not taken soon.
The remarks by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York were the latest sign that while business lobbying for the latest pact to expand the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade seems to be winning support for the pact in Congress, the accord remains in trouble because Congress will be in session for only a few more weeks this year and health care legislation will dominate its time.


Abdul-Jabbar May Coach
KAREEM ABDUL-JABBAR said yesterday in Philadelphia that was interested in coaching in the National Basketball Association and would consider offers beginning next year after one season of working as a personal teacher.
The league's career leading scorer said that many people told him after last season he should go into coaching after MAGIC JOHNSON stepped down from an interim position with the Los Angeles Lakers.
Abdul-Jabbar, 47, said he now knew that he would be interested in taking over a team or working as an assistant.
He was in Philadelphia helping the development of center SHAWN BRADLEY. (AP)


Jean F. Ingrao Labor Official, 63
Jean Fredette Ingrao, one of the first women elected to high office in the A.F.L.-C.I.O., died on Thursday at her home in Falls Church, Va.
She was 63.
She died of cancer, said Michael Byrne, a spokesman for the labor federation.


Welfare Chief Received Free Use of Apartment
Marva L. Hammons, who runs the city's welfare system, was the highest-ranking official in the Giuliani Administration to receive a rent concession from a real-estate executive who was one of the Mayor's largest fund-raisers, officials said yesterday.
Randy M. Mastro, Mr.
Giuliani's chief of staff, said Ms.
Hammons, the city's Human Resources Commissioner, had originally signed a 25-month lease, with one month free, for a $2,500 two-bedroom apartment in a building owned by the real-estate executive, William W. Koeppel.


Honor a Son of Italy On the Fourth of July
To the Editor:
As an American of Italian heritage I have wondered why Filippo Mazzei is not credited with his service to the Revolutionary cause when we celebrate the Fourth of July.


Pele Took the World by Storm in '58
Pele sounded nostalgic today as he recalled the Brazil-Sweden clash of nine World Cups ago, a match in another decade, another country.
The year was 1958 and the place was Sweden, the host nation of the sixth World Cup that year; Brazil and Sweden met in the final.


Spotlight Gives Way To Statutes
REMEMBER Lana Cantrell, the nighclub singer? Well, she's now Lana Cantrell, the lawyer.
"These days, the only place I sing is at home," said Ms.
Cantrell, 48, who was called "a singer's singer" by Variety when she regularly performed at places like the Waldorf, the Persian Room of the Plaza and the Maisonette of the St.
Regis.


Caremark
The stock of Caremark International Inc., a provider of health care products and services based in Northbrook, Ill., rose yesterday following Eli Lilly's $4 billion purchase of McKesson's PSC Health Systems, a drug benefit management service.
Analysts noted rising market speculation that more drug makers would try to acquire pharmaceutical benefit companies in the months to come.


When It Comes to Cup Pressure, Italy and Brazil Have Been There
Three former World Cup winners were still alive when the quarterfinals began.
Now there are two, with Germany, the defending champion, gone.
Will those two still be around tomorrow?
Will Brazil and Italy, both three-time winners, survive their semifinal games today and make it to the final?


Suspicious Fire Damages 90-Year Old Synagogue in Queens


Prudential Adds to Reserve to Pay for Scandal
Prudential Securities' projected cost for the firm's limited partnership debacle has surpassed $1.1 billion, which would make it the costliest fraud scandal for any investment house in Wall Street's history.
The scandal's price would have cut into the capital base of the brokerage firm, but its parent, the Prudential Insurance Company of America, injected $180 million in cash to cover the firm's losses during the last six months, caused mainly by the costs of the scandal.


Consensus Has Indurain On Competitive Pedestal
Anybody out there planning to form a Miguel Indurain Fan Club, please remember to send a membership application to Lance Armstrong.
"Big Mig!" the American rider exclaimed this morning.
"Too much! The man is just too strong."


The Top 12 Reasons to Love This Classic
Where have all the 12-Meters gone?
The question surfaces often among yachtsmen who remember the beauty and elegance of the 68-foot sailboats that once vied for the America's Cup.
The 12-Meters are now making a comeback on the East Coast.
Emerging from their boat-shed graveyards in surprising numbers, 12-Meters are bringing back not only nostalgia but also their unique brand of yacht-racing competition.


Tweaking the Captains of Industry in Prime Time
Michael Moore, the counterculture film maker who skewered General Motors and its chairman in the mordantly humorous "Roger and Me," is at it again -- and this time his camera lens has widened to include all of Corporate America.
A few weeks ago, Mr.
Moore, accompanied by a television film crew, stood outside I.B.M.'s building in Manhattan, his bullhorn aimed toward the office of Louis V. Gerstner Jr., I.B.M.'s chief executive.


Term Limits Don't Subvert the Constitution
To the Editor:
"Term Limits and the High Court" (editorial, July 3) misstates the constitutional issues term-limits proponents will argue before the Supreme Court.
The Arkansas case is a ballot access measure, one that prevents House or Senate incumbents with 6 or 12 years' service, respectively, from appearing on the ballot.
A write-in vote allows their election.
Thus, there is no "added qualification."


No Headline
"If you see kids in any other aspect of life, they're up, down, wiggling, nothing but movement. If they're still, you think they're sick or dull. But here we reward those who sit the best. It's like we're trying to teach pigs to dance and whistle." ANTONIO STRANO, a California teacher.  [ B8:5. ]


Death of Kim: An Edgy Reappraisal
For more than four decades, ever since the North Korean dictator Kim Il Sung launched the Korean War, leaving hundreds of thousands dead and the peninsula in ruins, many South Koreans and Americans have been awaiting the death of this dangerous leader as a moment to rejoice.
But something strange has happened since Mr.
Kim died on Friday at 82, reportedly of a heart attack.
Not only have many people here failed to applaud his passing but, as a Government official put it today, there is even some disappointment among top policy makers.


Off the Menu
A New Tavern in the Town
The name carved above the arched stone doorway of the landmark building at 42 East 20th Street says "N.S. Meyer, 1868."
"No relation," said Danny Meyer, an owner of Gramercy Tavern, which opened Monday on the ground floor of the building.


Make the Pools Safe for Everyone
Parks Commissioner Henry Stern says there is no real crisis in the city's public pools -- they are safer than the streets.
So they should be.
But in only 11 days, 10 young women have been the victims of sexual assaults or assault attempts in New York City pools.
These incidents echo a nasty trend begun last summer with "whirlpooling," in which groups of young males surrounded girls and young women, rhythmically clapping and intimidating them, then assaulting them.
Betsy Gotbaum, who was Parks Commissioner at that time, insensitively referred to those incidents as "ordinary horseplay that got out of hand." Mr.
Stern has shown that he is taking the problem more seriously.
One idea he considered, but wisely rejected, was to segregate the sexes in the pools.
Rather than deprive peaceful pool users of the pleasure of swimming with whomever they choose, he has opted to hold the thugs to civilized standards.
A New York police officer is now constantly "on deck" at every intermediate- and large-size pool in the city.


Italy and Brazil in Final
No country has won a fourth World Cup.
On Sunday, two will try.
The scenario unfolded yesterdayas three-time winners Italy and Brazil created a show-down for soccer's biggest prize withvictories ondifferent coasts fashioned by goals from two of the game's biggest stars.
First, the ITalians defeated Bulgaria, 2-1, at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J.
Both goals were scored by Roberto Baggio.
In the day's second semifinal, Brazil beat Sweden, 1-0, at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif., which will be the site of Sunday's title game.
The goal, in the 80th minute, was scored on a head shot by Romario.
SportsThursday, page B9.


Kids Who Say, 'Ugh, Cow!'
REBECCA BROCHES, a New Yorker, doesn't eat meat: "No chicken, turkey or hamburger." Her menu usually consists of "pizza, pasta, grilled cheese and tomatoes and clementines."
Fish is not entirely off her list, but then it's not on it, either.
Rebecca did eat fish years ago and is thinking of trying it again.
But only "when I grow up," she said.
"Meat tastes bad and anyway I like animals."


Lars-Eric Lindblad, 67, Pioneer Of Tours to Exotic Destinations
Lars-Eric Lindblad, a peripatetic entrepreneur whose tour company pioneered commercial trips to China, Antarctica and other remote parts of the world, died on Friday in Stockholm while on vacation.
He was 67 and lived in Wilton, Conn.
The cause of death was a heart attack, according to his son, Sven-Olof.


Public &amp; Private; Order In The Court
Some years ago I stood behind a teacher with a gaggle of students who had approached a court officer at the Criminal Courts Building in lower Manhattan to ask how she could arrange to observe a trial.
The officer told her what he later said many people failed to understand: that anyone can watch.
It's that simple: the public usually has a right to be present at the process by which we find our fellows guilty or not of some infraction of law.
Today, as the O. J. Simpson case has made clearer than ever before, we even have the right to watch from the comfort of our living rooms.


Lenard to Stay in College
VOSHON LENARD, a second-round draft choice of the Milwaukee Bucks, has told the team he is returning to the University of Minnesota for his senior year.
Under a new National Collegiate Athletic Association rule, underclassmen may enter the draft but retain their college eligibility if they decide to return to college within 30 days of the draft.
Any team drafting an underclassman retains that player's rights for the next year's draft. (AP)


Bishops Enter Health Battle With a Warning on Abortion
The nation's Roman Catholic bishops have warned the leaders of Congress that they are mobilizing millions of members of their church against any health care plan that requires all insurers to cover abortion as part of a standard package of benefits.
In a letter to Congressional leaders this week, the bishops affirmed their support for changing the health system to achieve universal coverage.
But they promised "vigorous opposition" to any health plan that includes a requirement of abortion coverage.


Superhuman Feats From a Subhuman Diver
To meet today's demands for construction, maintenance and repairs on deep-water oil platforms, the ideal diver has to have arms seven feet long, be able to dead-lift more than three tons and be ready to toil for days, without rest or complaint, more than half a mile beneath the surface.
In other words, the diver must be a robot.


Personal Health; A new type of over-the-counter pain reliever.
WITH pharmacy shelves already sagging with over-the-counter painkillers -- all of them various combinations or permutations of aspirin, acetaminophen or ibuprofen -- are you ready for something new?
Enter naproxen.
For 10 years the leading prescription drug in its class (sold as Anaprox and Naprosyn), it is now being offered directly to consumers as Aleve, competitively priced at nearly one-tenth the cost of the equivalent prescription dose and available without the added pain of a doctor's bill.
The $100 million advertising campaign begun by Aleve's manufacturer, Procter-Syntex Health Products Company in Cincinnati, insures that many of the 135 million Americans who develop an ache or pain sometime in the next three months will know about it and perhaps decide to give it a try.
But before people switch from the product they rely on for pain relief, they should know more about the relative benefits and risks of the various choices, as well as their price tags.
Painkillers Galore
Aleve joins a crowded and confusing field.
Over-the-counter pain relief comes in many guises: extra-strength, maximum strength, buffered and enteric-coated; in a wide range of dosages, and with brand names like Bayer Aspirin, Anacin, Excedrin, Ecotrin, Tylenol, Advil, Motrin IB and Nuprin.
There are also generic, and therefore less expensive, versions of aspirin, acetaminophen or ibuprofen.


Mets Could Avoid Liability
A judge said yesterday he was not inclined to hold the Mets responsible for injuries received by a 2-year-old girl when VINCE COLEMAN threw an explosive device into a group of fans last July.
Coleman, who was suspended by the Mets after the incident and traded to the Kansas City Royals in January, pleaded guilty earlier this year to possession of an explosive device and was fined $1,000.
The outfielder is being sued, along with the former Los Angeles Dodger ERIC DAVIS, by the family of AMANDA SANTOS, who received eye injuries when Coleman threw the device out of a car being driven by Davis near Dodger Stadium. (Reuters)


Treasury Bonds Show An Upturn
Treasury bonds rose for the first time in a week yesterday as a Government report surprised investors with the news that inflation was nonexistent in June.
The benchmark 30-year bond rose 13/32 , or $4.06 for each $1,000 bond, to yield 7.68 percent, four basis points lower than Monday.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.
Bonds gained as much as 3/4 point after the inflation report.


Some Shifts In Top Posts At Cummins
The Cummins Engine Company said today that Henry B. Schacht, its chief executive since 1973, had turned over the job to James A. Henderson, the president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Schacht will remain as chairman and concentrate on developing international alliances for Cummins, the diesel engine maker based in Columbus, Ind., that has been booming after a rough ride in the 1980's.


Italy Reduces Diplomats After Algiers Shootout
On a day in which four more people were killed in a shootout in front of the Italian Embassy in Algiers, Italy said today that it was sending military reinforcements to guard its embassy and a consulate in Algeria, and is reducing its diplomatic staff.
The Italian Foreign Minister, Antonio Martino, said in Paris that Italy and France had agreed to coordinate an evacuation of their nationals if the situation "was to come to the worst."


CHRONICLE
A Baltimore teen-ager became the youngest pilot to fly solo across the country yesterday, touching down in Long Beach, Calif., after a 12-day trip from Ocean City, Md., in a rented Cessna.
JIMMY MATHIS, 16, was greeted at Long Beach Airport by a cheering group of about 50 people, who included his relieved parents, JIM and MARY LOU MATHIS, The Associated Press reported.


Sentencing Delayed For Teacher's Killer
The sentencing of Gregory Morris, 15, for his murder conviction in the shooting of a bicycle rider in Prospect Park last year, was adjourned yesterday in Brooklyn Family Court, pending a sentencing hearing on July 26.
Mr.
Morris was convicted of felony murder, or causing a death while committing another crime -- in this case, attempting to steal the bicycle of the victim, Allyn Winslow, 42, a drama teacher.


On British Telly Also, Tabloid Values Gain
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis astutely assesses the "Murdochization" of British newspapers (column, July 4) but fails to point out the creeping influence of tabloid values on Britain's once-revered radio and television news.


Sending Money to Home District: Earmarking and the Pork Barrel
Representative Paul E. Kanjorski, Democrat of Pennsylvania, says he is fighting a lonely struggle to realize a great idea benefiting his district, the nation and the world, opposed by a cabal of cranky constituents, flyspecking lawyers and boneheaded bureaucrats.
To those critics, Mr.
Kanjorski's vision is little more than a giveaway: a means of extracting $30 million from the Pentagon to enable a nonprofit corporation run by his brother, his friends and his allies to buy thousands of acres of land in his home district for far less than their appraised value.


A Violent Drama In MacMillan Finale
It is easy to overlook the creative aspect of a ballet troupe that calls itself the Royal Ballet and that has as its signature work "The Sleeping Beauty." Yet the name "Royal" came relatively late and the company is anything but a court ballet descended from a Sun King.
Its 95-year-old founder, Ninette de Valois, is every inch as indomitable as Queen Elizabeth I. But in 1931, when she established the company long known as the Sadler's Wells Ballet, she hardly expected the Royal charter it acquired in 1956.
For all its staging of 19th-century spectacles, the de Valois company, influenced by its founder's experience with Diaghilev, was conceived as an experimental troupe.


Police Concerned About Patrol-Car Accidents
After four police cars were wrecked responding to the same robbery call on Monday evening, two other police vehicles were involved in accidents yesterday -- one as it returned from trying to catch a car thief, the other as it raced to assist an officer who had called for help, the police said.
A civilian and five police officers were injured in the first of yesterday's accidents, three officers seriously.
A civilian motorcyclist was hurt in the second crash.


Senate Republicans Deal A Major Defeat to Labor
Handing organized labor a major defeat, Senate Republicans today blocked passage of a bill that would have made it illegal for employers to hire permanent replacements for workers striking over wages and benefits.
Republican threats to filibuster the bill, which passed the House comfortably last year, led Senate leaders to schedule today's vote over whether to cut off debate.


'Gump,' a 9-Year Personal Campaign
It did not take a lifetime to make "Forrest Gump," but it certainly felt that way to Wendy Finerman.
"Nine years," said Ms.
Finerman, the 33-year-old producer who nurtured the project to fruition, almost obsessively and despite a general unwillingness in Hollywood to make a film about a slow-witted man who follows the tide of history from the 1950's onward.


From At-Home Parties To a $1 Billion Buyout
Donald J. Carter has agreed to sell Home Interiors and Gifts -- the centerpiece of a business empire that includes real estate, the Mesquite Rodeo and the Dallas Mavericks basketball team -- in a $1 billion leveraged buyout by the Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst investment firm and his family, the buyers said today.
For Mr.
Carter, the sale proves the impressive returns available from building a low-key business, founded by his mother in 1957, that sells silk and polyester flower arrangements, porcelain puppies and other household items at Tupperware-style home parties.
Interior designers might not approve, but that has not stopped the company's sales force of 42,000 from selling more than $850 million of merchandise a year.


Metropolitan Diary
THE scene: The street in front of an apartment building on West 75th Street between Columbus and Amsterdam avenues.
Close-up of double-parked car from which Joshua Charles Nathan and Nancy Alyse Jacobson unload a tangle of golf clubs, tennis rackets, softball gear and such.
The car's lights are on, the engine is running and the air-conditioner is on high.
As he heads for the building's lobby, Mr.
Nathan hears the car door slam shut, followed by Ms.
Jacobson's's cry: "I've just locked the keys in the car!" Thus the neighborhood adventure begins.


At Issue: What Is Adequate for the Poor?
With today's ruling, the New Jersey Supreme Court reaffirmed the state's duty to provide effective schooling, not just equal spending, for all students, especially those in struggling urban districts.
But the ruling also pushed the state further into a national debate about what constitutes an adequate education for students who grow up poor.
The court declined to specify which programs were necessary.
But it noted that both the plaintiffs' and the state' experts agreed that efforts like smaller classes for early grades, outreach for dropouts and effective summer school were essential.


Crisp Potatoes and Pork (Or Fish, Beef or Lamb)
THE grilled potatoes with this meal have lots of crust and very little oil.
I loved them so much I cooked them three nights in a row.
They are excellent with pork, but are equally appropriate for chicken, fish, lamb or beef.
Tomatoes, now in season, are the perfect accompaniment.


Producer Prices Stay Flat Again
Inflation at the producer level was nonexistent in June for the third straight month despite higher prices for energy, the Labor Department reported today.
This performance for the finished goods Producer Price Index -- items ready for sale to the final user -- was markedly better than most analysts had expected and seemed to provide the Federal Reserve more leeway to hold back on raising interest rates before what most still believe will be another rise in rates by mid-August.


Not Only Militants Oppose Mideast Peace Plan; What U.S. Jews Think
To the Editor:
J.
J.
Goldberg points out in "Only in America: Likud vs. Labor" (Op-Ed, July 2)that when elected officials presume to know what "the Jewish community" thinks or wants, they are often mistaken.
The Jewish community is not single-minded or monolithic.
There is as much diversity of opinion as perceived unanimity.


Lance Inc.(LNCE,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 11


Cameras to Pack For a Vacation
A SUMMER vacation, whether it's spent baking on a beach or lolling beside a cool mountain lake, can be a great time to take photographs.
But travelers would be well advised to leave their expensive cameras at home.
Salt air and sand can wreak havoc with a good camera, and most of them can't be taken into the water, where some of the best shots can be found.
Moreover, if a camera is left on the shore while a vacationer is swimming, it may be stolen.
Fortunately, there is a wide selection of cameras available to take on vacation.
A quick and easy solution is to pick up one of the single-use cameras now available.
These popular plastic cameras are designed to be used once and then taken to a photo lab for processing.
Recent models have become increasingly versatile, with Kodak, Fuji, Konica, Vivitar and other manufacturers offering models designed for special purposes.
Some have flashes built in, while others are intended for taking panoramic views or portraits.
Several come enclosed in waterproof plastic cases and can be used in water as deep as 10 feet.


First Chicago (FNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Latest Giants Loss: Oates to the 49ers
Another link to the Giants' Super Bowl past is apparently gone.
Center Bart Oates, a two-time Pro Bowler and a big reason the Giants won Super Bowl XXV, has agreed to a three-year contract with the San Francisco 49ers worth $650,000 a year, according to several people in the National Football League who are familiar with the situation.
Oates was offered a similar deal by the Giants, the people said, but he was apparently concerned that he might be cut during training camp because the 28-year-old Brian Williams would clearly be the starter.


Lewis to Defend Crown Against McCall
LENNOX LEWIS, the World Boxing Council heavyweight champion, will defend his title against OLIVER McCALL, the mandatory challenger, in London on Sept. 24.


Sports of The Times; The Locals Finish Their Homestand
THEY are selling the World Cup in square feet today.
It's all over in the East.
The World Cup has moved out West for one last fling, the final.
And they are chopping up the beautiful lawn for souvenirs.
With true World Cup chutzpah, the organizers could assure every purchaser that this specific square foot of sod is where Roberto Baggio dug in his heel and kicked a goal for Italy.
It would be a scam, but isn't the World Cup at least partly about turning over money by the bushel?


Clinton Loans In Arkansas Were Paid Off By Donors
Bill Clinton borrowed hundreds of thousands of dollars from a tiny Arkansas bank to promote his legislative agenda as Governor in the mid-1980's, and the loans were paid off by donations from supporters and special interests, according to bank records.
The personal loans were made by the Bank of Cherry Valley, owned and run by Maurice Smith, who was a close aide to Governor Clinton.
The bank already figures in the investigation of the Clintons' finances that is being conducted by the independent Whitewater prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr.
That part of Mr.
Fiske's inquiry concerns repayment of another loan, totaling $50,000, that Mr.
Clinton obtained from the bank for his 1984 re-election campaign.


Miami Mob Kills Driver After Car Hits Girl
A driver whose car hit an 11-year-old girl when she ran into the street was attacked and killed by a mob of young men in an inner-city neighborhood on Tuesday evening.
The child suffered only minor injuries.
The shooting of 44-year-old Charles Bell, who had gone shopping for his mother and was still wearing a shirt and tie from his job at a neighborhood funeral home, stunned some people in the Brownsville section of Miami, just east of Miami International Airport and south of Hialeah.


Not Only Militants Oppose Mideast Peace Plan; A Pioneer in Zionism
To the Editor:
J.
J.
Goldberg's "Only in America: Likud vs. Labor" (Op-Ed, July 2) is either glaringly tendentious or based on misleading information.
In referring to the Zionist Organization of America, Mr.
Goldberg writes that "despite its neutral-sounding name" it is a "Likud affiliate."


Seagate Technology Inc.(SGAT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


School Ruling Seen as Push Toward More State Control
In a state where few political traditions are as zealously protected as home rule, the New Jersey Supreme Court has pushed the Governor and the Legislature toward greater state control -- and conceivably total state control -- over the financing of public schools to bridge the gap in spending between its richer and poorer school districts.
The court, the state's highest, set the state on that path on Tuesday, when it ruled for the third time in the last 20 years that New Jersey's system of financing public education was unconstitutional because it failed to guarantee parity between rich and poor school districts, essentially between schools in its affluent suburbs and schools in its blighted cities.
While the court stopped short of dictating guidelines or setting specific financial goals, it was forceful in stating the direction that it feels the state must go.


Aetna Unit Chooses Ammirati &amp; Puris
The Aetna Life Insurance and Annuity Company, a subsidiary of the Aetna Life and Casualty Company, said yesterday that it had selected Ammirati &amp; Puris of New York as the first agency to handle its account.
Billings were estimated at $8 million to $10 million.


Accounts
*
International Association of Airport Duty Free Stores, Washington, to W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Baltimore, as the first agency to handle its account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Overhaul Of Schools
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani says he wants to strip away the bureaucracy that runs the New York City schools -- "crush it," is how he puts it -- but he in fact appears to be pursuing the less dramatic but still substantial goal of winning more control over school budgeting.
On Tuesday, Mr.
Giuliani formally distributed a report he had requested on overhauling the way the schools are governed.
He greeted the report with strong criticism of the Board of Education's central administration and of the Chancellor.


INSIDE
Move Over, Ben Franklin
The Treasury Department announced that starting with the $100 bill, it would make the first major changes in the currency since 1929, to fight counterfeiting.
Page A14.
Mexico Assassination Report
A report by the special prosecutor investigating the slaying of a leading presidential candidate in Mexico states that the man who confessed to the shooting acted alone.
Page A11.
Giuliani and Police Deal
A tentative contract with the police and transit police unions includes raises roughly equal to those won by other New York City unions.
Page B3.
Gang Blamed in Prison Melee
Officials said that an aggressive Hartford-based street gang was at the center of a savage melee among inmates at a Connecticut prison that left two men dead.
Page B1.


Favorite for UAL Has Cast Wide Net
John A. Edwardson, who is expected to be named as early as today as president of the new employee-owned United Airlines, has never been secretive about his goal to lead a large company, according to people who know him.
And that goes a long way in explaining why Mr.
Edwardson, 44, and now chief financial officer of Ameritech, has worked in a variety of industries, ranging from banking to airlines to minerals to telecommunications.


Showdown Time in A.L. Central
Yesterday was the day Kenny Lofton of the Cleveland Indians said he would begin to think about the Chicago White Sox and baseball's new-found cauldron: the American League Central Division.
"I'm not thinking about it here at the All-Star Game," said Lofton just hours before making his debut on behalf of his league Tuesday night.
"I'll start thinking about it Wednesday."


Alcan Aluminium Ltd. (AL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Boy, 13, Held in Killing of Boy, 12, at School for the Troubled
Nicholas Ippoliti and Brian Edwards were friends, two troubled boys who shared a life in a secluded central Westchester residential school for youths with emotional problems.
On Monday, school officials found both boys had been missing for several hours.
But by about 5:30 P.M., officials of the Pleasantville Cottage School in Pleasantville found the body of one of them, 12-year-old Nicholas, in a wooded area on the grounds of the school.
The school is an 82-year-old nonprofit institution, which receives referrals from child welfare agencies throughout the state.


MACY EXECUTIVES AGREE TO MERGER WITH FEDERATED
Top executives of R. H. Macy &amp; Company and Federated Department Stores Inc., which owns Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and several other department stores, have agreed on a merger that would create one of the nation's largest department store chains.
Negotiators said the agreement was still subject to working out several final details and stressed that the deal could still fall apart.
But both sides are optimistic that after seven months of courtship by Federated the two companies may reach a successful conclusion perhaps by the end of the week.
Macy has scheduled a special board meeting today to discuss the agreement.


Erol Beker; Industrialist, 76
Erol Beker, a Turkish-born industrialist and benefactor of the St.
Peter's Lutheran Church in midtown Manhattan, died on Sunday at his home in Cannes, France.
He was 76.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Indurian Attacks To Widen His Lead
Halfway up the first big climb in this year's Tour de France, Miguel Indurain looked back once over his left shoulder and then once over his right.
When he saw that his major rival, Tony Rominger, had been left behind, Indurain knew just what he had to do -- attack.
Twenty minutes later, the Spaniard rode out of a thick screen of fog and cold mist and crossed the finish line today after another terrible show of force.
For the second time this week, following his victory in the individual time trial on Monday, he had exploded the bicycle race.


Japan's Radical Plan: Self-Serve Gas
A motorist arriving at a service station here is usually greeted by a phalanx of uniformed attendants shouting welcomes.
They guide the car into position, wipe the windows, empty the ashtray, and check the tire pressure.
If necessary, they halt traffic to usher the car back onto the road.
This is the type of pampering for which Japan, land of the bowing elevator ladies, is known.
But it comes at a price: it helps push gasoline costs to nearly $4.50 a gallon, four times as much as in the United States.
But now, a radical notion is creeping into Japan.
Why not let consumers pump their own gasoline?
Called Fire Hazards
Self-service stations are prohibited on the ground that they are a fire hazard, a particular danger in congested Japan.
But with the Government vowing to deregulate the economy drastically, the prohibition on consumers pumping their own gas has become a symbol of what critics say are thousands of needless restrictions that raise consumers' costs.


King Is Now Shooting for the Stars
She needs only one more victory to become the 14th player to win admittance into the Ladies Professional Golf Association Hall of Fame.
And to Betsy King there is no more appropriate site for that 30th victory than the Wykagyl Country Club, the site of the $650,000 JAL Big Apple Classic, which begins on Thursday.
"This is my favorite course on the tour," King said yesterday after a practice round at the 96-year-old club renowned for its steep hills, narrow fairways and small, fast greens.
"And I've always played well here."


Fund-Raiser For Giuliani Altered Rent For Official
The tenant who preceded Marva L. Hammons, New York City's welfare commissioner, in an East Side apartment rented from a major fund-raiser for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, said yesterday that she was charged $500 more a month for the apartment than Ms.
Hammons.
The tenant, Linda S. Wolff-Adler, said she paid a little more than $3,000 a month for her two-bedroom apartment at 250 East 73d Street, $2,871.41 in rent and a special capital improvements assessment of $147.80.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.23
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.39
4.44
2.98
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.81
4.87
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.38
7.41
5.70
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.67
7.68
6.56
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.48
8.48
7.29
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.50
6.51
5.69
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Freewheeling
ETHAN ALLEN -- the Revolutionary soldier, that is -- would probably turn in his grave, but the furniture company bearing his name is leaving Colonial America far behind.
The design for a new steel and glass curio cabinet, part of the Radius Collection due in stores in August, owes much more to Milan than to Ethan Allen's native Vermont.
It has nickel-plated steel supports and black rubber wheels, with not a Colonial finial in sight.


Murdoch Sees Weaknesses In CBS's Program Lineup
The morning after the demise of the CBS-QVC merger, Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of Fox Inc., trumpeted Fox Broadcasting's strides in the television industry and derided CBS's programming as "getting pretty tired."
While CBS remains the ratings leader in prime time, the network "needs a more expansionary business view," Mr.
Murdoch said.
"They have real problems on their program schedule."


Economic Scene; Smoking's economic cost isn't a good argument for higher taxes.
LAST week the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta confirmed what few had doubted.
Smoking-related diseases have "an enormous economic impact," wrote the editors of the centers' Weekly Report -- the equivalent, they estimated, of $2 a pack in medical costs alone.
But the agency was careful not to link these remarkable numbers to the case for higher cigarette taxes, and perhaps wisely so: Few economists are convinced that the link is strong enough to bear the weight of the argument.
For while the total costs of smoking are undoubtedly humungous, said Joseph Newhouse, an economist at Harvard, most are borne by the smokers themselves.
"You just can't justify higher taxes on cigarettes by the damage done by cigarettes to nonsmokers," he said.


New Jersey's Neglectful School Aid
Once again, New Jersey's highest court has ruled that the state shortchanges schoolchildren in its poorer cities.
And once again the Court has put off the final reckoning.
Given Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's promise of further cuts in the state income tax, she owes the Legislature and the public a prompt indication of what programs she proposes to sacrifice to finance more school aid.
New Jersey is not the only state under court orders to equalize school aid, but it is one of the most obstinate.
The issue has been in and out of litigation for almost 25 years -- a quarter-century of neglect for the state's urban schoolchildren.
They deserve better, and sooner.


Egyptian Writer Ousted
An Egyptian writer has been dismissed from his Government job and could face a year in prison for writing what a state administrative court describes as an "immoral" book.
The court ruled that the writer, Alaa Hamed, 55, an employee of the tax authority for 35 years, should be ousted for writing "Al-Firash," or "The Bed." The decision reflects what many critics say is the Government's failure to combat the spreading influence of Muslim extremists.


Henry Koren, A Diplomat For 23 Years
Henry L. T. Koren, a retired Foreign Service officer who dealt with knotty issues like the American civil pacification program in South Vietnam and the new Panama Canal treaty, died on July 6 at home in a retirement community in Williamsburg, Va.
He was 83 years old.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, his family said.


CALVIN KLEIN TO SELL JEANS COLLECTIONS FOR $50 MILLION
Calvin Klein Inc., the privately held clothing and fashion design company, announced yesterday that it had agreed to sell its jeans collections to a new company formed by Arnold Simon, principal of RIO Sportswear Inc. of New York, and Charterhouse Group International Inc., an investment group headed by the New York financier, Merril M. Halpern.
The transaction was valued at $50 million, plus royalties from future sales.
The new company, Calvin Klein Jeanswear Company, is obtaining the rights to make and sell the designer's men's and women's jeans in the United States.
Calvin Klein Inc. said it would continue to design the collections and create their advertising and promotion campaigns at its New York headquarters.


TURMOIL IN TELEVISION: A BIDDER'S POSITION Comcast Offers Defense Of an Uninvited Proposal
Why is QVC Inc. so valuable to Ralph and Brian Roberts and the Comcast Corporation that they are willing to spend $2.2 billion for the company, with or without Barry Diller's management?
Responding to a skeptical Wall Street, which pushed Comcast's stock down 9 percent yesterday, the Robertses went on the offensive, trying to explain the buyout offer that scuttled QVC's merger with CBS Inc.


HOUSE DEMOCRATS SUPPORT ABORTION IN HEALTH PLANS
Escalating a long-simmering struggle, more than a fourth of the Democrats in the House served notice on their leadership today of their "strong commitment" to covering abortion services in any national health plan.
Their signal came in a letter to Representative Thomas S. Foley of Washington, the Speaker of the House.
It was signed by about 70 Democrats -- the number was still inching up at the end of the day -- and it strongly suggested that their support for a health care bill would depend on whether it covers abortion.


How Many Gay Comics Does It Take to Do 2 Shows?
Gay and lesbian standup comics are not exactly new to prime time.
Shows like WNYC's "In the Life" and Comedy Central's "Out There" have paved the way to wider exposure.
Tonight HBO opens the electronic closet's door even wider with two back-to-back editions of "Comedy Half-Hour." Suzanne Westenhoefer is featured in the first, Bob Smith in the second.
Both performers appeared earlier in "Out There," an all gay-and-lesbian comedy special.
As far as show business is concerned, what would have been unthinkable in the 1980's is becoming almost commonplace today.
Interviewed on a local news program this week, the singer Melissa Etheridge spoke matter-of-factly about how being a lesbian affects or, equally significant, doesn't affect her work.
Amanda Bearse of Fox's "Married . . . With Children," thought to be the only openly gay actress on a regular prime-time series, is the host of the second production of "Out There," on Comedy Central on Oct. 11, National Coming Out Day.


Merger of New York's Police Forces Faces Tough Obstacles
To the Editor:
"Unifying the Police Forces" (editorial, July 5) is correct: the merger of New York's housing and transit police with the New York City Police Department is "an excellent idea." However, you do not mention some significant obstacles.


Horace Collins; HBO Vice President, 44
Horace Collins, senior vice president and assistant general counsel of Home Box Office, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said Robert Del Deo, his companion.


Birthday Mess? Yes
To The Home Section:
Regarding "Life on the Birthday Merry-Go-Round"  [ Parent &amp; Child, June 16 ] : As a mother of two girls, 3 and 5, I have given seven "homemade" birthday parties over the past five years.
This year, I succumbed to temptation and threw my 5-year-old her party at Kidmazeum in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The simplicity of it, the ease and the thought of no mess at home simply seduced me.


Bombing Figure Gets 20 Months For An Immigration Violation
Telling him that he was "very lucky" to get off so easy, a Federal judge in Manhattan sentenced the fifth and last defendant in the World Trade Center bombing to 20 months in prison for his guilty plea to a minor charge of lying to immigration officials.
The defendant, Bilal Alkaisi, a 29-year-old Jordanian, was originally charged, with five others, in the bombing conspiracy but was dropped from the case after Federal prosecutors concluded that they did not have enough evidence to convict him.
One defendant in the case fled the country, while the four others were convicted in March and received life sentences without the possibility of parole.


First Came Red Flag, Then Came Red Card
Jonas Thern turned around in the middle of the Rose Bowl, in the middle of millions upon millions of television screens from Capetown to Copenhagen, and let a look of great surprise flicker across his handsome, Swedish face.
Referee Jose Torres Cadena was trotting purposefully toward him and reaching for the red card in his shirt pocket.
Thern, the Swedish captain, had realized that he might be sidelined by his sprained knee, but he never thought that knocking out the legs of Dunga of Brazil near midfield would be enough to send him out of his first World Cup semifinal.


With Deal Off, CBS Is Viewed As Vulnerable
The collapse of the proposed merger between CBS and QVC has left the broadcast giant in a deeply uncertain position, vulnerable to a possible takeover, television executives and analysts said yesterday.
They added that CBS was also ill prepared now to deal with pressing problems like restive affiliated stations and repairing its program lineup.
CBS announced yesterday that the decision by the Comcast Corporation to bid for control of QVC had ended its pursuit of the merger.
Instead, CBS said it would commence a cash tender offer to buy back up to 3.5 million of its more than 15 million shares of stock for $325 a share.
That would be followed by a stock split giving shareholders five new shares in exchange for each share they already hold.


Lessons of the Feast; In Brooklyn, Renewal in Ancient Rite
The Turks invaded Italian Williamsburg this week and got the heave-ho.
The Italians, predictably, loved it.
But so did the Turks.
Even the parish priest gave his blessing with a smile.
Go figure how they settle scores in Brooklyn.
This was not the most recent clash in one of the city's more obscure ethnic wars.
Rather it was payback for a heroic deed from way back -- the fifth century -- when legend says that an Ottoman sultan rescued St.
Paulinus, the bishop of Nola, Italy, from captivity.


Human Rights Monitors Leave Haiti


Trust Started by Tree Lover Gives Botanical Garden $15 Million
As a young woman, Mary Flagler Cary had an enduring admiration for trees.
She photographed them.
She delighted in planting arbors on the family's 2,000-acre Dutchess County estate in Millbrook, N.Y.
Now, more than a quarter century after her death, the philanthropy she created is giving $15 million, its largest gift ever, to the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
The money is to sustain plant research and help young scientists pursue botanical studies in this country and abroad.


Watson's Heart, Soul Deep in Highlands
The call came early this week, from Tom Watson to Jack Nicklaus.
Watson was arranging a little final practice round for today on the eve of the 123d British Open, and wanted to know whether Nicklaus was interested in taking on "a couple of pigeons."
"Who do you have?" Nicklaus wanted to know.


No Headline
"We find ourselves alone in the face of the reality of  political repression. But we will continue to fight for  human rights. It's our job." -- JEAN ROBERT VAVAL, a Haitian rights worker.  [ A10:6. ]


COMPANY NEWS: Laughing at G.E.'s Expense; Honored Leader Jokes About Trading Scandal
John F. Welch Jr., the chairman of the General Electric Company, may be under fire these days, but he has not lost his sense of humor, judging from the remarks he made at a black-tie dinner on Tuesday night.
The 58-year-old executive has long been one of the most highly regarded managers in Corporate America, but his reputation has been tarnished by the recent trading scandal at G.E.'s brokerage subsidiary, Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.
G.E. took a $210 million charge against earnings in the first quarter, after it was said that Joseph Jett, a Kidder, Peabody trader, had created $350 million in phantom profits.


No Thanks, Mr. McEnroe
The United States Davis Cup captain, Tom Gullikson, had a lukewarm response today to John McEnroe's offer to play doubles for the team.
"Just the fact that he is willing to play says a lot about his commitment to Davis Cup," Gullikson said.
"But realistically you need to look at younger guys and hope the young players step up and give the same commitment and level of interest to Davis Cup that John has shown his entire life."


ALC Communications Corp.(ALC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Atlanta Paralympic Games, to be held during the summer of 1996, to the Joey Reiman Agency, Atlanta.


2 Sentenced In Smuggling Fatal to 10
A Federal judge sentenced the two top officers of the Golden Venture yesterday to close to the maximum sentence of five years for conspiring to smuggle illegal Chinese immigrants into the United States.
The judge, Reena Raggi, said she wanted to "send as strong a message as possible to those who collaborate with smugglers."


A Struggling Cuomo Attacks G.O.P. Rival
In the past, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Republican challengers have fought just to get his attention.
In 1986, Andrew P. O'Rourke toured the state with a cardboard cutout of Mr.
Cuomo to symbolize the absence of debate.
In 1990, Pierre Rinfret took to ambushing Mr.
Cuomo on the campaign trail because the Governor was studiously ignoring him.
But things are different this year.
With Mr.
Cuomo struggling in the polls and on the defensive for his opposition to the death penalty, the Governor and his surrogates have begun directly attacking his main Republican rival, State Senator George E. Pataki.


Australians Know How to Handle Sun
To the Editor:
After seeing a news report highlighting advice from the weather services now being disseminated to the American public about ultraviolet radiation factors for the following day, I was surprised that it has taken America this long to educate itself about the risks of sun exposure.


Haitians Fear Upheaval as Monitors Leave
Members of an international human rights group left Haiti today, and Haitian political workers said the country could erupt in violence within a month if repression continued.
"I hope it does not happen, but it's inevitable," said the Rev.
Hugo Tiest, coordinator of a church-based group, Justice and Peace of the Haitian Conference of Religion, which supports the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
"I am afraid of the end results." A Long View
Some Haitians said they remained optimistic that a peaceful way could be found out of the impasse that has hardened since army leaders ousted Father Aristide in September 1991.
"We spent 300 years in slavery," said Bayyinah Bello, who works with several local political groups.
"So three years in the life of a people is no time."
The Haitian military's campaign of terror has largely been aimed at the local organizations that form the backbone of Father Aristide's support, trying to insure that if the exiled President returns, he will not be able to govern.
The level of intimidation increased on Monday after the army-backed Government ordered all human rights observers from the United Nations and the Organization of American States to leave Haiti by today.
On Tuesday, about 12 bodies riddled with bullets were dumped into a shallow grave near Leogane, 18 miles west.
In the months that they have been in the country, the 100 or so monitors have concluded that many killings were directly attributable to the army and its allies.
A Sample of Intimidation
Today, two men who said they were supporters of the exiled President walked into Father Tiest's downtown office and told him they needed help.
But the priest said he became suspicious when the men showed him a picture of Father Aristide instead of identification.
One man drew a gun and demanded files.
Father Tiest said a worker then screamed for help and the men fled.
"These are assassins and criminals," the priest said.
With the departure of the international observers, Haitian human rights workers are wondering how effectively they can do their work.
"We find ourselves alone in the face of the reality of political repression," said Jean Robert Vaval, of the Ecumenical Center for Human Rights.
"But we will continue to fight for human rights. It's our job."
Mr.
Vaval and others said that while much attention had been given to the plight of Haitian boat people, the refugeees within the country were an even more serious problem.
These refugees, estimated at 350,000, have left their jobs and homes and live in a different city every week, trying to keep ahead of marauding soldiers.
One such refugee, a man in his 30's, said he was a member of a political organization in the Artibonite Valley in northwest Haiti.
Since the coup, he said, he has moved from house to house until finding refuge in a Port-au-Prince church.
Pay Attention, World
"I am not afraid because I have weathered the worst," he said, adding that he was arrested several months ago and released because of the intervention of the international observers.
"But too many people have suffered for me and now I don't want to jeopardize their lives."
The international monitors have been been reluctant to talk, fearing their comments might upset Haiti's military leaders.
But many have voiced sadness at having to leave without completing their task.
"I hope that the international community thinks this is enough and takes some decisive action to end this crisis now," said one member of the mission.
"It's a turning point because some people have perceived before that this was mainly a U.S. problem."
--------------------
Corpses as a Weapon
WASHINGTON, July 13 (Reuters) -- Haiti's rulers are intensifying repression, and their latest tactic is to dump the bodies of murdered political opponents in the streets to terrorize the people, a State Department official said today.
The official, Nancy Ely-Raphel, from the department's human rights section, said that in the past two weeks, several corpses of young men with their hands tied behind their backs had been found in the streets of Port-au-Prince.
Ms.
Ely-Raphel said 133 killings had been reported between February and May.
But she added: "We believe we may now be seeing a further ratcheting up of repression. The latest developments include increased dumping of bodies in public areas of Port-au-Prince in an attempt to terrorise the populace."
--------------------
Exercise in Bahamas
WASHINGTON, July 13 (AP) -- Several hundred United States marines began a practice invasion-and-rescue operation today on Grand Inagua Island in the Bahamas, 150 miles northwest of Haiti, Pentagon sources said.
Under current Pentagon plans, marines would secure key points in Haiti in the event of an invasion.
Similar exercises were held in the United States in June.


Not Only Militants Oppose Mideast Peace Plan; Proper for Congress
To the Editor:
As co-chairmen of the Congressional Peace Accord Monitoring group, we are compelled to correct several inaccuracies in "Only in America: Likud vs. Labor" (Op-Ed, July 2), J. J. Goldberg's comments on the Capitol Hill response to accords between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Moorco International Inc.(MRC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Tomjanovich Accused of Drunken Driving
RUDY TOMJANOVICH, coach of the National Basketball Association champion Houston Rockets, was free on $500 bond yesterday after spending a night in jail on a drunken driving charge.
Tomjanovich, 45, was arrested at about 3 A.M. in West University Place, Tex., after an officer reported stopping the red Jeep the coach was driving for speeding and twice crossing a yellow line.
"It was believed the subject had been drinking, and there was an odor of alcohol on his breath," said Chief STEVE GRIFFITH of the West University Place police.


Baggio, The Hero, Cries Tears Of Joy
Roberto Baggio and the man in the suit were arm in arm at the end, heading toward the shadows and all the noise at the west end of Giants Stadium.
Baggio's two goals had created their emotional embrace and a long, slow walk, the beginning of a trip that will take him to the Rose Bowl on Sunday for a final step toward a championship.
Italy had just defeated Bulgaria, 2-1, and the man in the suit, Gigi Riva, could understand the powerful emotions Baggio felt better than anyone else.
Nearly a quarter-century ago, Riva had shouldered the burden of a nation's expectations for an Italian team that reached the 1970 final, also against Brazil.
Today, when Baggio's brilliance allowed Italy to satisfy those passions for one penultimate moment, today's hero, the one in the Azzurri uniform, cried.


With Persuasion and Muscle, Black Caucus Reshapes Haiti Policy
In March, the 39 members of the Congressional Black Caucus in the House introduced a bill to tighten the economic embargo against Haiti, sever its commercial air links to the United States, halt the summary repatriation of Haitian refugees picked up at sea and block financial assets held in America by Haitian nationals.
The measure has not yet come up for a vote in Congress.
But now it hardly matters.
Virtually all its provisions have been adopted as President Clinton's policy toward Haiti.


Gannett Co. (GCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Pizazz Without the Palazzo
EMBASSY ROW in Washington is best known for its procession of stately buildings in historic styles: Renaissance palazzo, American Colonial, Mediterranean revival.
That was before the construction of the new $10 million Finnish Embassy, which opens officially this fall at 3301 Massachusetts Avenue NW (34th Street).
This modern glass jewel box is the first building in the United States by the Finnish design team of Mikko Heikkinen and Markku Komonen, who are famous in Finland, especially among children, for Heureka, a Constructivist science center on the outskirts of Hel sinki.
At night, through the embassy's glass facade, passersby can see its innards glowing.
The architects call the interior the Grand Canyon: two square towers sheathed in burnished copper are suspended from a massive blue steel beam under a skylight.


Merger of New York's Police Forces Faces Tough Obstacles; Back Up Mollen Panel
To the Editor:
Your July 7 graphic on the recommendations of New York City's Mollen Commission on Police Department corruption avoids the litmus test requirement for ending this pervasive problem.
"Integrity training" and "education," for example, are fine as far as they go, but if not backed by regulation, even a law demanding that "honest" cops begin to shatter their blue wall of silence will not stop widespread corruption.


KU Energy Corp.(KU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


40 Years Later, It's Still The Blues
When "Count Basie Swings, Joe Williams Sings" was released on Clef in 1955, the recording changed the careers of both men.
Mr.
Williams was a relatively unknown singer based in Chicago, and Count Basie was suffering from the general decline in interest in big bands.
Their collaboration, matching a gleaming, industrial-strength orchestra with the dry and clipped singing of Mr.
Williams, was a high point in blues culture, and "Every Day I Have the Blues," a single from the album, rose to the No. 2 spot on the rhythm-and-blues charts.
Since then Count Basie has died, and blues culture is fading away as a training ground for younger musicians.
But Mr.
Williams, who is appearing through Sunday at the Blue Note, backed by the Count Basie Orchestra led by Frank Foster, remains something special, a way into a sound and musical attitude that by and large no longer exist.
And on the basis of the first set on Tuesday night, Mr.
Williams, 75, is more than able to make a lesson in history seem utterly contemporary, turning his art into something thrilling.


Scars of War Hurt Croatian Arts Festival
In the heyday of the former Yugoslavia, the Dubrovnik Festival was a glamorous affair.
Although Croatian and other Yugoslav artists were featured, this was the country's, and really the Communist bloc's, premiere forum for international performing artists and ensembles.
The great singers and instrumentalists and conductors performed here.
Famous orchestras, opera companies and dance groups played on the city's many indoor and outdoor stages.
Venturesome theatrical productions from Yugoslavia and beyond were staged every summer.
Today this extraordinary city, built between the 11th and 17th centuries but in essence a marvelously preserved 13th-century merchant fortress, still stands.
As does the striking Adriatic coast, with its cliffs and turquoise waters, its comforting harbors and sheltering islands.
And as it does every year at this time, bougainvillea spills out from every corner, painting the brilliant landscape with violet intensity.


Canada Will Let Business and Localities Run the Airports
Canada's Transport Ministry announced today that it was getting out of the airport management business, giving the job to regional and local organizations, and in some cases, private business.
The change means greater opportunities for business in Canada, and perhaps in the United States.


Ward and Williams Get Their Rookie Due
Having got his first taste of Knicks-style practice the last two days, Charlie Ward was asked how it has been.
"Brutal," was his succinct reply.


Weyerhaeuser Co. (WY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Bearded Lady Climbs the Show-Biz Ladder  Actor's Playhouse
Ruth Fields, the title character of the camp musical "The Truth About Ruth: the Musical Memoirs of a Bearded Lady," is a hirsute show-business trouper who is described by one character as "a cross between Judy Garland and Monty Woolley."


Bombing Figure Gets 20 Months For An Immigration Violation
Telling him that he was "very lucky" to get off so easy, a Federal judge in Manhattan sentenced the fifth and last defendant in the World Trade Center bombing to 20 months in prison for his guilty plea to a minor charge of lying to immigration officials.
The defendant, Bilal Alkaisi, a 29-year-old Jordanian, was originally charged, with five others, in the bombing conspiracy but was dropped from the case after Federal prosecutors concluded that they did not have enough evidence to convict him.
One defendant in the case fled the country, while the four others were convicted in March and received life sentences without the possibility of parole.


Mexican Ends Investigation Into Shooting
Over the objections of powerful figures both within and outside the ruling circle, the special prosecutor investigating the assassination of the governing party's presidential candidate is ending his inquiry, officials familiar with the case said today.
In a brief report issued in Mexico City on Tuesday night, the prosecutor stated unequivocally for the first time that the 23-year-old factory worker who confessed to the shooting had acted alone, motivated by nothing other than hatred for the party in his own disturbed mind.


Clinton Turns Attention To Georgia Flood Relief
Barely stopping to sleep after returning late last night from a European summit, President Clinton and his top aides swooped into Georgia today, quickly viewed the state's greatest flood in a century and pledged $66 million in Federal aid for this and two neighboring states.
Before swooping back out after four hours, Mr.
Clinton took to television to promise local farmers that he would ask Congress for twice the normal level of aid and he urged news organizations to point out any kink in the aid pipeline so that the White House could "put the hammer down and solve it."


Pentagon Issues Report
Acting on a report on the shooting down of two American helicopters in Iraq, the Secretary of Defense ordered training changes for the crews.
Article, page A6.


Woman, 66, Killed by Car Whose Driver Is Unlicensed
A 66-year-old woman walking her dog alongside a park in the Bronx was struck and killed Tuesday evening by a car that veered onto the sidewalk while speeding, the police and witnesses said.
The driver had an invalid license that had been suspended six times, records show.
The woman, Dalida Velez, an immigrant from the Dominican Republic and the mother of six, was the latest victim in a series of deaths caused by unlicensed drivers this summer.
She was dead on arrival at St.
Barnabas Hospital.
Earlier this month in the same borough, a 21-month-old girl was killed when an unlicensed driver backed into her outside a supermarket.
Driver Is Charged
The driver in the accident yesterday at Crotona Park, Peter Henry, 27, was charged with manslaughter and criminally negligent homicide.
State motor vehicle records show that he had been convicted of several traffic violations, including going through red lights and failing to stop for stop signs, that had led to the revocation of his license.
The records show that after the revocation, he was issued more tickets for driving infractions, which led to the license suspensions.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMCORE FINANCIAL INC., Rockford, Ill., a holding company, agreed to acquire closely held NBA Holding Co., Aledo, Ill., for about $22 million in stock.


AST Promotes 2 Executives
AST Research Inc., the world's fifth-largest personal computer manufacturer, said today that it had promoted James T. Schraith to president and chief operating officer and Bruce C. Edwards to executive vice president.
Safi Qureshey, AST's co-founder, continues as chairman and chief executive.
AST said the moves would bolster its management team and allow Mr.
Qureshey to concentrate on long-term strategy.


Hong Kong's Governor Says China Undermines Colony
At times battered by ferocious criticism from Beijing, and at times ignored, the Governor of Hong Kong vigorously defended his program of local democratization today and lashed out at the Chinese Government for undermining confidence in the colony in the three years before Britain surrenders sovereignty.
Mixing sarcasm with passion, anger with fervor, the Governor, Christopher Patten, placed blame for the growing nervousness among many people in Hong Kong about China's looming takeover squarely on Beijing's leaders.


One if by Land
THIS summer's most reasonably priced gift, for someone else or for yourself, is a brightly colored candle in the form of a lighthouse ($9) or beach ball ($6) by Two's Company.
At Charivari, 1001 Madison Avenue (78th Street), and the Cooper-Hewitt's Design Museum Shop, 2 East 91st Street.


U.S. Acts to Bar Repeat of Helicopter Loss
Offering new details on the chain of human errors that caused American pilots to shoot down two United States helicopters in Iraq, Defense Secretary William J. Perry said today that he has ordered changes in the training of flight crews to prevent a repeat of one of the military's worst self-inflicted losses.
The changes include more training for Awacs surveillance plane crews, shorter combat tours and a review of flight procedures.


Utility Trying Hard to Sell Reactors
FOR SALE: Two nuclear power plants.
Never been used; need some work.
Asking $3.4 billion, or best offer.
The utility responsible for the biggest municipal-bond default in history now has another problem -- two incomplete nuclear reactors that it finds too expensive to finish, too expensive to keep in mothballs and possibly too expensive to tear down.


Gang Members Ignited Connecticut Prison Melee, Officials Say
Prison officials said today that members of an aggressive Hartford-based street gang called 20 Love were at the center of a savage melee that left two men dead Tuesday in the worst night of inmate-on-inmate violence in Connecticut in decades.
But the officials at the Carl Robinson Correctional Institution also agreed in part with the harsh assessment of the prison guards' union that the open dormitory-style construction of the medium security prison itself and the shortage of secure cells for violent inmates were partly to blame as well.


Calendar: A Boat Tour, Exhibitions and Talks
Architecture by Boat  Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.
On Wednesday from 7 to 10 P.M., the museum is sponsoring a boat tour of architectural sites, with commentary by Laurie Beckelman, the chairwoman of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.
The tour will go down the Hudson River from West 42d Street, around the southern tip of Manhattan, head up the East River to Gracie Mansion and return.
Reservations required.
Tickets, $45; members and students, $35; children ages 10 to 16, $15.
Crafts: Two Shows  American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
"Sculptural Concerns: Contemporary Metalworking," an exhibition of recent jewelry, furniture, domestic objects and sculpture by 54 artists, continues through Oct. 2.


Greenbacks to Get High-Tech Makeover
Ben Franklin is moving.
In fact, in 1996 his image on the $100 bill will be three-quarters of an inch to the left and will grow 50 percent larger, the Treasury Department said today.


Only Romario Finds the Net, and Brazil Lands in Final
The cycle for Brazil at the World Cup had gone unbroken for nearly a quarter of a century: colossal expectation followed by national despair, unrivaled flair tarnished by unfulfilled accomplishment, the vibrant samba reduced to a somber march.
Until now.


Regards to Broadway, by Way of a Lunch-Hour Concert


Camp Isn't School
To The Home Section: This letter is in response to "Worries About Abuse Are Changing Camps"  [ Parent &amp; Child, June 9 ] .
This article was pointed out to me by my mother, who thought I might be interested in it since I attended summer camp and will be a counselor in training this summer.
When I read it, I was absolutely appalled.
The rules Bob Ditter mentioned were ridiculous.
How are campers supposed to be comfortable with a counselor who acts like a stone wall?
The point of going to camp is to have fun.
If counselors act more like teachers, camps will become extensions of school.
School ends in June.


A New Report Suggests U.N. Consolidate
A new, privately commissioned report issued today suggests the United Nations should create a common headquarters for the General Assembly, the Secretariat and all its specialized agencies as the United Nations' founders originally envisaged.
The report, titled "Renewing the United Nations System," was financed by the Ford Foundation and written by two former senior United Nations officials, Sir Brian Urquhart and Erskine Childers.
It also recommends radical reform of the International Monetary Fund and other aid organizations to mount an attack on the world's economic inequalities, which have left 80 percent of the world's wealth in the hands of 20 percent of its population.


Such Junk as Dreams Are Made On
IN a converted garage attached to a unassuming ranch-style house in Shaker Heights, Ohio, the husband-and-wife writing team Terry and Ralph Kovel are overseeing members of their 16-strong staff as they research the couple's monthly newsletter "Kovels on Antiques and Collectibles."
The Kovels are the coloratura masters of collectibles, virtuosos at elevating mundane objects to the antique status of high C (as in cash).
These days, stoneware crocks are up.
So are canceled checks from baseball-team owners.
And so is the Kovels' home-grown business.
Their annual price guides (to "everything from barbed wire to toothpick holders," Mr. Kovel said) and magazine and newspaper columns are a multimillion-dollar enterprise.
The $36-a-year newsletter alone has 200,000 subscribers.


4 Airlines Sign Kennedy Deal For a Terminal
Four foreign airlines will build the first entirely new terminal at Kennedy International Airport in more than two decades, under an agreement signed yesterday that is intended to bolster Kennedy's position as the nation's leading airport for international flights.
The new terminal will occupy the site of the Eastern Air Lines terminal that has sat unused since that carrier folded in 1990.
Financing will come from $435 million in bonds issued by New York City's Industrial Development Agency, but under the agreement, a consortium of the four airlines -- Air France, Lufthansa German Airlines, Japan Air Lines and Korean Air Lines -- will build and pay for the structure, taking responsibility for repayment of the bonds.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Turmoil in Television
The collapse of the CBS-QVC merger leaves CBS vulnerable to a possible takeover and ill-prepared to deal with pressing problems like restive affiliated stations and a program lineup in need of repair, television industry executives and analysts said.  [ Page A1. ]
Comcast's Brian and Ralph Roberts tried to explain to Wall Street their buyout bid that scuttled the CBS-QVC deal.  [ D8. ]


Merger of New York's Police Forces Faces Tough Obstacles
To the Editor:
"Unifying the Police Forces" (editorial, July 5) is correct: the merger of New York's housing and transit police with the New York City Police Department is "an excellent idea." However, you do not mention some significant obstacles.


Consumer Prices Rose 0.3% in June
Consumer prices climbed three-tenths of 1 percent in June, as increases for cars, gasoline, air fares and clothing more than offset moderation in housing, the Labor Department reported today.
The rise, which closely matched expectations, meant that inflation as gauged by the Consumer Price Index ran at the same 2.5 percent pace during the spring quarter as it had during the first three months of the year.
The rate for 1993, the third straight full year of diminished inflation, was 2.7 percent.


Most Movers and Shakers Tune In at Summer Camp
If there are other suitors eyeing QVC Inc., they may well be in Sun Valley, Idaho this week -- rafting or fly-fishing or horseback riding at Allen &amp; Company Inc.'s annual bash for its most powerful clients, many of them media executives.
Allen &amp; Company is the New York investment bank that specializes in media deals, and represented QVC in its merger pact with CBS Inc.
The deal fell apart Tuesday night, but that did not get in the way of the party.


More Questions for Judge Breyer
In two days of Senate testimony, the Supreme Court nominee Stephen Breyer has sought to defuse troubling questions about whether he ruled, as an appeals court judge, in environmental cases whose outcomes might have affected his financial investments.
Judge Breyer assured senators that, after reviewing his role in eight key cases, he was personally confident that he had not violated any conflict-of-interest standards.
His testimony answered several questions -- but raised as many more.
Those unanswered questions need deeper Judiciary Committee inquiry when he returns to the witness table today, both to get a full picture of the nominee's ethics and to confront holes in the ethics rules for judges.


Bosnian Serbs Confer With Britain and France on Peace Plan
The leader of Bosnia's Serbian nationalists said today that his faction's parliament would decide on Monday whether to accept an internationally backed proposal to end the Bosnian war, but the Serbian leader hinted that in his opinion the "take it or leave it" plan should be rejected.
The remarks by the nationalist leader, Radovan Karadzic, came after a meeting with the Foreign Ministers of Britain and France, Douglas Hurd and Alain Juppe.


Hospital Supplier in Novel Deal
Baxter International Inc., the world's largest hospital supply company, has signed a novel contract with the Duke University Medical Center that could become a national model for cutting health care spending.
The five-year supply agreement, which is expected to be announced Thursday, will generate at least $200 million in revenue for Baxter, which is based in Deerfield, Ill.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Why Trees Weep
Q.
Recently I purchased a weeping cherry and find it strange that the limbs really do grow downward, not up toward the sun like other plants.
Why? -- Penelope Grimes, Providence, R.I.


World Cup Will Have First Four-Time Champion
From the start, Brazil has been one of the premier teams in the World Cup.
Most of the players may each have one name, but they sound more than one note.
Italy, which struggled in the opening round, has played as well as any team in the past fortnight.
So it was entirely appropriate that the two finest teams in the elimination rounds advanced yesterday to Sunday's final at the Rose Bowl, setting up a match that will determine the first four-time winner in World Cup history.
The Brazilians, flush with pride after dominating Sweden in a World Cup semifinal match at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif., are confident.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on June 22 about possible health hazards from eating hot dogs misstated the policy of the journal Cancer Causes and Control for the review of its articles before publication.
The articles are indeed reviewed before publication, by at least two experts.


Architects' Leader
EVEN before she takes office on July 18, Carol Clark, the new executive director of the New York Chapter of the American Institute of Architects, has raised some hopes pretty high.
Since 1990, Ms.
Clark has helped shape policy at the New York City Planning Commission, serving as liaison to the City Council.
Before that, she was director of the Municipal Art Society's Planning Center.


Sleepless in Seattle? Definitely Watch Yanks
What to do on another sleepy Thursday in Seattle?
Maybe sample some coffee on any corner.
Maybe watch a grunge band on any corner.
Definitely attend the baseball game between the Mariners and the Yankees.
That should be quite intriguing.
What happens when one of the best young managers in baseball questions the approach of one of the best young players in baseball?
There is a chance for a juicy grudge, a war of words.
As the first-place Yankees begin their second half of the season with an 11-game West Coast trip tonight, the Kingdome could play host to such an event because Manager Buck Showalter has doubted Ken Griffey Jr.'s respect for the game and Junior is angry.


Miscellany
*
The singer Whitney Houston will appear in the first in a series of television commercials for AT&amp;T's True Voice service, by FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York, begining tonight.
AT&amp;T said representatives of Ms.
Houston, who suffered a miscarriage several days ago, had asked that the commercial proceed as scheduled. *
Mark Messier, captain of the New York Rangers hockey team, has renewed his contract as the spokesman for Louisville Hockey equipment.
He will also help introduce Meltdown, a line of street hockey equipment.


In One Year, the Mets Do an About-Face
Nobody's calling them the Miracle Mets yet, but as they prepare to resume play after the All-Star break with a game against the San Diego Padres at Shea Stadium tonight, it would be hard to deny that by some measures the Mets are one of the hottest teams in baseball.
Certainly they are among the most improved. 13-Game Improvement
Consider that a year ago the Mets were in seventh place in the Eastern Division.
Today they are in fifth place.
True, they were last in a seven-team division last year and are last in a five-team division this year, but don't snicker too soon.


Boston Federal Reserve Selects New President
The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston today named as its president a specialist in bank regulation and financial markets who has little background in interest-rate policy.
The selection of Cathy E. Minehan, who is 47 years old, the Boston Fed's chief operating officer and a career central banker, as the bank's president, holds special significance for two reasons.


METRO DIGEST
4 CHARGED WITH FIXING BREAD PRICES After complaints that a group of unscrupulous bakers were trying to corner the Italian-bread market in parts of New York City, undercover investigators opened a bogus bakery in Greenwich Village.
Their investigation resulted in the indictment of four officials from a bakery association on price-fixing changes.
Two were also charged with coercion.
A1. 4 AIRLINES BUILD NEW KENNEDY TERMINAL Four foreign airlines will build the first entirely new terminal at Kennedy International Airport in more than two decades, under an agreement that is intended to bolster Kennedy's position as the nation's leading international airport.
A1.


Journal; O. J. Come Home
As if it weren't bad enough that America's shrinks leave the country in the lurch in August, now we must suffer the shame and pain of severe O. J. withdrawal.
You know the symptoms.
At noon sharp (11 Central, 9 Pacific) an alarm goes off deep inside your gut.
Lunchtime already?
Craving a smoke?
No, the hour has arrived for the preliminary hearing -- or would be, had the preliminary hearing not ended after a paltry six days.
No longer can an entire afternoon be given over to sifting the facts of a heinous crime with panels of rent-a-lawyers.
It's back to the dreary reality of work.


Pickel, Veteran Lineman, Returns to Jets
Defensive tackle BILL PICKEL, who in 1993 enjoyed one of his most productive seasons, has agreed to contract terms with the Jets, the team announced yesterday.
Pickel, a former Los Angeles Raider from Rutgers University and St.
Francis Prep High School in Queens, will be starting his 12th season in the National Football League and third with the Jets.


Tisch Acts On Value Of Shares
CBS Inc. moved quickly yesterday to shore up its stock price in the wake of its abandoned merger with QVC Inc.
CBS said it would buy back up to 3.5 million of its shares, or 22 percent of the amount outstanding, for $325 a share.


Technology Issues Help Lift Stock Prices
Stock prices moved higher yesterday, fueled by a rally in high-technology issues, signs of a steadier dollar in Europe and a firmer bond market.
The rally in technology stocks was based largely on anticipation among investors of good quarterly earnings and by solid performances of stocks like the Chipcom Corporation and Seagate Technology, which both reported strong quarterly profits.
Shares of Chipcom jumped up 7 1/8, to 46 1/2, while Seagate rose 1 1/4, to 24 5/8.
Cisco Systems rose 1 1/4, to 24, and Intel was up 1 5/8, to 61 3/4.


Chipcom Corp.(CHPM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


N.Y.R.A. Will Accept A Winter at Aqueduct
The people who run New York's race tracks have notified Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo that they will surrender to his "ultimatum," and will conduct winter racing at Aqueduct despite financial losses.
However, live racing will be held five days a week instead of the customary six, with nine races a day.
And the simulcasting experiment of last winter -- seven live races interspersed with five TV races from Florida -- will probably not be repeated, at least in that format.
But the state's Offtrack Betting offices are expected to carry simulcasts regularly from outside the state.


Warner Music Names Official
The Warner Music Group, a division of Time Warner Inc., has named Doug Morris president and chief operating officer of Warner Music-U.S., a new unit that will consolidate the company's major record labels.
All of Warner Music Group's pre-recorded music and entertainment labels in the United States will report to Mr.
Morris.
The labels are Atlantic, Elektra and Warner Brothers.
Mr.
Morris continues to report to Warner Music Group's chairman and chief executive, Robert J. Morgado.


Agents Turn Bakers in Battle Against Italian-Bread Cartel
For years, law-enforcement officials heard complaints about a small group of unscrupulous bakers trying to corner the Italian-bread market in parts of New York City.
Using threats of violence, investigators were told, the cartel controlled the distribution of fresh Italian bread to small grocery stores in Brooklyn and Staten Island, inflating prices and eliminating competition.
But investigators found that bakers and store owners were reluctant to cooperate.
The only way to get to the heart of the Italian-bread racket, they decided, was to open a bakery themselves.


CHRONICLE
VAN CLIBURN is on a 16-city American concert tour with the Moscow Philharmonic, and the first week has been memorable -- perhaps too memorable.
Take the opening concert, which was on Monday night at the Hollywood Bowl.
After the first half, Mr.
Cliburn complained of dizziness, and when he returned after the intermission, he did not play the Rachmaninoff piano concerto that was listed on the program but performed four shorter compositions instead, said SUSAN TILLEY, the chairwoman of the Van Cliburn Foundation, who was traveling with him.


William A. Penner; Merger Specialist, 60
William A. Penner, a Chicago financial executive who was active in AIDS-related causes, died on Monday at his home in Chicago.
He was 60.
The cause was AIDS, his family said.


For Wildlife's Sake, Don't Lift Alaska Oil Ban
To the Editor:
In reviewing the impacts of lifting the ban on the export of Alaska North Slope crude oil, the Energy Department failed to take a close look at the environmental consequences.
Despite this inexcusable oversight and gaping information abyss, Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary recommends lifting the 20-year-old prohibition that was a critical element in the Alaska pipeline construction deal (Business Day, July 1).


Unilever Executive Gets Assignment in England
Robert M. Phillips, who has made Unilever P.L.C. a growing force in the intensely competitive cosmetic and fragrance market, will be promoted to a new assignment in England supervising Unilever's global personal-products units, the company said yesterday.
Mr.
Phillips, 55, will also be named to the Unilever board at the annual meeting next May, making him the only American board member.


CHRONICLE
The Bass family of Texas, with its fortunes in oil and real estate, has long been associated with Yale University: various members have given millions of dollars over the years.
But there is a Vassar connection, too.
ANNE HENDRICKS BASS, the former wife of Sid Bass, has donated $1.5 million to Vassar College, in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
She graduated from the college in 1963, and her daughter Samantha Bass graduated this year.


People
*
Pam Hamlin, executive vice president and director of client services at Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly, Providence, R.I., was named a partner. *
Martin Macdonald was named to the new position of executive creative director at West Advertising and Marketing, Tampa, Fla.
He was previously executive vice president and creative director at Asher/Gould, Los Angeles.


Houghton Mifflin
Shares of Houghton Mifflin fell 11 percent yesterday on reports that a California educational panel reviewing textbook purchases for next year did not recommend the publisher's elementary-school mathematics program.
In a statement, Houghton Mifflin said that while one program was not adopted by the panel, another was, and that the review was only one of a series in a long selection process.


Dekalb Genetics (SEEDB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Study Raises Serious Doubts About Commonly Used Methods of Treating Back Pain
A study that examined the spines of people without back pain is casting serious doubt on the methods used to diagnose and treat people whose backs ache.
The study, led by Dr.
Michael N. Brant-Zawadzki, a radiologist at Hoag Memorial Hospital in Newport Beach, Calif., used magnetic resonance imaging, or M.R.I., to examine the spines of 98 men and women who had no back pain.
The researchers found that nearly two-thirds of the subjects had spinal abnormalities, including bulging or protruding disks, herniated disks and degenerated disks.
A third had more than one abnormal disk.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Spanish Style and Passion, With a Mastery of Rhythm  Gramercy Arts Theater
Pilar Rioja's Spanish dance solos are remarkable for their intelligence, stylishness and passion, qualities apparent on Sunday afternoon when her program included two New York premieres that displayed her mastery of rhythm.


Drive Is Opened to Fight Cuts in Medicare
Hospital lobbyists today began what they described as an all-out fight to prevent Congress from making the kind of large cuts in the growth of Medicare that several committees have proposed as a way to finance health coverage for people who are uninsured.
Hospitals have generally supported President Clinton's effort to guarantee health insurance for all Americans, and they have endorsed many of his specific proposals to redesign the health care system.


Mainstream Religions To Form 'Alternate' Lobby
A broad coalition of mainline religious leaders plans to announce on Thursday the establishment of an educational and lobbying group intended to counter the Christian Coalition, the leading organization of religious conservatives.
Organizers of the new group, the Interfaith Alliance, said there had been few people from religious organizations speaking out against the religious right, leaving most of the attacks to come from the Democratic Party.
They said they hoped that people from theological backgrounds would appear more credible than politicians.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Yefim Bronfman's Pianism By Way of Mozart  Avery Fisher Hall
The better part of Tuesday night's Mostly Mozart concert was its second half, with the pianist Yefim Bronfman contributing a thoroughly distinguished performance of Mozart's Concerto No. 22 in E flat.
Mr.
Bronfman's art seems to grow more subtle as the years go by; for the E-flat concerto, he produced a pearly tone, lucid articulation and characterful phrasing that put forward interpretive points at carefully spaced intervals.
A few telling pauses here and there established an unusual and quite compelling melancholy temper beneath this work's generally sunny surface.
The cadenzas, partly of his own devising, were mildly eccentric but not distractingly so, musing further on the inner wealth of deceptively simple figures.


KLLM Transport Services Inc.(KLLM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Italians Save Their Best for the Cup's Next to Last
For the first time in the 1994 World Cup tournament, Italy's team took command.
For the first time, the Italians showed off the assets they had advertised but rarely displayed.
For the first time, Italy lived up to expectations instead of living off luck.
Poor Bulgaria suffered the consequences.


Hilton Hotels (HLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Helping Excite Toronto Over Books for 20 Years
It's 8 P.M. on a Tuesday in a cultural center on transformed industrial land along Lake Ontario.
Lights dim.
Candles on small round tables cast fancifully flitting shadows on the ceiling.
It's storytelling time.
A man of Falstaffian girth with a ginger beard barrels to the podium and welcomes an audience of perhaps 200 who have paid less than the price of a movie to hear two writers read from their recently published works.


Berlin Journal; Clinton at the Brandenburg Gate: Mixed Reviews
Born 24 years ago in what was then Communist East Berlin, Oliver Blasing was standing on a street crossing just east of the Brandenburg Gate on Tuesday, cheering President Clinton.
Mr.
Blasing had taken a day off from his studies at western Berlin's Technical University, and braved a beating summer sun to listen to a speech by Mr.
Clinton on his first visit to Berlin.
And yet somehow, Mr.
Blasing said afterward, it was all so familiar.
He said that seven years earlier, in June 1987, he had stood on the very same spot waiting for another American President to speak.


In Wild-Card Era, High Hopes for Many
In the oddity of unnatural alliances that an All-Star Game creates, the two players most responsible for ending the National League's embarrassing losing streak will now return to the task of trying to beat each other's brains out in the race for the National League East championship.
When Fred McGriff of Atlanta swatted an electrifying pinch-hit, two-run home run in the ninth inning that tied the score Tuesday night and Moises Alou of Montreal slugged a game-winning double in the 10th, they exultantly performed for the good of their league in an 8-7 victory that ended the American League's winning streak at six games.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Household Finance Corp., Prospect Heights, Ill., a unit of Household International Inc., is selling $250 million of 8 percent notes due in 2004 at 99.832 to yield 8.024 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The noncallable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service, A by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Provision on Racial Bias in Death Sentences Appears Unlikely for Crime Bill
With the Congressional clock ticking, efforts to break the logjam over the Clinton Administration's anti-crime package have broken down, and there is little expectation that the final bill will include a provision that its proponents say would help prevent racial bias in death sentences.
The provision has been the major bone of contention in the proposed $30.2 billion crime package, with Republicans, particularly in the Senate, adamantly against it and many but not all members of the Congressional Black Caucus for it.


Simple Truths and Apostles of Death
Following is an open letter from Salman Rushdie to Taslima Nasrin, a Bangladeshi physician, newspaper columnist and author of the novel "Shame," who is under death threats from Muslim clerics and faces criminal charges from the Government for allegedly criticizing the Koran.
Mr.
Rushdie, who has been in hiding since being sentenced to death by Iranian religious leaders in 1989, is organizing an international protest on Ms.
Nasrin's behalf by other prominent writers.
I am sure you have become tired of being called "the female Salman Rushdie" -- what a bizarre and comical creature that would be! -- when all along you thought you were the female Taslima Nasrin.
I am sorry my name has been hung around your neck, but please know that there are many people in many countries working to make sure that such sloganizing does not obscure your identity, the unique features of your situation and the importance of fighting to defend you and your rights against those who would cheerfully see you dead.


Clubhouse for Penn
WHAT do Saul Steinberg, Michael R. Milken, Ronald O. Perelman and Leonard and Ronald Lauder have in common?
They are among the group of some 50 University of Pennsylvania alumni who gave at least $150,000 each to outpace their Ivy League rivals along Clubhouse Row.
The Penn Club opened on June 15 at 30 West 44th Street in a 1901 Beaux-Arts building that originally housed the Yale Club, which moved to Vanderbilt Avenue in 1915.
Neighbors include the Harvard Club, at 27 West 44th Street; the Cornell Club, at 6 East 44th Street, and the Princeton Club, at 15 West 43d Street.


Bulgarian Star Vents Anger
Hristo Stoichkov had reason to be frustrated on this hot afternoon.
His team's giant-killing saga had ended in a 2-1 semifinal loss to Italy, and he had pulled a muscle and left the game in the 78th minute.
But what made him hot was the referee, Joel Quiniou, who called a penalty late in the first half -- Stoichkov converted the kick for the Bulgarians' goal -- but did not call another penalty he felt they deserved.


A big-league creative director returns to his roots as he takes on the role of agency builder.
A CREATIVE executive is leaving one of New York's biggest agencies for one of its smallest.
W.
Michael McKenna, a senior vice president and creative director at the New York office of Young &amp; Rubicam, which has billings of almost $1.4 billion, is leaving to join Albert Frank-Guenther Law, which has billings of about $50 million.


THE SUPREME COURT: NEWS ANALYSIS Portrait of a Pragmatist; Confirmation Hearing for Breyer Elicits His Emphasis on Rulings' Lasting Effects
From his 13 years on a Federal appeals court, it is apparent that Stephen G. Breyer is a judge of moderate leanings, a self-described pragmatist interested more in solutions than in theories.
Judge Breyer has said nothing to dislodge that image during two days of testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee.
To that extent, his Supreme Court confirmation hearing has produced little news.
What the hearing has accomplished, through the nominee's responses to the friendly, open-ended questions of admiring senators, is to construct a portrait of what it means to be a judicial pragmatist.


IN REHEARSAL WITH: Cybill Shepherd; A Song in Her Heart
CYBILL SHEPHERD is here to star in Merv Griffin's Sixth Annual Fourth of July Coconut Ballroom Revue.
And proud of it.
In fact, she can do an entire stand-up routine about her voice, her singing career, recording career, anything having to do with music, starting with her biggest flop film, Peter Bogdanovich's "At Long Last Love," to her album "Cybill Does Cole Porter," which raised the inevitable question, What did Cole Porter ever do to her?


The Three Tenors, Guess Who, to Sing
"The biggest ever" is a phrase that comes up every few sentences when anyone involved with "Encore! The Three Tenors" is asked about the show.
"Encore" is, of course, the reunion of Luciano Pavarotti, Placido Domingo and Jose Carreras to take place on Saturday evening at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles, a musical spectacle meant to give a touch of high culture to the World Cup finals.
The three tenors first came together at the time of the last World Cup games, in 1990, and sang a concert at the Caracalla Baths, in Rome.
Broadcast live to 800,000 people, the original "Three Tenors" concert became a smash hit on records (more than 10 million sold) and on video (with sales of more than a million).
But that, many production, television, publishing and record companies are hoping, was just a warm-up.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about a labor agreement between the Leslie Fay Companies and the International Ladies Garment Workers Union misstated one of the terms of the accord.
The company has guaranteed 600 production jobs in Pennsylvania for one year, until July 31, 1995, not three years.
For the rest of the three-year contract, it agreed only to the goal of trying to maintain the jobs.


Beyond the West Bank; Israel Pinning Its Hopes on the Talks With Jordan and Syria
While attention has been focused largely on the Palestinians and the start of their self-rule, peace talks between Israel and its Arab neighbors are at a potentially decisive stage on more fronts than at any moment since they began three years ago.
This week Israel began a new round of negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
In a few days it will enter a new phase in its dialogue with Jordan, and at the same time it will also welcome Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who will try to breathe fresh life into stalled talks with Syria.
Wherever the Syrians go, Lebanon can be expected to follow.


France Helps in Rwanda -- So Far
Grant France this much credit for its risky armed intervention into the genocidal civil war in Rwanda.
Some 2,500 French troops moved into Rwanda, saved lives and created a safe area in the southwest, and are now poised to withdraw.
This decisiveness contrasts with the inability of Washington and the United Nations to speed promised armored personnel carriers to Africa for use by 500 Ghanaian peacekeepers scheduled to replace the French soldiers.
The U.N. is being billed $10 million for these rented vehicles, which arrived after weeks of paperwork delay only to face fresh delays for lack of trained Ghanaian drivers.
The world body should try Avis next time.


Cheerful Court Nominee And Cordial Senate Panel
Judge Stephen G. Breyer, who seems headed for easy confirmation to the Supreme Court, today painted a broad picture for the Senate Judiciary Committee of his views on the death penalty, freedom of religion and how he goes about the job of being a judge.
In his second day of testimony before the committee, Judge Breyer also elaborated on his earlier defense of his participation in pollution cases as a Federal judge.
At the time, he faced great financial losses from his investment in an insurance syndicate suffering financial losses from pollution lawsuits.
Judge Breyer, who on Tuesday sought to pre-empt any criticism of the issue with a statement to the committee, faced his first questioning on the subject today.


Decision Due On Leslie Fay Documents
The judge overseeing the bankruptcy case of the Leslie Fay Companies will decide today whether to make public two reports about the accounting scandal that pushed the apparel company into Federal bankruptcy protection last year.
Many people involved in the case said they believed that Judge Tina Brozman would release the two reports, compiled by Charles A. Stillman, a lawyer who specializes in securities law.
Mr.
Stillman was appointed as an independent examiner in the case earlier this year after creditors questioned the objectivity of the original investigation into the scandal, conducted by the company's audit committee.


Television Coverage Of Senate Hearings
The Senate Judiciary Committee's confirmation hearings on Judge Stephen G. Breyer's nomination to the Supreme Court will be covered live today, beginning at 10 A.M., by the Public Broadcasting Service.
The service will provide gavel-to-gavel coverage to its affiliates, which have the option of carrying the hearings or running other programs.


Merriam Modell; Novelist, 86
Merriam Modell, a writer of short stories and suspense novels, died on July 1 at Presbyterian University Hospital in Pittsburgh.
She was 86.
The cause was pulmonary embolism, the result of a recent accident, said her son, John.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  U.S.
TO REVISE AIR TRAINING  Offering new details on the chain of human errors that caused American pilots to shoot down two U.S. helicopters in Iraq, Defense Secretary William J. Perry said he has ordered changes in training to prevent such accidents.
A6


Brazil's Star Soars to New Heights as Goal Scorer
The Brazilians were holding hands in a show of unity as they came onto the carpet of the Rose Bowl and they left embracing each other in celebration.
Just when it looked as if Brazil had exhausted all its attempts against a resilient Swedish defense, Romario rose to the moment with 10 minutes left, heading home the only goal in the 1-0 triumph over Sweden.


Camp Isn't School
To The Home Section: This letter is in response to "Worries About Abuse Are Changing Camps"  [ Parent &amp; Child, June 9 ] .
This article was pointed out to me by my mother, who thought I might be interested in it since I attended summer camp and will be a counselor in training this summer.
When I read it, I was absolutely appalled.
The rules Bob Ditter mentioned were ridiculous.
How are campers supposed to be comfortable with a counselor who acts like a stone wall?
The point of going to camp is to have fun.
If counselors act more like teachers, camps will become extensions of school.
School ends in June.


S.E.C. Approves Guidelines On Mutual Fund Advertising
Seeking to discourage inflated or misleading claims by mutual funds and other investment companies, the Securities and Exchange Commission approved guidelines yesterday on how rankings are used in advertising and sales literature.
The new rules, which were proposed by the National Association of Securities Dealers, will require "prominent disclosure" in advertisements and sales literature of an investment company's ranking, the number of companies in the category, the name of the category and the period on which the ranking is based.


Hubbell Inc.(HUB.B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cries of 'Bella!' Ring Out in Corona
Amid the din that shook Lucia's Cafe in Corona, Queens, yesterday during the final moments of Italy's victory in the World Cup semifinals, only one man stood without a noisemaker, a bell or a flag.
His arms were crossed tensely over his chest, and the index and pinky fingers of each hand were raised upward while the other fingers were tucked under his thumb.
"The horns," intoned Luigio Gigliotti, his eyes flickering in some kind of soccer-induced trance.
"The horns."


Larry Hogue, Symbol of Troubled Homeless, Flees a Hospital
A mentally ill man who for years terrified a neighborhood on the Upper West Side of Manhattan escaped yesterday from a state psychiatric center in Queens, where he had been assigned to a locked ward since last fall, officials said.
The man, Larry Hogue, left the ward at 11:30 A.M. for what was supposed to be a 15-minute errand across the sprawling campus of the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center.
A spokeswoman for Creedmoor, Karen Schechter, said that Mr.
Hogue had done well enough in recent months to be given grounds privileges.
Yesterday, she said, he was to pick up his wages from a rehabilitation program, a check for about $25, and go back to the ward for lunch.


International Paper Co. (IP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cutting a Myth Down to Human Size
The Catcher Was a Spy  The Mysterious Life of Moe Berg  By Nicholas Dawidoff  Illustrated. 453 pages.
Pantheon. $24.
By now many readers know the most prominent mythic features of the famous athlete-scholar-spy Moe Berg (1902-1972).
How he lasted 17 years in major-league baseball despite being the player who first inspired the phrase "good field, no hit." How he was said to have spoken at least a dozen languages, including Sanskrit, despite its being a dead language.


Mayor Announces Tentative Pact With Police Unions
The Giuliani administration reached a tentative agreement yesterday with New York City's police and transit police unions on contracts that would increase wages and benefits by roughly as much as the settlements negotiated with the other municipal unions over the last year.
The agreement broke a two-month impasse in negotiations with the two police unions, which had held out in the hope of gaining a sweeter package for their officers than the 8.25 percent increase in salaries and benefits negotiated with the city's nonuniformed workers.


Not Only Militants Oppose Mideast Peace Plan; Cartoonist Wasn't Jailed
To the Editor:
Garry Trudeau's "Drawing, Dangerously" (Op-Ed, July 10), on persecuted cartoonists, includes a wholly inaccurate tale about Oleg Schwartzburg, Jerusalem Post cartoonist.


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ
A Big Band Combines Repertory and Improvising  Village Vanguard
Big bands have personalities, and the one Loren Schoenberg brought to the Village Vanguard on Monday night is calm and airy.
Mr.
Schoenberg, a saxophonist, band leader and jazz historian, knows exactly how to calibrate his orchestra, and it moves easily from a quiet, almost conversational level to a scream, with nicely balanced and clear reed and brass sections.


Israel Bars Palestinian Officials From Gaza
Israel barred new officials of the Palestinian National Authority from entering Gaza and Jericho today in a dispute over the arrival here of four P.L.O. men, two of whom allegedly planned a 1974 attack on a school in which 22 Israeli students were killed.
The dispute strained the self-rule accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization and highlighted a lingering lack of trust.
It also touched a raw nerve in Israel, where the raid on the school, in the northern town of Maalot, is remembered as one of the most horrific terrorist assaults.


Honors
*
The Western States Advertising Agencies Association, Los Angeles, named its new officers for 1994-95.
Bob Kresser, chairman and chief executive of Kresser/Craig, Santa Monica, Calif., was named president, succeeding Brian Morris, executive vice president and general manager of Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, who was named chairman.
Bart Young, president of Speer Young &amp; Hollander, Los Angeles, was reappointed vice president, and Diane Krause, executive vice president and account group director at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Los Angeles, was named secretary-treasurer.


Market Place; The investor Charles Hurwitz may be clearing up some feuds.
MAXXAM is the sort of stock that Rush Limbaugh would pick if he ever decided to run his own socially conscious mutual fund.
Environmentalists are battling Charles E. Hurwitz, the company's chief executive and controlling shareholder, in Congress and the courts over his threat to chop down some of California's finest stands of virgin redwood trees.
Even Vice President Al Gore has met with him to stay his ax.


Coltec Industries Inc.(COT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


For 2d Time, Senators Block Bill to Bar Replacement of Strikers
Determined not to enhance union power, conservative senators today blocked for a second time a bill intended to keep employers from permanently replacing workers striking over wages and benefits.
The vote was a replay of one on Tuesday when Senate Democrats failed to gather enough support to stop a Republican filibuster.
The effort today was again 7 votes short of the 60 needed to break the filibuster.


Dr. Richard Light Dies at 92; Flier, Geographer, Surgeon
Dr.
Richard U. Light, early long-distance flier, former president of the American Geographical Society, pioneer in neurosurgery and grandson of the Upjohn Company's founder, died on Monday at his home in Kalamazoo, Mich., at the age of 92.
The cause was a heart attack that he suffered on May 24, his family said.


Not Only Militants Oppose Mideast Peace Plan
To the Editor:
J.
J.
Goldberg employs the deceptive tactic of playing off the general fear of militant radicalism to encourage mainstream American Jews to mobilize in support of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process ("Only in America: Likud vs. Labor," Op-Ed, July 2).


CPC INTERNATIONAL (CPC,N)
CPC International, a food company based in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., said Tuesday that its second-quarter net income increased 4.7 percent, excluding a restructuring charge announced in June.
Most notable were double-digit increases in sales and operating income from CPC's European operations, which account for 30 percent of the company's earnings.
These were offset by a decline of 10.7 percent in operating income in Latin America, which the company attributed to the introduction of economic reforms in Brazil.


Corrections
The Garden Notebook column in The Home Section last Thursday, about a show of Central Park benches at the Cooper-Hewitt National Museum of Design, described one bench incorrectly.
The 12-foot-long rustic log bench echoes the style of the Adirondack benches first designed for the park by Calvert Vaux and Frederick Law Olmsted but is not a reproduction.
It is an original design by Kim Hoyt, an architect for the Central Park Conservancy.
In addition, a picture of a bench, on the front page of the section, and a picture inside the section of a bench in the Ramble in Central Park were credited incorrectly.
Both photographs are from the collection of Herbert Mitchell, not the New York City Parks Photo Archive.


Bridge
An act of personal kindness by Ely Culbertson in the early years of the game turned out to be a lasting benefit to bridge in New York City.
When at the height of his fame in 1937, he led a team to Budapest to contest the first world championships.
While there, he met a young bridge organizer of obvious ability and enthusiasm, and was later able to help him leave Germany and enter the United States.
The man was Rudolf Muhsam, who died on May 24 at age 88.
For 35 years, until his retirement in 1973, he was the secretary of the Cavendish Club in Manhattan, presiding over the affairs of the world's most famous bridge club with great efficiency.
He was friendly with all the great American players of that period, most of whom played at the Cavendish.


The Pope Takes On A Surprising Role: High-Priced Author
In a highly unusual publishing event that has been a tightly kept secret until now, a book written by Pope John Paul II is to be published commercially around the world late in the fall.
The book, a collection of essays called "Crossing the Threshold of Hope," is a discussion of Roman Catholicism and how it relates to the modern era, and will be published in the United States by Alfred A. Knopf, said Sonny Mehta, the publisher and editor in chief at Knopf.
Mr.
Mehta and his boss, Alberto Vitale, the chairman of Random House, obtained the book on Tuesday in a hefty multimillion-dollar deal with Morton L. Janklow, the literary agent who represents the Pope's Italian publisher, Mondadori, in the United States.
"This is an extremely important book, and we will publish it with all the vigor and the expertise that we have," Mr.
Mehta said in an interview yesterday.


CHRONICLE
TONY BENNETT, who has been enjoying a renaissance as a singing idol among the young, beamed yesterday when he heard his name announced among the nominees for the 11th annual MTV Video Music Awards, The Associated Press reported.
Mr.
Bennett's "Steppin' Out With My Baby" was nominated as Best Male Video.
The good news came at City Hall in New York, where Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced that the awards ceremony would be broadcast from New York for the first time in eight years.
The ceremonies will be held Sept. 8 at Radio City Music Hall.


Clark Earns His License to Race Hot Rods
The former major leaguer JACK CLARK earned his National Hot Rod Association top fuel dragster license this week at the track where he has been trying to qualify for about two months.
Clark becomes the first former major leaguer to receive the license, according to officials at the Texas Motorplex in Ennis, located about 30 miles south of Dallas.


Plan Would Ban Development in Half of the Pine Barrens
A commission that is weighing the fate of the 100,000-acre pine barrens wilderness on eastern Long Island released a staff report today that recommends that more than half the huge tract never be developed.
The barrens, a wooded outback of pitch pines, scrub oaks and sandy soil, is more than five times the size of Manhattan.
It sits over what the commission called the purest underground drinking water supply in the state and contains rare stands of dwarf pines and several rare plant and animal species.
It is also the largest undeveloped area on Long Island, which has 2.6 million residents, and it has come under greater and greater development pressure in the last 20 years.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Judge Stephen G. Breyer's testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee with a picture showing three members of the committee misidentified the Senator on the left in some editions.
It was Senator Orrin G. Hatch, not Strom Thurmond.


Archer Daniels Midland Co.  (ADM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


N.B.A. Case Still Unresolved
The labor stalemate between the National Basketball Association and the players' union remained unresolved yesterday as the Federal judge who presided over a one-day trial on Tuesday failed to make a ruling.
A decision is expected today or tomorrow.
Both sides submitted final papers yesterday to United States District Court Judge Kevin Duffy in Manhattan.
The N.B.A. sued the union last month, saying the dispute should remain a collective bargaining -- not an antitrust -- matter.
The National Basketball Players Association, arguing that the impasse should be judged an antitrust case, got a temporary restraining order that halted all player signings.
The union has also charged that the salary cap, college draft and right of first refusal violate antitrust law.
"If the judge struck it all down, it would create chaos, but we could go quickly to the Court of Appeals, and we believe they'd reverse," said Howard Ganz, one of the N.B.A.'s lawyers.


CBS to Add Three Affiliates In Deal With Westinghouse
CBS and the Westinghouse Broadcasting Company agreed yesterday to a deal that would bring three stations owned by Westinghouse into the CBS affiliate lineup and create a partnership to purchase future stations, produce syndicated programming and sell local advertising time.
The deal, the latest affiliate reshuffling at the broadcast networks, will significantly enhance CBS's group of affiliates.
Coming just a day after the collapse of the proposed merger between CBS and QVC Inc., the deal represented what CBS executives called a welcome injection of good news for an embattled network.


For Children
'Celestial Bodies'
Alley Pond Environmental Center  228-06 Northern Boulevard  Douglaston, Queens  (718) 229-4000  Recommended ages: 7 and up  Tonight
No one's really sure what may happen when the first fragment of the shattered comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 collides into Jupiter tomorrow about 4 P.M.
In fact, perhaps nothing will happen, said Walter Polosnik, an astronomer at Queens College.
"There might not be enough mass."


Welfare Ruling
In a ruling that could cast a pall on states' welfare experiments, a Federal court struck down California cuts approved by the Bush Administration.
Article, page A12.


Paccar Inc.(PCAR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Congress Briefed on Funds for GATT
The Clinton Administration briefed lawmakers today on how it plans to raise the $12 billion needed to pay for the global trade agreement, in a new push to have Congress approve the accord before the end of the year.
The United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor; the new White House chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, and Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen appeared before a closed session of the Senate Finance Committee.


Nowadays, Workers Enjoy Dressing Down for the Job
Most days the women and men who flow through the hallways of corporate New York look as if they are on the way to a rich man's funeral.
Some call it the Wall Street look, or the Madison Avenue look, but what it really is, said people who suffer inside those proper clothes, is the stiff, hot look.
They sweat into their summer wool suits and walk inside unbending shoes, ignoring comfort and common sense because convention, and their employers, expect them to dress up at work.


N.B.A.'s Ordeal in Court: Is Stern Losing His Touch at the Foul Line?
The courtroom is familiar territory to the National Basketball Association.
The league is fighting for position against a diverse group of legal opponents: the players' union, the jilted buyer of the Minnesota Timberwolves, and the former three-time champions of the league, the Chicago Bulls.
On Tuesday, the league and the National Basketball Players Association, which have hit an impasse in collective bargaining, squabbled in Federal Court in Manhattan over thorny issues like the salary cap, which an emboldened union wants eliminated.
The case could be decided today and may have a profound effect on the league's future if the union wins.


Bombings Laid to Mafia War on Italy and Church
Italian investigators said today that the Mafia was behind a series of bomb attacks last year against cultural and church targets in Italy partly to destabilize the Italian Government, but also because the Mafia felt that the Roman Catholic Church had abrogated an unwritten hands-off policy toward organized crime.
The investigators, who are investigating the bombings of targets that included the Uffizi gallery in Florence, said they had issued arrest warrants for eight suspects, all with Mafia associations, and had made two arrests.


Drugs and Brutality on the Mean Rues of Paris
Don't blame the French director and writer Bertrand Tavernier for the fact that his police drama "L.627," seems so mild-mannered compared with its American counterparts.
His melancholy portrait of the life of a Parisian narcotics officer suggests that the meaner streets of America's cities are 10 times scarier and more hazardous than the slums of Paris.
In "L.627," which opens today at the Quad Cinema, there are no gory shoot-outs, no car chases, no screaming of obscenities.
The film studies the day-to-day life of Lucien Marguet (Didier Bezace), an undercover narcotics agent in his mid-30's, with a thoroughness and detachment that lend it a semi-documentary flavor.


Laclede Steel Co.  (LCLD,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Salary Cap The Same as A Dunce Cap
DAVID STERN tells a judge that if professional basketball players are allowed to dissolve the salary cap and attain broader free agency, it will be the ruination of the game as we know it.
Where have we heard that before?


In the Rowdy Back Alleys of English
Random House Historical Dictionary of American Slang
Volume I: A-G
Edited by J. E. Lighter
1,006 pages. Random House. $50.
To Ambrose Bierce, slang was "the grunt of the human hog (Pignoramus intolerabilis)." To S. I. Hayakawa, it was "the poetry of everyday life." Now, thanks to the herculean efforts of J. E. Lighter, a research associate in the English department of the University of Tennessee, American slang has its very own dictionary, a historical dictionary that stands as both a glossary of our ribald daily speech and an irreverent index of our nation's cultural evolution.
Although it's frustrating that only a portion of this dictionary is now available -- the second volume (H-R) is to be published in the spring of 1996, and the final volume (S-Z) is scheduled for the spring of 1997 -- researchers and browsers alike will find Mr.
Lighter's first volume as deliciously readable as it is informative.


Storm Rages in Chicago Over Revoked Adoption
As the host of a local radio call-in show, Catherine Johns has been listening to outraged and broken-hearted Chicagoans for years.
But seldom have so many sounded so anguished as they did the other night, when the overwhelming topic was the plight of a 3 1/2-year-old boy known as Baby Richard and his adoptive parents.
"I'm so angry I can hardly speak," one caller said, his voice thick with hurt.
"How can this happen? How can an old man in a black robe tear a family apart like this?"


Gunmen Kill 1 and Hurt 4
A man was shot to death on a Harlem street and four bystanders were wounded by gunfire yesterday in what the police called a revenge killing of a drug dealer.
The dead man, Hemsley Bethea, was shot shortly after 6 P.M. while being chased on foot by four men on 134th Street east of Frederick Douglass Boulevard, said Capt.
Michael Duffy, a police spokesman.
The men fired 16 or 17 shots, the captain said.
Mr.
Bethea, of 215 West 131st Street, was pronounced dead at the scene.
One slug hit a woman in the chest, he said, and three others hit men, but none was seriously injured.
Their names were not immediately released.


Orion Pictures Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Silent White House
It is time for President Clinton to take a stand for racial justice in administering the death penalty.
That is the main issue stalling the crime bill, passed months ago by both the Senate and House but bogged down in conference over differing versions, and the President is silent about it.
Mr.
Clinton and both parties in Congress are eager for this election-year crime bill, which has something for everyone: severe new penalties, including five dozen new Federal death penalties; billions for police, prisons and prevention programs; a ban on assault weapons, and a host of other measures.
Despite the general enthusiasm, Senate Republicans are not content to share in this cornucopia with House Democrats; they threaten to filibuster any bill that includes the House-passed Racial Justice Act.


Big Charge To Be Taken By Digital
The Digital Equipment Corporation announced today that it would take a $1.2 billion charge for the fourth quarter to cover the elimination of 20,000 jobs and the reduction of 10 million square feet of office and manufacturing space.
The company, which had announced the job reductions earlier, said the cuts would be accelerated and take place over 12 months rather than two years, as had been previously announced.


Riggs National Corp.(RIGS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Appeals Court Overturns California's Welfare Cut
In a decision that could cast a pall on experiments by states to change their welfare systems, a Federal appeals court in San Francisco has struck down California welfare cuts approved by the Bush Administration in 1992.
In a 2-1 ruling, a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit said the cuts were invalid because Federal officials had not considered the hardship on 2.4 million Californians who receive Aid to Families with Dependent Children.


Ryan's Family Steak House (RYAN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Mexico Asks New Inquiry Into Slaying Of Candidate
Hoping to silence widespread criticism of the investigation into the assassination of the ruling party's presidential candidate, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari agreed today to an "exhaustive" re-examination of the case.
Speaking to reporters in Mexico City, Mr.
Salinas said he had appointed five lawyers and criminologists to review the inquiry, which was carried out by a special prosecutor, Miguel Montes Garcia, who resigned today.


U.S. Arms Subsidies Come Back to Kill Us
To the Editor:
The Defense Department and the Congressional Research Service report that in the seven years between 1986 and 1993, United States arms sales to foreign governments increased from $10 billion to a stunning $36.3 billion.


Art in Review
'In Memory of Douglas Morse Howell'
Washburn Gallery  20 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through July 29
During his long career, Douglas Morse Howell, who died in February at the age of 87, revived the art of handmade paper and initiated many artists into its mysteries.
Ann Ryan worked almost entirely with Howell papers, and after seeing her collages, Jackson Pollock, Lee Krasner and Alfonso Ossorio took them up, too, often commissioning Howell to make one-of-a-kind sheets with distinctive tints and textures.


Sacred Indian Sites
To the Editor:
It is heartening to know that Indian tribes are finding ways to strengthen their economies, their schools and their futures (front page, July 3).


Market Place; Are investors in semiconductor stocks living in the past?
THE common wisdom is that the semiconductor industry is heading into its annual summer doldrums, which are accentuated this year because the industry is at the bottom of a downturn in its traditional four-year cycle.
Indeed, a quarterly review of the stocks of 14 companies followed by analysts at Robertson Stephens &amp; Company showed that semiconductor stocks were down 2 percent on a year-to-date basis, and up only 2 percent compared with the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation's 400 index.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Pohang Iron and Steel Co., Seoul, South Korea, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell as much as $700 million of debt securities and common stock.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AT&amp;T CORP., Basking Ridge, N.J., announced a $150 million expansion of its NCR Microelectronics plant, in Fort Collins, Colo., that fabricates chips used in communications, peripherals and storage media.


Strawberry Shows Old Form With Slam
Giants 8, Expos 3
Darryl Strawberry hit his first homer in over a year, a grand slam, and drove in five runs last night as the San Francisco Giants won their fifth straight game, 8-3, over the Expos in Montreal.
Strawberry's two-out home run off Pedro Martinez (6-5) in the fifth was his first since June 8, 1993, for the Los Angeles Dodgers.
He was placed on the disabled list 10 days later because of back problems and missed the rest of the season.


Louisiana Pacific
Shares of the Louisiana-Pacific Corporation surged yesterday after the release of record second-quarter earnings of 75 cents a share, better than analysts' expectations of 73 cents.
The lumber and building products company, based in Portland, Ore., attributed its performance to strong housing starts, building permit applications and existing homes sales, indicative of an expanding economy.


King Wants Navratilova to Finish Year
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA may call it quits after the World Team Tennis season ends July 31, but her longtime friend and former rival BILLIE JEAN KING is trying to talk her out of it.
"I would like her to finish out the year, but this is something she needs think through; she needs to decide where she wants closure," King said last night in Florham Park, N.J.


Fund-Raiser Donated Office To Giuliani During Campaign
An East Side storefront donated for at least a month to Rudolph W. Giuliani's mayoral campaign by a real-estate executive was listed on campaign finance reports as a contribution worth $700, but the same space was recently rented to a pizza chain for $5,000 a month.
The storefront was donated by William W. Koeppel, the same real-estate executive who arranged apartments for 15 Giuliani administration and campaign officials, most of whom got their first two weeks to three months of occupancy without rent.


Maurice G. Hardy Manufacturing Executive, 64
Maurice G. Hardy, chairman of the Pall Corporation, a manufacturer of industrial and medical filters, died Sunday at his home in Old Brookville, L.I.
He was 64.
The cause was cancer, the corporation said in an announcement.


Anderson Leaves Knicks for Spain
The former University of Indiana forward ERIC ANDERSON, who spent the last two seasons with the Knicks, signed a contract with Andorra of the Spanish League's First Division on Wednesday.
The 6-foot-9-inch Anderson averaged 1.9 points and 1.5 rebounds in 11 games last season for the Knicks. (AP)


Tovar, 54, Dead; Played 9 Positions
Cesar Tovar, one of only two major leaguers to play all nine positions in a game, died yesterday in Venezuela.
He was 54.


Corrections
A brief report in the Real Estate column in Business Day on Wednesday about a lease signed by a group of men's wear manufacturers for space at 1350 Avenue of the Americas in Manhattan misstated the cross street.
The building is at 55th Street, not 54th Street.
The article also misstated the height of the building. It has 35 stories, not 55.


Microsoft Negotiating A Settlement With U.S.
The Microsoft Corporation is in detailed discussions with the Justice Department over a possible settlement of the Government's long-running antitrust investigation, people familiar with the case said last night.
The two sides are actively discussing a narrow range of issues in the hope of avoiding a broader and more protracted courtroom battle that would almost certainly last for years.


Wachovia Corp.(WB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
WHITNEY HOUSTON canceled a concert in Phoenix last night, saying that a recurring sore throat had been aggravated by the heat and dry air that she has experienced during the Southwestern swing of her tour.
The cancellation had nothing to do with her recent miscarriage, said Lynn Volkman, a Los Angeles spokeswoman for the pop singer.


Houghton Mifflin Co. (HTN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Greyhound to Concentrate On Shorter Regional Routes
In an announcement that marks the end of an era, Greyhound Lines Inc., unable to make money as the only nationwide bus system, said today that it would abandon most of its direct long-distance service and concentrate instead on regional routes of 400 miles or less.
What that means, said William Kula, a Greyhound spokesman, is "more New York-Boston, Dallas-Houston, Los Angeles-San Francisco, as opposed to Washington D.C. to Los Angeles or Chicago to Miami."


A War on Church and State


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. MAKING MOVES FOR HAITI ACTION
While insisting again that a United States invasion of Haiti is not imminent, the Clinton Administration continued today to lay the groundwork for such an action.
Elite Army paratroopers who would probably lead an invasion of Haiti stepped up night training exercises at Fort Bragg, N.C.
The Administration announced that 15 countries had signaled a willingness to join a multinational force that would maintain order and retrain Haiti's security forces after the current military government leaves.


CHRONICLE
Another chapter, this one happier than most in the recent annals of the British royal family, was written yesterday when Lady SARAH ARMSTRONG-JONES, 30, the daughter of Princess Margaret and Lord Snowdon, wed DANIEL CHATTO, 37.
The couple, both painters, were married in St.
Stephen's Walbrook, a small 17th-century church in London built by Sir Christopher Wren, The Press Association reported.
Reporters were kept at bay, so few details about the ceremony or the reception at Clarence House, the home of the Queen Mother in London, were available.


What More Can a Fan Ask From a Final?
Soccer: Love it or leave it, America.
That's really the only message necessary now, from those who love the sport to those new to it who have been watching the 1994 World Cup swirl colorfully around the United States for the past month.
Because with Brazil and Italy playing in Sunday's championship game, this should be about as brilliant as soccer gets.
Should be, if the Brazilians and Italians play as they did in winning their semifinal games Wednesday.
They showed once again that this is a sport about players, not tactics.
This is a sport that entrances you, if it does, because of the skill, the brains and the imagination of players creating and reacting instantaneously and instinctively on the field.


Bondholders' Triumph, Shareholders' Distress
The big winners in Federated Department Stores' deal to acquire R. H. Macy are the Macy bondholders, who are getting far more than they seemed likely to receive only a few months ago.
But the losers could yet be the Federated shareholders.
Federated and Macy each wound up in bankruptcy court largely because they overpaid for department stores in the heady days of the mid-1980's.
Macy and the Campeau Corporation ended up divvying up the old Federated in 1988, with Macy getting Bullock's and I. Magnin stores in the West and Campeau getting the rest, including Bloomingdale's.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Claimed Larry Casian, pitcher, off waivers from the Minnesota Twins.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Released Hubie Brooks, outfielder.
Activated Keith Miller, infielder, and Wally Joyner, first baseman, from the 60- and 15-day disabled lists, respectively.
Designated Nelson Santovenia, catcher, for assignment.


Chrysler Has Record Profit Once Again
With its profit margins widening on car and truck sales, the Chrysler Corporation reported today that its earnings jumped almost 40 percent in the second quarter, to $956 million, a company record for any quarter.
The auto maker said its profits increased because of an improved mix in its sales: a greater proportion of truck sales, which tend to be more profitable because trucks are in shorter supply, and a declining proportion of fleet sales, which are less profitable because fleets buy in bulk.


Anthem Electronics Inc.(ATM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ex-Prince Firmly Fixed In the Present
Since Prince has changed his name to an unpronounceable glyph, tickets for his two-night stand night at the Palladium were billed as "Art. Frmly Knwn as Prince." Calling for encores, the crowd chanted, "We want" followed by two high whoops.
Under any name, he delivered both too little and too much on Wednesday night: one album's worth of songs stretched to two and a half hours of music.
He had announced he would be playing only new material in these benefit concerts for the Harlem Dance Theater.
But fans who had paid $60 per ticket were still hoping for an old hit or two.
They didn't get any; only his current hit, "The Most Beautiful Girl in the World," and "Peach," from his 1993 boxed set, were familiar.
Songs led into guitar solos, keyboard solos, audience call-and-response bits and, after false endings, the same old vamp.
During one encore, after 2 A.M., he extended a song while he appeared in a succession of silly hats.
As catchy new songs like "Days of Wild" and "Acknowledge Me" stretched out, the star's self-indulgence came through as clearly as his abundant musical gifts.


Editor Named At New Woman
Betsy Carter, executive editor of Harper's Bazaar, has been appointed editor in chief of New Woman, a publication of K-III Magazines.
She succeeds Karen Walden, who has left the company.
Ms.
Carter, who joined Harper's Bazaar in 1993, had been an associate editor of Newsweek, where she spent nine years, and editorial director of Esquire, where she spent six years.
She headed the creative team that produced Esquire's New York Woman in 1986; the magazine ceased publication in 1992.


Hunt (J.B.) Transport Services Inc.(JBHT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
"I don't have to look for something to wear, I don't have to go through that, 'Oh God, what suit, what blouse, what skirt?"' ANTONIA PATTON a dress-down day advocate.  [ B2:3. ]


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; For Mercedes-Benz, a rebound in U.S. sales means it's time to realign a marketing effort.
MERCEDES-BENZ of North America is significantly reorganizing its marketing communications functions in ways that will fundamentally affect relationships with the agencies on its estimated $120 million American account, Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS of New York and the Martin Agency of Richmond.
The changes involve Lowe assuming many duties now handled by Martin, thereby streamlining operations and, it is hoped, increasing the efficiencies and effectiveness of Mercedes-Benz's sales pitches.
The moves might also include offering local dealer groups a new option of hiring local agencies.


Art in Review
'1969: A Year Revisited'
Grey Art Gallery and Study Center  33 Washington Place  Greenwich Village  Through July 22
The idea behind this exhibition, to create a snapshot of a single year in American art, is a good one, and what a year 1969 was, with Woodstock, gay liberation, the Manson killings, the walk on the moon and widespread student protests against the war in Vietnam all careering together in a truly manic pileup.


Art in Review
'Drawing on Sculpture'
Cohen Gallery  1018 Madison (near 78th Street)  Through July 28
This exhibition rounds up drawings and prints by suspects usual and not, for one of the more impressive group shows of the summer.
An etching by Marcel Duchamp and a beautifully diagrammatic study by Josef Beuys, as well as works by Claes Oldenburg, Louise Bourgeois and Dan Flavin, remind us that most sculptors are at ease in two dimensions.
Bruce Nauman's nonchalant way with pencil and paper is shown to have more than a few adherents, including Michael Joo, Marc Quinn and Damien Hirst.


Why Driving in New York Thwarts the Air-Conditioned Taxi
To the Editor:
We in the taxicab industry share the utopian dream of a "cool, comfortable ride" mentioned in "Wanted: An Air-Conditioned Taxi" (editorial, July 6).
Unfortunately, we must face the reality of driving 12-hour shifts on the streets of New York.


Flora Tobin Bryant Wedding and Party Planner, 84
Flora Tobin Bryant, a wedding and party planner who also wrote about both subjects, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Bridgeport.
She was 84 and lived in Fairfield, Conn.
The cause was a heart attack, said her lawyer, Richard J. Fricke.


Schulman (A.) (SHLM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Students Seeking Damages for Sex Bias
Two years after the Supreme Court ruled that students could sue schools for monetary damages for sexual harassment or sex discrimination, the first round of cases is nearing trial -- and schools across the country are watching closely, worried about their potential liability.
No one has won any significant money yet.
And because the field is so new, there is still widespread uncertainty about how offensive the behavior must be before a student has a right to damages, how a school should respond to complaints of harassment or discrimination and when a school is responsible for one student harassing another.


Asylum Process Slights Chinese Refugees
To the Editor:
You identify discrimination against Haitian boat people in President Clinton's announced policy of denying them refuge in the United States even if they qualify for political asylum (editorial, July 7).
But what about the Chinese boat people, who are treated even more shabbily under the President's immigration policies?


Ex-Dolphin Joins Another Miami Team
The former Miami Dolphins receiver MARK DUPER has signed with the Miami Hooters of the Arena Football League.
Duper, 35, makes his debut July 23 in Miami against the Orlando Predators.
He will be teamed with a former Dolphins teammate, running back JIM JENSEN. (AP)


J. P. Morgan's Net Fell 18.8% in 2d Quarter
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company, the nation's third-largest banking company, said yesterday that its earnings declined 18.8 percent in the second quarter, below security analysts' projections, largely because of a big drop in trading revenues.
Net income fell to $350 million, or $1.73 a share, from $431 million, or $2.12 a share, in the corresponding quarter of 1993.
For the first half of this year, profits dropped 4.3 percent, to $695 million, or $3.43 a share, from $726 million, or $4.27 a share, before the effect of an accounting change, in the comparable period a year ago.


Revco D.S. (RXR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Burmese Junta Offering U.S. An Opium Warlord for Arms
The generals who run Myanmar are making an offer that they hope the United States will find impossible to resist: lift the arms embargo against this country and the army will bring down the opium warlord responsible for most of the heroin sold on American streets.
The new offer, which military officials here say has been broached with State Department officials in recent weeks, is not expected to sway the Clinton Administration, which has repeatedly expressed disdain for the junta and its human rights record.


Soccer Stays After Cup, Without Some Stars
Major League Soccer, a new professional league, is supposed to be the legacy the 1994 World Cup will leave in the United States.
Today, with only 7 of a planned 12 teams having been announced for the start of play next April, American soccer officials called formation of a new league a challenge but a realistic one.
"The moment the World Cup is over, we will go into high gear with M.L.S.," Alan Rothenberg, the president of the United States Soccer Federation and chairman of the new league, said at a news conference today.
"The World Cup has given us a good platform to build on, but it's not going to be easy. Putting the World Cup on was easy. Putting a league together is going to be more difficult, more challenging." League to Control Teams
Rothenberg, who is also the chief operating officer of World Cup USA-94, announced today that the league had signed a contract for at least four years with Nike to outfit six of the league's 12 teams and that the sporting goods company Mitre would provide the league's official ball.


As Germans Parade in Paris, Some Cheer, a Few Are Chilled
Stirring painful memories among many who lived through Germany's wartime occupation of France, German troops paraded down the Champs-Elysees today for the first time in 50 years, guests of an aging French President eager to stress reconciliation.
The 200 officers and men from the 10th Panzer Division, riding in armored personnel vehicles marked with a discreet German military cross, were barely noticeable among the 6,200 soldiers from four nations taking part in this year's Bastille Day parade.
Only a few protests were heard.


Macy Board Backs Federated Tie To End a Department Store Era
After a seven-month struggle to retain its independence, R. H. Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that its board had endorsed a merger with Federated Department Stores Inc. that will get Macy out of bankruptcy protection early next year and create the largest department-store company in the country.
"It's the end of the longest-running soap opera in retailing history," said Walter F. Loeb, a retail consultant.


O'Sullivan Corp.(OSL,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Schwarzenegger As a Walter Mitty With Weapons
THE director James ("Terminator") Cameron has accomplished many a neat trick on screen, but nothing to match this: turning Arnold Schwarzenegger and Jamie Lee Curtis, most delightfully, into the Nick and Nora Charles of the heavy-demolition set.
By the end of "True Lies," the long-awaited escapist high of the summer movie season, these two stars are gamely tangoing on the dance floor and looking proud of their fancy footwork.
As well they should.
Which is not to say that "True Lies" stints on special effects for the sake of its main characters, even if (by the standards of action films, anyway) those characters are unusually appealing.
Mr.
Cameron's latest, giddiest roller-coaster ride also offers many occasions for gripping the armrests and reminding oneself that this is only a movie.
A furiously inventive, thrill-packed movie in which a fight sequence looks real even if it takes place high above Miami, in midair.


3d Man Arrested in Robbery At an East Side Bridal Shop
A third suspect linked to the robbery and shooting of a Maryland couple at the Vera Wang Bridal House on Madison Avenue in March was arrested and charged with robbery yesterday, the city's top officials announced yesterday at an elaborate news conference at City Hall.
The couple, Edith and Gerald Schaeffer, flew to New York yesterday to join other witnesses in viewing a lineup.
Police officials said three of the witnesses identified the suspect, Sandor Sebok, 39, but they would not say which ones.
A law enforcement official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that members of the Schaeffer family also testified yesterday before a grand jury in the Manhattan District Attorney's office.


IP Timberlands Ltd. (IPT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Rest for the Weary: Brazil Focuses on Italy
The hotel lobby was a gantlet: reporters, television cameramen, autograph seekers, World Cup officials, security guards and understandably curious guests.
Technically, the Brazilian players were supposed to have this afternoon off for sightseeing or lounging.
The reality was that their massive entourage had no intention of letting them rest: not in the wake of Wednesday's semifinal victory over Sweden; not with only three days remaining until the biggest soccer match for Brazil in 24 years.


Larry Hogue Is Arrested In Westchester
Larry Hogue, a symbol of New York State's failure to effectively treat mentally ill drug addicts, was apprehended yesterday at a bank in New Rochelle, just a day after he fled a state mental hospital where he had been held since September.
Mr.
Hogue walked off the grounds of the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Queens on the same morning that his doctors there met to discuss plans for releasing him to a supervised residence as early as next week, state officials said.


Jordan Asked to Help Locate New Jersey Murder Suspect
New Jersey officials asked Jordanian diplomats in Washington yesterday for help in the pursuit of a murder suspect who authorities think fled to his native Jordan with his two children a day after he strangled his estranged wife.
Law-enforcement officials believe the suspect, Mohammad Abequa, 45, considers Jordan a safe haven because the United States does not have an extradition treaty with Jordan and Jordan is not legally obliged to honor the Morris County arrest warrant for Mr.
Abequa.


Don King Indicted for Fraud Over Insurance
Don King, the flamboyant boxing promoter with the signature stack of stiff gray hair, was indicted yesterday by a Federal grand jury in Manhattan on wire fraud charges involving hundreds of thousands of dollars of fraudulent insurance claims.
In a nine-count indictment, the 62-year-old King was charged with defrauding Lloyd's of London by submitting phony expenses and contracts from a canceled championship fight in 1991 that involved Julio Cesar Chavez, the World Boxing Council superlightweight and junior welterweight champion under contract to King, and Harold Brazier.


Merchants See Modest Boom In Business From World Cup
They might not have known a header from a penalty kick, a Baggio from a Romario, but hotels, restaurants, souvenir stands and other businesses in the region apparently had no trouble recognizing the traveler's checks tendered by visitors to the World Cup.
Officials said today that the games at Giants Stadium, the last of which was played on Wednesday night, had pumped $450 million to $500 million into the area's economy, including nearly $200 million in New York City.
Those figures landed in the middle of predictions made before the World Cup started here on June 18.


An Unknown Surprises as Faldo Flops
To say that the first round of the British Open today at the Ailsa Course was eventful would be like saying Scottish weather is a wee bit unpredictable.
On a day that began bright and breezy and ended in a windblown shroud of cold mist straight out of a Bronte novel, there were low rounds by unfamiliar names, there was Tom Watson on the leaderboard and John Daly in some spots where drives have never before been imagined, much less seen.


Cortines Assails Giuliani Budget As an Austerity Plan for Schools
New York City's public schools will have less to spend on everything from painting walls to preventing hallway fights next year as a result of cuts imposed by the Giuliani administration to balance the city's budget, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday.
But Mr.
Cortines acknowledged in a memo to the Board of Education that the financial outlook for the school system, although gloomy, is not as bad as it looked a month ago, when some school officials were predicting the layoffs of hundreds of teachers.


Pentair Inc.(PNTA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Restaurants
On a sultry summer day, when it is hard to remember a single good thing about life in New York City, the best advice I've got is: Go to the Rainbow Room.
The Rainbow Room is a dazzling bit of fantasy where bands play without stopping, the dance floor revolves and men in fabulous clothes set fire to ice cream.
The magic begins the instant you enter the lobby.
The marble halls of Rockefeller Center are dark and hushed in the evening.
The elevators are lined with wood and even the buttons are beautiful.
When the doors open on the 65th floor, you find yourself in a long glass, ebony and mahogany hall that makes you feel you have stepped right into a 1930's movie set.
No matter what you saw the last time you looked into a mirror, you now feel chic, beautiful and sophisticated.


American Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Montes Claros Journal; A Brazilian Juggernaut Whistle-Stops the Jungle
In the depth of winter in Brazil's backlands, a bright 85-degree sun beats down on the dusty green hills, driving even the lizards to seek the shade.
But dozens of people are gathered at midday at a highway intersection here, their bicycles, motorcycles, cars and pickup trucks festooned with red banners.
An hour of waiting is rewarded when a tour bus appears through the shimmering heat on the asphalt horizon.
A sound truck leads the way into town, blaring between riffs of Brazilian rap music: "Every worker to Portugal Square. Meet the first worker president in the history of Brazil."


How the Chengs Finessed Trump
It may be one of the last big real estate deals in New York City, but to Henry Cheng, Riverside South, the multibillion-dollar joint venture that could transform Manhattan's largest buildable waterfront land into a community of 16 largely upscale apartment towers along with shops and parks, is just another development.
"In Hong Kong, China, we've done bigger projects than this, much bigger," said Mr.
Cheng, a man parsimonious with words.
He and his father, Cheng Yu-tong, have built one of Hong Kong's biggest global property and project development conglomerates, with substantial holdings stretching across Asia and into the United States.


INSIDE
Mental Patient Recaptured
Larry Hogue, a symbol of failure in the treatment of mentally ill drug addicts, was found a day after he fled a Queens mental hospital.
Page B1.
Intriguing Heart Finding
Researchers have drawn an unexpected link between heart disease and cancer in a study that could lead to new treatments.
Page A16.
Sex Bias Suits by Students
Two years after the Supreme Court ruled that students could sue schools for sexual harassment or bias, the first cases are nearing trial.
Page B7.
Nigerians Defy Military Rule
Pushing for the military to give power back to an elected civilian government, millions of Nigerians stayed away from work.
Page A10.


Women in Colombia Move to Job Forefront
In 1933, the fathers of this country grudgingly agreed to a novel experiment by allowing a woman to enroll in a Colombian university.
Six decades later, women outnumber men in the universities, 52 percent to 48 percent.
In the mid-1960's, ignoring opposition from the quasi-official Roman Catholic Church, social workers started to introduce family planning.
Three decades later, the average Colombian woman has 2.7 children, about one-third the 1964 level of 7.4.


Acme Metals Inc.(ACME,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26





Time, Not Drugs, Is Called Best for an Ear Ailment
A Federal agency recommended today that doctors be less aggressive in prescribing antibiotics for small children with fluid in the middle ear because the condition often clears up by itself.
The condition, otitis media with effusion, or "glue ear," afflicts more than six million children a year.
It is characterized by fluid in the middle ear and fluctuating or temporary hearing loss, but no sign of infection.


Damark International Inc.(DMRK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


3 Arrested in Smuggling Cocaine Found in Newark Cargo
On Tuesday night, Francisco Delgado parked his Lincoln Town Car at 29th Street and Broadway in Manhattan, and began walking away.
But before he had gotten more than a block, United States Customs Service agents grabbed him.


German Troops Join a Bastille Day Parade in Paris


Courier and Sampras Set To Get Davis Cup Rolling
The United States Davis Cup team went for a boat ride today, an appropriate diversion in one of the world's busiest seaports.
The occasion was the ceremonial draw for a World Group quarterfinal match against the Dutch this weekend.
The American squad disembarked satisfied with the order of play for Friday's opening two singles matches on a Plexipave hard court in the 12,000-seat temporary stadium built on a pier jutting into the harbor.


CHRONICLE
LEON FLEISHER, the pianist and conductor, was in for a surprise when he arrived for a rehearsal Wednesday with the Grant Park Symphony Orchestra in Chicago.
"I knew that the harpist in the orchestra is my daughter-in-law KAYO FLEISHER, but on this program there were several pieces that require two harps, so my son RICHARD finagled a way to be the second harp," he said.
"When I came in, there they were, both sitting on the stage."


Home Shopping Network Inc.(HSN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Optimism Ignites a Stock and Bond Rally
Stocks and bonds rallied yesterday in their best session in weeks, riding the crest of investor optimism brought on by low inflation data, a stabilizing dollar and some solid second-quarter corporate profits.
The bond market led stocks higher, beginning a surge yesterday morning after the Government reported that retail sales rose a modest six-tenths of 1 percent in June, providing more evidence that the economy was not overheating.
This, combined with other reports this week that showed inflation to be under control, eased traders' concerns that the Federal Reserve would soon raise interest rates once again.
Bond Prices Rise
As bond prices rose, interest rates fell, pushing the yield down to 7.53 percent, from 7.67 percent on Wednesday.
Lower interest rates make stocks a more attractive investment.


Scrambling for Votes on Health Care
The process of melding a health insurance bill is nine parts cultivation, one part inspiration.
And maybe one part rumor.
The two majority leaders, Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, are cultivating their colleagues in one meeting after another.
They listen, probe and occasionally focus attention back on their goal: finding a formula that would promise health insurance to all Americans and would be acceptable to Congress.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lendl Returns, Rallies  Ivan Lendl, sidelined since May with back pain, returned last night and advanced with a 4-6, 6-2, 6-3 victory over Jim Grabb in the United States Pro Tennis Championships in Brookline, Mass.
Lendl, who had not played since losing to Arnaud Boetsch in the first round of the French Open, advanced to the quarterfinals.
He was down a set and trailing by 2-1 in the second set when he won six straight games.
The defending champion Greg Hamilton of Canoe Brook was the only other player threatening the lead when play at the Metedeconk National Golf Club in Jackson, N.J., was stopped.
He was just one shot off the lead with three holes to play.
Play is scheduled to resume at 8 A.M. today. (AP) Winged Foot Pairs Ahead: Tim Lucas and Ted Seelye of the host Winged Foot Golf Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y., shot 67-71-138 to top 32 teams that began match play in the Anderson Memorial Tournament yesterday.
J.
P.
O'Hara and Neil Christie, also of Winged Foot, had 69-72-141 to share second place in the qualifying with Terry McBride and Jim Craffey of the Arcola Country Club in Paramus, N.J., who had 68-73-141.
FIELD HOCKEY  U.S.
Surprises England  Barbara Marois scored from a 59th minute penalty corner shot yesterday to give the United States a surprising 1-0 victory over favored England in the women's field hockey World Cup in Dublin.
In a desperate final 20 minutes, England repeatedly pressured the goal, only to be turned back by a stout American defense, with goalkeeper Patty Shea forced to make seven saves.
The Americans were not considered a threat, clinching the last of the 12 qualifying places and being beaten by England, 2-0, two months ago. (AP)


Change for a Dollar
America's currency is too easily counterfeited on modern copiers, but politicians and bureaucrats have feared a mass public uprising if they ever dared tinker with the people's greenbacks.
Now, finally, the Treasury is redesigning the $100 bill, and will then redo all the rest, down to the lowly dollar.
Having conquered their fear of changing, they should do more: Replace the $1 bill with a coin.
The currency redesign is well conceived.
Visible changes will include an enlarged portrait moved left of center, and a translucent watermark portrait of the same person right of center -- similar to France's paper francs.
Invisible changes include tricks the Treasury is not talking about.
The new bills will be the same size and color as the old, with the same patriots' portraits.


A Deal for Shoppers? Only if They Notice It
Maricela Garcia, whose job is to launch bursts of perfume in the general direction of arms passing through the cosmetics department at Macy's, has not toted up the big-bucks numbers behind the merger her bosses are planning.
All she wants to know is, what will they call the Thanksgiving Day parade?
"The Macy's-Federated-Bloomingdale's-A&amp;S parade?" she wondered, smoothing her white smock.
"It's a mouthful," she said.


Whitman Corp.(WH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Creating a Retailing Empire
R.
H.
Macy's board endorsed a merger with Federated Department Stores that will get Macy out of bankruptcy protection and create the largest U.S. department-store company.  [ Page A1. ]


Maurice G. Hardy Manufacturing Executive, 64
Maurice G. Hardy, chairman of the Pall Corporation, a manufacturer of industrial and medical filters, died Sunday at his home in Old Brookville, L.I.
He was 64.
The cause was cancer, the corporation said in an announcement.


Fitzpatrick Charged: Domestic Battery
Florida Panthers goaltender MARK FITZPATRICK was arrested in Islamorada, Fla., after his pregnant wife, SUSAN, told authorities he kicked, grabbed and shoved her during an argument, the authorities said.
He was charged with aggravated domestic battery, spent the night in jail and was released after posting $15,000 bond, the Monroe County Sheriff's Department said yesterday.


Tyco Is Acquiring Kendall In $1.4 Billion Stock Swap
Tyco International Ltd., said yesterday that it would acquire Kendall International Inc., a maker of disposable medical products, in a stock swap valued at $1.4 billion.
Tyco, a maker of fire protection systems, optic fiber and other products, will pay as much as $60.45 worth of its common stock for each of Kendall's 23.4 million shares.
Tyco, based in Exeter, N.H., said it expected that the merger would be a tax-free transaction that would not dilute its per-share earnings.


Pippen Wants to Stay With the Bulls
SCOTTIE PIPPEN, the subject of numerous trade rumors before and after last month's draft, said yesterday he would like to remain with the Chicago Bulls.
"I know that as a professional, I can be traded at any time," Pippen said.
"I was shocked during the draft when my name was bandied about as to a possible trade. I have not, however, scheduled any meeting with Bulls owner JERRY REINSDORF. I plan to spend the rest of the summer on vacation. Hopefully, I'll be back with the Bulls."


Griffey's Backward Cap Still in the Forefront
Poor Randy Johnson and Rich Gossage.
They forgot to turn their caps backward on the way out to Mariners batting practice tonight, and for failing to conform to team policy, they became instant ribbing material for Ken Griffey Jr.
"Hey!" Griffey yelled as the Seattle pitchers promptly twisted their caps around.
He nodded.
"That's it," he said.
"That's more like it."


Players Prepare New Topics
Union representatives will be no more enamored of a salary cap on Monday than they have been on every other day they have met with negotiators for baseball's club owners.
But the discussion at the next bargaining session could be more telling than previous meetings.
After a session in Manhattan yesterday at which non-salary-cap issues were discussed, a Players Association representative said the union had some concepts it will present at Monday's meeting if the owners' negotiators are willing to discuss them.


Rev. George Riddick, 61, Dies; Advocate for Poor in Chicago
The Rev.
George Edgar Riddick, a civil rights advocate long associated with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's Operation PUSH, died on Tuesday at his home in Chicago.
He was 61.
The cause was a heart attack, said the organization, which is in Chicago.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE SISTERS ROSENSWEIG," Ethel Barrymore Theater, 243 West 47th Street, Manhattan.
A comedy-drama by Wendy Wasserstein about an American banker in London and her two younger sisters, who gather to celebrate her birthday; starring Michael Learned, Linda Lavin and Tony Roberts; directed by Daniel Sullivan.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M. and tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Bard (C.R.) Inc.(BCR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Retail Sales Tepid, Spurring the Markets
Consumers increased their spending at retail counters by a tepid six-tenths of 1 percent in June, a smaller rebound than expected from two straight months of decline and confirmation that this engine of economic growth is running low on steam.
"The consumer has backed off from the first-quarter buying binge," said Martin A. Regalia, chief economist for the United States Chamber of Commerce, referring to the Government's report on sales last month that also included a downward revision for May.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the proposed merger between Federated Department Stores Inc. and R. H. Macy &amp; Company misstated the value of the package of securities and cash that Federated offered to Macy's bondholders in some editions.
It is valued at about $482 million, not $4 billion.


Cara Operations reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Corrections
A correction in this space on June 4 about a picture caption describing President Clinton's signing of a bill to limit abortion protests misspelled the surname of a member of Congress.
She is Representative Constance A. Morella.


Health Management Associates (HMA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Anti-Scandal Magistrates in Italy Challenge New Government Move
The magistrates whose corruption investigations brought down Italy's political old guard challenged Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi today, asking to be reassigned rather than work under a new Government decree that could free hundreds of suspects from jail.
The magistrates' decision, announced by Antonio Di Pietro, an investigating magistrate who is a national hero for his role in corruption inquiries that ended a political era, threatened Italy with its most serious crisis since Mr.
Berlusconi and his right-wing allies won power in elections in March as the champions of a new political order.


Gubernatorial Convention to Open
Three candidates for governor are coming to the Democratic convention that opens here Friday night, all pledging to unify the party, which finished last in 1990's three-way race won by Lowell P. Weicker Jr.
But not one is pledged to accept their convention's decision, and a primary is all but certain.
The contest is a struggle to win back voters whose loyalties were weakened by a Governor allied with neither major party; by Ross Perot's 1992 campaign for President, and by the harsh actions that the Democratic-controlled Legislature took during the state's fiscal crisis.


Dover Corp.(DOV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Strikes Spread As Nigerians Defy Military
Pressure on Nigeria's military authorities increased today as a 10-day-old strike in the oil-and-gas industry spread into a nationwide stoppage that almost crippled commerce and transportation.
In a bold act to press the military to give power back to an elected civilian government, millions of people stayed away from work today despite warnings from the Government that such a strike was illegal.
Leaders of the strike vowed to continue the protest until the military gives up power.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  REFUGEES POUR OUT OF RWANDA  Rwanda's Hutu leaders fled before a Tutsi-led rebel offensive, and Red Cross officials said more than half a million people poured into Zaire, prompting urgent pleas for aid.
A1  The U.N. issued another appeal for a Rwanda cease-fire.
A10


Young Choreographers Get a Chance to Shine
The American Dance Festival presented its annual Young Choreographers and Composers in Residence program on Wednesday night at the Reynolds Industries Theater.
It was an evening of dances about grass, stone and water.
The works were the result of a five-week residency at Duke University supervised by Martha Myers and Thomas Cabaniss.
During this period, three choreographers, members of their companies and three composers were given rehearsal space that they could use at any time of day or night.


For Soccer Enthusiasts, Grass Means More Green


New Age Begins: Baseball by the Shuttle System
The All-Star Game Tuesday night from Pittsburgh barely indicated the hardships, or challenges, that The Baseball Network (TBN) will face starting tomorrow night.
One game, with three announcers, is a mere bag of shells to produce, compared with telecasting 13 games, all but one being played simultaneously.
How successfully TBN performs in producing games of interest to local fans while blending in taped highlights and live cut-ins from other games will determine whether baseball looks smart or stupid for entering its joint venture with ABC and NBC.
The partnership will earn owners about $5 million per team, down from about $10 million per club from CBS during the past four years.


Former Salomon Trader To Pay $1.1 Million Fine
A former top trader at Salomon Brothers Inc. has agreed to pay a $1.1 million fine and accepted a permanent ban from the securities industry for his role in a 1991 Treasury bond auction scandal, the Securities and Exchange Commission announced today.
Paul W. Mozer, the former head of Salomon's Government securities trading, has already served four months in jail on criminal charges stemming from the scandal.
He agreed to the fine and ban in settling a civil lawsuit filed by the commission.


Packers Put Out Hefty Pact For Favre
Brett Favre, a 24-year-old quarterback in his fourth National Football League season, knows where his next meal is coming from.
Yesterday, the Green Bay Packers quarterback signed a five-year contract worth $19 million to $20 million.
Favre was a restricted free agent.
Next year, he could have become an unrestricted free agent, meaning he could sign with any other team.
Instead, the Packers kept him with a contract that, The Green Bay Press-Gazette reported, included these provisions:


Skier in Critical Condition After Accident
LINA CHERJAZOVA of Uzbekistan, the Olympic gold medalist in women's aerial skiing, was in critical condition yesterday, one day after she slammed the back of her head onto the 125-foot jumping ramp during practice in Lake Placid, N.Y.
Hospital officials declined to say whether she had regained consciousness since the accident, which occurred on a water jump at the Olympic ski jumping complex.
Cherjazova, 25, is the dominant woman in freestyle skiing and won the gold medal at Lillehammer, Norway, in February.
Later that day, she was told that her mother had died.
Two years ago, she won eight World Cup events.
Last year, she captured six.


Nigerian Democracy, Under Arrest
Nigeria can be described as a giant-size country under pint-size military rule.
A year ago, Nigeria's generals decided to allow their people a whiff of democracy under highly controlled circumstances.
Two political parties were formed under military tutelage; two carefully screened candidates were allowed to contest the presidency.
Even so, when voters failed to approve the regime's first choice, the military ruler broke his promises, annulled the election and robbed the presumed winner, Moshood Abiola, of victory.
The result has been a grass-roots pro-democratic uprising that the current military clique has been unable to quell.
The crisis deepened a few weeks ago when Mr.
Abiola, a Muslim and millionaire with a following in Nigeria's non-Muslim south, proclaimed himself President on the first anniversary of the canceled election.
For that he was charged with treason, held incommunicado and threatened with a life sentence.
When a federal high court judge twice ordered the military to produce Mr.
Abiola in open court, the junta ignored the order.


METRO DIGEST
DRESSING FOR SUCCESS? TAKE A BREATHER
They sweat into their summer wool suits and walk inside unbending shoes, ignoring comfort and common sense because convention, and their employers, expect them to dress up at work.
But even convention can come unbound on a Friday in mid-July.
Increasingly, corporate America is loosening its tie -- or discarding it -- for one casual, comfortable day a week.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Student Loan Marketing Association (SLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yanks Start Second Half With Stirring Comeback
Jim Abbott handed the ball to Buck Showalter in the fifth inning tonight.
The Yankees manager was booed.
The Yankees starter was headed for the clubhouse.
It was 7-1, Seattle, a game apparently gone sour quickly.
What kind of second-half opener was this?


Armenians Suffer Painfully in War, But With Pride and Determination
Life rarely gets much worse than this in the struggling countries of the former Soviet Union: surrounded by enemies, paralyzed by war, Armenia has no working industry, inflation so high that people carry their cash in shopping bags and electricity only two hours a day.
Hot water is rare.
Gasoline costs nearly 30 times as much as in Azerbaijan, the neighboring country that Armenia has been unofficially at war with for six years.
Bread lines are common.
Even the good news is bad news in disguise.
Glorious summer vegetables are cheap and plentiful now, thanks mostly to a total blockade that has made it impossible to do anything with local produce but eat it as soon as it is harvested.


Ruined Life as Romanian Metaphor
Communism may have been overthrown in Eastern Europe, but its disappearance seems to have left whole populations conditioned to see themselves as oppressed and helpless.
The disappointment of discovering that freedom doesn't immediately cancel the old paranoid mind-set is a theme that literally screams and shouts through "The Conjugal Bed," Mircea Daneliuc's harshly surreal comedy of life in post-Communist Romania.
Much of the shouting is done by the film's unsympathetic main character, Vasile (Gheorghe Dinica), who runs a decrepit movie theater that shows American films.
Learning that his wife, Carolina (Coca Bloos), is pregnant with a third child they can't afford, he bullies her into trying to abort by jumping off a dresser.
When that doesn't work, he fantasizes about finding a way to sell the child abroad.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.22
3.13
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.27
4.39
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.66
4.81
3.12
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.22
7.38
5.70
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.53
7.67
6.56
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.48
7.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.44
6.50
5.69
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Miscellany
*
Home Shopping Network Inc., St.
Petersburg, Fla., and Kevin Harrington have formed a joint venture called HSN Direct to produce infomercials worldwide.
Mr.
Harrington, who will be president and chief executive of HSN Direct, was previously an executive vice president of National Media Corp., Philadelphia, an infomercial producer.
Also joining HSN as chief operating officer is Bob Swift, who was previously senior vice president of marketing at Turner Broadcasting Sales Inc., Atlanta. *
Leo Burnett Worldwide has merged its operations in Adelaide, Australia, with Andrew Robertson Advertising, Adelaide.
The terms were not disclosed.
The new agency, Robertson Leo Burnett/Adelaide, will operate from Burnett's current office.
Andrew Robertson, managing partner at Robertson, will head the new shop.


Smith (A.O.) Corp.(SMC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alfred E. Clark; Reporter, 80
Alfred E. Clark, a reporter for The New York Times for more than 40 years, died on Tuesday at St.
Clare's Hospital.
He lived in Manhattan and was 80 years old.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his wife, Frances.


Executive Changes
BANKERS TRUST CO., New York, named Bluford H. Putnam managing director and chief strategist of its global investment management group.
DATA BROADCASTING CORP., New York, named Mark Imperiale executive vice president and chief financial officer, succeeding Stephen W. Ellis, who assumes the new position of executive vice president of administration.


Art in Review
'Divine Protection' 'Batak Art of North Sumatra'
Metropolitan Museum of Art  Fifth Avenue at 82d Street  Through Dec. 31
Art gets divvied up in museums in interesting ways.
Why, one might ask, is the small exhibition "Divine Protection: Batak Art of North Sumatra" installed in the Michael C. Rockefeller Wing, which is devoted to art of the Pacific Islands, Africa and the Americas, when most of the Metropolitan Museum of Art's sculpture from Sumatra's neighbor Java is to be found in the Irving Galleries of South Asian and Southeast Asian Art?


Los Angeles Prosecutors Delay A Decision on Simpson's Friend
Prosecutors today put off a decision on whether to charge Al Cowlings with aiding and abetting a fugitive when he and his friend O. J. Simpson led the police on a 50-mile-long freeway chase a month ago.
The delay, announced by Suzanne Childs, a spokeswoman for District Attorney Gil Garcetti, came less than 24 hours before Mr.
Cowlings's scheduled arraignment and suggested that the prosecutors might seek a postponement of the hearing.


Let Five Senators Forgo Health Care Coverage; Small-Business Owner
To the Editor:
I watch the debate over President Clinton's universal health care plan and am appalled by the exaggeration by self-interest groups spending large sums to discount the true intent and meaning of health care for all -- it confuses me how any American can deny access to those who have not.
While the details of accomplishing this are still being formulated, as a small-business owner I believe in this plan enough that I am willing to pay my share, no matter the costs, to assure that those who cannot afford health care may have coverage.
The simplicity of the plan, and the security it offers to all in America, will create equal opportunity for health care and particularly for America's children.


Pulitzer Publishing Co.  (PTZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Bosnia Envoy To Get German Post
Charles E. Redman, the Administration's special envoy to the Bosnia peace talks, will become the new United States Ambassador to Germany, Administration officials said today.
President Clinton informed Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany last week of the decision to name Mr.
Redman, a career foreign service officer, to the post.


Accounts
*
Demaine, Vickers, Alexandria, Va., was awarded two accounts with combined billings estimated at $1.7 million: Pulte Home Corp.
Virginia division, Fairfax, previously at Boscobel Advertising, Kensington, Md., and Karten's Jewelers, New Bedford, Mass., previously in-house. *
Century Boat Co., Panama City, Fla., to Laughlin/Constable Inc., Milwaukee, to handle its account, previously handled by various agencies on a project basis.
Billings were not disclosed.


Seagate Technology Inc.(SGAT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Rwandan Refugees Flood Zaire as Rebel Forces Gain
Rwanda's Hutu leadership fled today before a Tutsi-led rebel offensive, and a wave of refugees poured into Zaire, prompting urgent appeals from international relief agencies unprepared to deal with the staggering number of refugees.
More than half a million Rwandans had fled into Zaire in the last 24 hours, the International Committee of the Red Cross in the Zairian border town of Goma said late this afternoon.


Let Five Senators Forgo Health Care Coverage; Tax Gas to Pay for It
To the Editor:
Assuming that Congress and the Administration can agree on a health care reform package, there will still be the problem of paying for it.
Cigarettes are already one of the most highly taxed commodities but provide far less revenue than would a tax on gasoline, which might also help to reduce health care costs by reducing the risk of another oil-related recession.
EDWARD RENSHAW  Prof. of Economics, SUNY-Albany Albany, July 5, 1994


Angels Who Perform Miracles at the Ball Park
"Angels in the Outfield," this summer's second baseball movie intended for a family audience, is a big dripping scoop of marshmallow sentiment topped with whipped-cream spirituality.
Updated from the 1951 film starring Paul Douglas as George Knox, a hard-hearted baseball coach, the new version has a glowering Danny Glover in the role of Knox, who is now the bitter, scowling manager of the California Angels.
The Angels, who are in last place, are so bad that their playing is buffoonish.
But with some unexpected heavenly intervention, they begin performing wondrous feats.
What transforms the team from pathetic clowns into heroic ones is a little boy's fervent prayer.
When Roger (Joseph Gordon-Levitt), an 11-year-old foster child, hears his father, a drifter, sarcastically remark that the chances of the family's reuniting are as good as those of the Angels winning the pennant, the boy takes it as a promise.
That night, Roger prays to a star for the Angels to win the pennant, and it twinkles back at him.
The very next day, winged, white-robed seraphim, visible only to Roger, appear in the stadium to help the players make impossible catches, hit crucial home runs and throw some of the fastest balls ever pitched.


New Tactics by Unions Avoid Strikes
Corporate America's legal right to hire people as permanent replacements for striking workers, a right reaffirmed by Congress this week, has led unions to shift tactics in recent labor disputes.
Their goal, which has so far been less than successful, is to regain some of the bargaining power that a strike once conferred on unions.
In some cases, like the United Auto Workers strike against Caterpillar Inc., the unions have invoked legal provisions that hinder companies from exercising their right to replace strikers.


Millipore Corp.(MIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Different Take On Moviegoing
INSIDE the eight-screen multiplex, the jolly jingles are about to begin.
As the lights darken and the last popcorn-toting stragglers find their seats and as the packed audience waits impatiently for the latest mega-movie out of Hollywood to explode from the screen, outside on the sidewalk, you resign yourself to the fact that, once again, you can't get in.
This show and the next show are both sold out.
Clearly, something is wrong here.
Just about every cinema in town is overflowing, not just the multiplexes but Film Forum, too, filled with masters of planning eager for air-conditioning and escape.
What to do?


Maurice G. Hardy Manufacturing Executive, 64
Maurice G. Hardy, chairman of the Pall Corporation, a manufacturer of industrial and medical filters, died Sunday at his home in Old Brookville, L.I.
He was 64.
The cause was cancer, the corporation said in an announcement.


Sound-Art Installation Closes Early in Paris
"Sound Island," a sound-art installation at the Arc de Triomphe by Bill Fontana, an American, has closed, seven weeks before its planned late-August termination.
The installation, which conveyed live sea sounds from Normandy beaches to the tunnels beneath the Etoile and the outer walls of the arch and live pickups from throughout Paris to the upper terrace, was intended as a summerlong commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the D-Day landing and the liberation of Paris.


Giants Increase Offer to Try to Keep Oates
By late Tuesday night, Bart Oates, the Giants' free agent center, had agreed in principle to become a member of the San Francisco 49ers.
Yesterday morning, he gave George Young, the Giants' general manager, a courtesy call to say it has been nice knowing you but see you later.
But a funny thing happened on the way to Candlestick Park.
The Giants, not wanting to lose a valued member of the team who could provide much-needed depth, did something that people close to Oates say shocked him.
They increased their offer to Oates to $2.1 million over three years and, more important to the player, gave him a chunk of the money up front.


Study Links Heart Disease and Cancer
A strange new twist in heart research has led to a remarkable finding that if true could lead to a major change in the treatment of heart disease, particulary of coronary arteries that become reclogged after patients have had them opened by a method that uses a tiny balloon.
The new finding makes an unexpected link between heart disease and cancer, suggesting that a common virus infects the cells that line the inner wall of the arteries and sets them on a path of uncontrolled growth somewhat akin to cancer.


Monkey Business, and With Mother
The title "Spanking the Monkey" works like a generational litmus test.
People in their 20's and younger recognize it, although it may baffle anyone older.
In this very funny dark comedy, the phrase conveys a healthy, cross-generational attitude toward masturbation.
Ray Aibelli, the film's frustrated college-age hero, belongs to a generation that seems to take a rational, clearsighted approach to sex.
But he finds himself at the center of a twisted coming-of-age story.
His misguided experience involves a brief fling at incest with his attractive mother, among other bitter family dysfunctions.
Yet "Spanking the Monkey" remains good-humored, sane and amusing.
It's as if David O. Russell, the film's 35-year-old writer and director, had dared himself to do the impossible in his first feature and gotten away with it.
It is no fluke that the film won the Audience Award at this year's Sundance Film Festival.
With its witty, nonexploitative treatment of a lurid subject, "Spanking the Monkey" is an unexpected crowd pleaser.
It is also the sort of astonishingly fresh and self-assured work that can make a reputation.


Noland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Spoken Word
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street.
Today: "Music Traditions of India," by J. Kenneth Moore, 11 A.M.; "A Closer Look: 'Madame Cezanne in a Red Dress,' " by Patricia Sands, 12:30 P.M.; "Spanish Portraiture: El Greco, Velazquez and Goya," by Lisa Rotmil, at 3 P.M.; "Petrus Christus: Renaissance Master of Bruges," by Veronique Sintobin, 5 P.M.; "An Egyptian Silver Statuette Revealed," by Deborah Schorsch, 6 P.M.; "American Painting: The 1950's," by Stacy Tenenbaum, 7 P.M.
Tomorrow: "American Architecture at the Metropolitan Museum of Art," by Matthew Kennedy, 11 A.M.; "Picasso and the Weeping Women: The Years of Marie-Therese Walter and Dora Maar," by Gail Stavitsky, 11 A.M.; "American Impressionism and Realism: A New View," by Mishoe Brennecke, 2:30 P.M.; "Understanding Modern Art," by Ms.
Stavitsky, 7 P.M.
Sunday: "Hatsheput's Funerary Temple: The Sculpture From Deir el Bahari," by John McDonald, 11 A.M.; "Dali: The Early Years," by Ellen Handy, 11 A.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


For Fans, a Nice Mess of a Convention to Get Into
It's another nice mess.
In the midst of it, there are 300 people, some of them wearing red fezzes with yellow tassels, others wearing black derbies.
But there is no mistaking the gathering for a reunion of classmates from some Anglo-Egyptian school in the heyday of King Farouk, although more than a few Grand Sheiks are on hand.


Home Video
Departing from usual tasks, personal computers are beginning to act a little like television sets.
At present, about all computers can serve up in the way of moving pictures is a small patch of herky-jerky images reminiscent of the Keystone Kops.
But with a boost from an add-in card, a video processor plugged into the computer, those images can be enlarged to fill the screen and smoothed and sharpened to the point where they could eventually surpass those on television.
In fact, given the interactive powers of computers, some consumers already prefer them to their television sets.
In the future, analysts say, cable and telephone systems may deliver movies and games directly to computers, bypassing television altogether.


Robert F. Mullen, Lawyer, 51, Is Dead
Robert F. Mullen, a senior partner in the Manhattan law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, died yesterday at his home in Scarsdale.
He was 51.
The cause was cancer, said Evan R. Chesler, a partner in the firm.


Joy Turns to Concern As Baggio Nurses Injury
The first serious hint of a country's concern came well after the beginning of Italy's celebration.
Roberto Baggio's exit in the 71st minute of the semifinal victory over Bulgaria on Wednesday had appeared more triumphant than ominous.
His sentimental journey from the temporary grass at Giants Stadium at the tearful conclusion of the game held no signs of anguish.
It was not until Baggio was asked about the enormousness of his two-goal effort that propelled the Azzurri into the World Cup final for the first time since 1982 that his condition began to become clear.
In a sport that transforms victims of the most harmless collisions into apparent candidates for amputation in their pursuit of yellow cards, the potential severity of Baggio's right hamstring injury was somehow obscured.
That is, until the first question after Baggio emerged from the dressing room, a standard for lottery winners and heroes:
"How do you feel?" No Conclusive Answers
The question had to do with Baggio's joyous sense of accomplishment.


How the Chengs Finessed Trump
It may be one of the last big real estate deals in New York City, but to Henry Cheng, Riverside South, the multibillion-dollar joint venture that could transform Manhattan's largest buildable waterfront land into a community of 16 largely upscale apartment towers along with shops and parks, is just another development.
"In Hong Kong, China, we've done bigger projects than this, much bigger," said Mr.
Cheng, a man parsimonious with words.
He and his father, Cheng Yu-tong, have built one of Hong Kong's biggest global property and project development conglomerates, with substantial holdings stretching across Asia and into the United States.


Management Shift Continues at Bates
Bates Worldwide has reassigned several top executives as the agency continues making management changes.
Les Stern, 46, executive vice president and director of account planning and strategic services in New York, was named yesterday to the new position of European planning director at Bates Europe in London.
Jeff DeJoseph, 39, was named to succeed Mr.
Stern; he joins Bates from D2, a strategic marketing consulting company in New York where he had been a principal.


Return of Little's Game Comes Quite Naturally
Desperate for help because of a prolonged slump, Sally Little went to several golf instructors in recent years looking for help.
A few too many, as it turned out.
"I went to several teachers and all it did was confuse me," said Little, who has won 15 tournaments during her 24 years on the Ladies Professional Golf Association circuit, but none since 1988.
"I finally got rid of all my coaches and went to Bob Toski three months ago and got my old natural feel back."


A Government Struggles to Be Born
Two hundred years after the Constitution created a directly elected legislature as a cornerstone of American democracy, Nassau County is being compelled to give it a try.
Nassau has been governed since 1898 by a board made up of its four town supervisors and the mayors of its two cities, and it is perhaps the largest jurisdiction in the United States to retain this quaint system of governance for so long.


Save F.H.A. Loans for Needy Families
The Clinton Administration is backing legislation that would give more families Government-guaranteed mortgages.
Put that way, the policy sounds enlightened.
Why then do prominent community housing groups and consumer advocates oppose the legislation?
Their objections flow from a less flattering interpretation of the House and Senate bills: they authorize the Federal Housing Administration to help relatively high-income families.
That would help mortgage lenders, whose loans to those families would become risk-free.
But it would siphon mortgages from low-income home buyers whom the F.H.A. is supposed to protect.


After Worst Flood in 65 Years, Florida Starts Recovery
As residents of Georgia anxiously waited for their rivers to crest today and the water to start receding, towns in the Florida Panhandle were also beginning to recover from the worst flooding there in 65 years.
Although Florida's floods have caused no deaths or severe injuries, more than 1,000 residences and businesses have been flooded, damage to state roads and bridges has reached $10 million, and oyster harvesting in Apalachicola Bay on the Gulf Coast has been halted.


SynOptics Communications Inc.(SNPX,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


White House Cuts Growth Forecasts
The White House said today that the economy was closer to operating at full capacity than it had previously thought, and so lowered slightly its forecasts for economic growth in 1996 and beyond.
Fearing that factories and other businesses were already close to operating at full speed and could run into production bottlenecks, fueling inflation, the Federal Reserve has raised short-term interest rates four times this year.


Packers Put Out Hefty Pact For Favre
Brett Favre, a 24-year-old quarterback in his fourth National Football League season, knows where his next meal is coming from.
Yesterday, the Green Bay Packers quarterback signed a five-year contract worth $19 million to $20 million.
Favre was a restricted free agent.
Next year, he could have become an unrestricted free agent, meaning he could sign with any other team.
Instead, the Packers kept him with a contract that, The Green Bay Press-Gazette reported, included these provisions:


Abroad at Home; Merchants Of Hate
"Bill Clinton is a tyrant; he's a monster," Randall Terry told Erik Eckholm of The New York Times recently.
"The Bible commands us to expose the wicked."
Mr.
Terry is an example of the most important phenomenon in American politics today: the growing power of extreme right-wing ideologues who turn fundamentalist Christian beliefs into political commands.
He founded Operation Rescue, which mounts often violent demonstrations against abortions.
Now, as head of a group called Loyal Opposition, he says that President Clinton favors baby-killing.


Golden West Financial Corp.(GDW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


From Pledge to Plan: The campaign to end welfare -- A special report.; The Clinton Welfare Bill: A Long, Stormy Journey
With four days left before they were to present a plan to overhaul the welfare system, President Clinton's aides faced a painful question.
They were about to propose the strictest work requirements in welfare history, but were they really ready to cut off every penny to mothers who did not comply?


All Eyes on Federated's Chief, Again
With the proposed merger of Federated Department Stores Inc. and R. H. Macy &amp; Company, the spotlight is on Federated's chairman, Allen I. Questrom.
The industry is speculating wildly about his management team at the combined company, as well as who will be in and who will be out.
But one waggish Federated watcher raised another question: Will Mr.
Questrom model clothes in the next Macy's catalog?


Inside Art
Serra Project Withdrawn
The sculptor Richard Serra doesn't want to fight any more public battles.
Clearly, he is still smarting from the wrangle five years ago over "Tilted Arc," his giant sculpture that bisected the space in front of 26 Federal Plaza in lower Manhattan until it was dismantled and removed by the city in 1989, after complaints that it made the plaza unusable.
Now negative publicity has caused him to withdraw from a commission to install a 48-foot-tall sculpture in a San Francisco parking lot, opposite the newly renovated Palace of the Legion of Honor.
It would have been his first public commission in the United States since "Tilted Arc."
"I've been barbecued in San Francisco, and I don't need to get fried anymore," Mr.
Serra said in a telephone interview this week.
The reason he gave for backing out of the job seems simple enough.
The land is owned by the city and is therefore under the jurisdiction of the Parks and Recreation Department's gift policy, which states: "Parks and Recreation reserves the right to re-site or remove a gift if it becomes a hazard or liability or if the approved terms of the acceptance are not fulfilled. The Commission, working with the Arts Commission, may consider the deaccessioning of works of art."


Car 54, You're Where? In Another Accident?
Sirens blaring, lights flashing, New York City police officers chase down unsafe drivers every day.
But several radio car accidents this week have shown that in some cases, it is the officers who are the bad drivers.
With the department vastly expanding its hiring in recent years, more and more officers are young recruits with little experience behind the wheel of a cruiser.
Department officials acknowledge that these recruits often bring with them a zest for daring -- perhaps fostered by depictions of police chases in films -- that may contribute to carelessness.


Coaches in Cup Final Do It Their Way
Before Brazil faced Sweden on Wednesday, Coach Carlos Alberto Parreira was introduced to what should have been a friendly crowd at the Rose Bowl.
Thousands of fans wore yellow shirts and waved the yellow and green flag of Brazil.
Parreira was about to lead Brazil to its first World Cup final in 24 years.
He would be hailed as a conquering hero, right?
Not a chance.


Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc.(BOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Corrections
An article on June 14 about the deposition given by President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, to Robert B. Fiske Jr., the special prosecutor in the Whitewater case, incompletely described the history of such testimony by sitting Presidents.
In 1980, President Jimmy Carter gave a deposition to the Office of Professional Responsibility of the Department of Justice.
The department was conducting an inquiry into conversations between Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti and the President concerning its investigation into whether Mr.
Carter's brother, Billy, had violated the Foreign Agents Registration Act.
This correction was delayed by editing lapses.


Goodrich (B.F.) Co. (GR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Issues New Appeal for Rwandan Cease-Fire
As a rebel advance sent Rwandans flooding across the border, the United Nations Security Council issued another urgent appeal today for relief aid, a cease-fire and political talks to end the civil war in the devastated central African country.
The Council acted at the request of France, which has already sent 2,500 troops to establish a safe area for refugees in southwestern Rwanda.


Clash Punctuates Nomination Hearing
Judge Stephen G. Breyer completed his testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee today but not before a sharp confrontation over whether he acted improperly in deciding pollution cases while investing in an insurance syndicate facing substantial losses over pollution lawsuits.
Judge Breyer, President Clinton's second nominee to the Supreme Court, found himself facing pointed criticism from Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, over his participation as a judge in eight pollution cases while he was a member of a Lloyd's of London insurance syndicate.


Audiovox Corp.(VOX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Art in Review
'A Terrible Beauty' 'Images of Conflict in Ireland'
Artists Space  38 Greene Street  SoHo  Through July 30
The most dismaying aspect of this survey of two decades of disturbances in Northern Ireland is how little the photographs, and the situations they record, have changed.
Philip Jones Griffiths's 1971 photograph of British soldiers charging up a street in Londonderry past a housewife huddled in a doorway has become a classic of photojournalism, but has obviously done little to improve the situation.


Hulk Hogan, on Witness Stand, Tells of Steroid Use in Wrestling
He is famous as the flamboyant wrestler Hulk Hogan.
But today, Terry Gene Bollea was a subdued and sad-faced man as he testified in the Federal trial of his former employer, Vincent K. McMahon, the wrestling promoter charged with illegally providing steroids to the wrestler-performers in his World Wrestling Federation.
Gone were the screaming yellow muscle T-shirt and the manic persona of the charismatic Hulkster.
Mr.
Bollea, his long blond hair spilling over the collar of a dark business suit, answered questions somberly as the Government tried to show that Mr.
McMahon's Titan Sports Corporation had illicitly provided him with anabolic steroids.
Defense lawyers, in cross-examination, sought to show that Mr.
Bollea's nearly 14-year use of the drugs had been an entirely personal action.
Steroid Use Called Common
Prosecutors have charged that Mr.
McMahon provided steroids to his wrestlers to build up their physiques and thus make them more appealing to audiences.


Corrections
An article in some editions yesterday about plans for a new terminal at Kennedy International Airport described the ownership of the airport incorrectly.
It is owned by New York City, which leases it to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
The article also described the recent history of the Eastern Air Lines terminal incorrectly.
The terminal, which occupies the site where the new terminal will be built, was indeed used by several other airlines between 1990, when Eastern went out of business, and November 1993.


Jets Map Large Role for 5-8 1/2 Glenn
In April's National Football League draft, the Jets traded up one position in the first round and with the 12th choice over all they took a fast cornerback.
Yesterday, that cornerback, Aaron Glenn of Texas A&amp;M, agreed to a four-year contract reportedly worth $4.04 million, including a $2.1 million signing bonus.
Glenn figures to earn his pay immediately.
Pete Carroll, the Jets' new head coach, indicated that Glenn would almost surely start at left cornerback.


Robert J. Stein, 82, Medical Examiner
Dr.
Robert J. Stein, the first person to hold the post of medical examiner in Cook County, Ill., , died Tuesday at Highland Park Hospital in Highland Park, Ill., his hometown.
He was 82.
The cause was complications of gastrointestinal surgery, said his son Peter.


Moynihan Won't Fight The Petitions Of Sharpton
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's campaign announced today that he would not challenge the Rev.
Al Sharpton's right to get on the Democratic primary ballot, virtually insuring a Sept. 13 contest between the influential, professorial incumbent and the flamboyant, nettlesome street preacher.
Mr.
Moynihan's decision came as Mr.
Sharpton and five other insurgent candidates filed tens of thousands of signatures on nominating petitions with the state Board of Elections.
The deadline for filing petitions in person or having them postmarked was midnight tonight.


English Style Looking A Lot Like International
The Royal Ballet in Britain has always had room for especially gifted foreign dancers, including Rudolf Nureyev.
But nowadays, as has been evident in the major debuts featured in the company's triple bill at the Metropolitan Opera House, the Royal's roster is as international as that of any American company.
On Wednesday night, for instance, "The Dream," Frederick Ashton's witty and magical treatment of "A Midsummer Night's Dream," was led by Tetsuya Kumakawa, a Japanese virtuoso, as Oberon, while his Titania was Sarah Wildor, the Royal's latest home-grown revelation and very much a star in the making.


A Master Who Was Also an Enthusiast
Early in "Francois Truffaut: Stolen Portraits," a probing collection of remembrances of the great French film director, Gerard Depardieu reads a breathlessly excited letter that Truffaut wrote when he was only 17.
"Three films a day, three books a week and some good music will keep me happy until my death," he declared, going on to announce, "I don't look at the sky because afterward the earth looks awful."
The mixture of blunt matter-of-factness and passionate enthusiasm suggested by those words eventually found artistic expression in the 21 full-length movies and four short films that Truffaut completed before his death 10 years ago at the age of 52.
How closely did the themes of his movies parallel his life?
"Stolen Portraits" proposes that his films were even more autobiographical than commonly thought.
One of his friends, the writer Claude de Givray, maintains that Truffaut trusted only stories that were true.


F.C.C. Says Cable TV Rates Fell
The Federal Communications Commission released data today indicating that its second try at cutting cable television rates has reduced prices for basic service in the nation's 25 biggest cities by an average of 8.5 percent since last August.
But in some areas, including four of New York's five boroughs, rates have actually increased slightly.
And in some places, the increase has been substantial.
In Baltimore, for example, the rates for basic cable service -- everything except so-called premium channels like HBO, which are not covered by the regulations -- have risen 15.2 percent.
Variety of Pricing Factors
The variations underscore the complexity of the F.C.C rules and how they are being interpreted by the cable industry, with pricing permutations based on factors like the number of channels provided and the average personal income of a particular city.


Segui Demands Answers From Mets
Frustrated with his changing role and uncertain status in the lineup, David Segui requested over the All-Star break that Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' general manager, meet with his agent, Tommy Tanzer, to discuss Segui's long-term future with the club.
McIlvaine and Tanzer spoke by phone yesterday afternoon.
Segui requested the meeting because he believes his role as the Mets' starting first baseman may be in jeopardy, given the team's decision to play Rico Brogna, the hot rookie, against right-handed pitchers and relegate the switch-hitting Segui to a platoon role.


Affable? Hardly. Bette Davis's Life.
Movie stars come and go.
These days they seem to be going faster than ever.
But there was, back in the 1930's and 40's, a period of giants, with names like Garbo, Hepburn, Crawford and, of course, Davis, the subject of a documentary Sunday on TNT.
With Jodie Foster as host, "All About Bette" is that familiar television concoction called a clips biography, but more than most, it captures the essence of its subject.
Bette Davis made 101 films during a career that lasted six decades.
As Ms.
Foster observes, using a script by the film critic David Ansen, the actress made a magnificent spectacle of herself on and off screen.
While going through four husbands, who turned out to be drunks or louts or both, she had a string of affairs with such co-workers as the actor George Brent and the director William Wyler.


Changing Young Lives On the Streets of Italy
The story of a teacher who changes the lives of streetwise students in a Neapolitan village seems utterly predictable.
It also sounds totally wrong for Lina Wertmuller, who made her name with savvy, tough-minded films like "Seven Beauties." Yet in the delightful, sweet-tempered comedy "Ciao, Professore!" the teacher is transformed in ways that link him to earlier, imperfect Wertmuller characters.
By the end of this idealistic teacher's brief stay in the village of Corzano, his most rebellious student tells him: "You stole a van; you smacked a nun against a wall. A few weeks more, and you'd learn how to live." The boy means it as a compliment, and in this case he's right.
The teacher, Marco Sperelli (Paolo Villaggio), was assigned to his rough-and-tumble third-grade class by a minor computer error.
He was meant to teach in the more refined northern town of Corsano but instead was assigned to Corzano in the crime-ridden south.
In that crowded village, education means nothing next to scraping together a living.
Even the children help in the family businesses: hawking stolen cigarettes on the street, or working in restaurants, barber shops and fruit stands.


Guardian Angels Come to Moscow


Office Depot Inc.(ODP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


A Top Official Leaves Kidder
The shake-up in top management at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company continued yesterday, as the struggling brokerage firm announced that Michael A. M. Keehner, former head of its brokerage unit, had left to start his own business venture.
The departure of Mr.
Keehner, 50, was not a complete surprise.
As part of a reshuffling less than a month ago by John F. Welch Jr., the chairman of the General Electric Company, Kidder, Peabody's parent, Mr.
Keehner was removed as head of the firm's brokerage force and replaced by Mark B. Sutton, Mr.
Keehner's second in command.


Teen-Agers on the Edge and Over It
In "Mi Vida Loca My Crazy Life," Allison Anders tries what few directors would have had the interest or intelligence to think of.
She looks beyond the surface of the lives of Hispanic girl gangs and attempts to create a deeper portrait of young women in the Echo Park section of Los Angeles.
They use gang names, like Sad Girl, Mousie and Whisper.
And though violence is part of their lives, they are likely to be teen-age mothers struggling to get by.
Sad Girl wears deep black lipstick wherever she goes.
Mousie has the biggest hair in the neighborhood.
They have been best friends since childhood, but the friendship is strained because they have both had babies by the same man, Ernesto.
He tries to be a good father, but seems to care more for his elaborately painted truck.


Feet to the Pedals, An Eye On the Prize
A ROUTINE pleasure of bicycling is possession of the land; you ride a mile, you feel you own it.
So why would anyone want to pedal from Manhattan to Montauk?
There is, after all, more accommodating and cheery real estate available to the acquisitive cyclist than Long Island, at least that portion of it between the East River and the South Fork, a stretch that many New Yorkers are familiar with only through strategy sessions aimed at devising the quickest, most painless traverses -- via motorized transport, of course -- on Friday and Sunday evenings.
However, as a cyclist who has made big chunks of the trip a dozen times in the last few years of renting a summer house near the beach -- and now the whole thing -- I can report that the journey is a worthwhile enterprise.
At more than a century (cycle-ese for a 100-mile ride), it's not a wise endeavor for the physically unprepared.
The route has its pitfalls, yes.
Long Island isn't exactly Paumonok anymore, the Indians' beach-rimmed woodland in the shape of a fish, and I don't think residents of Nassau County or even western Suffolk should be surprised or offended to learn that for the cyclist, their home terrain is no velodrome.


Spy Sues C.I.A., Saying She Was Target of Sexual Discrimination
A woman who holds a senior post in the clandestine service of the Central Intelligence Agency is suing the C.I.A., saying she was subjected to a multitude of injustices because of her sex.
The woman was a station chief assigned to a Caribbean country, said several people familiar with, though not directly involved in, the case.
They would not identify the country; the woman was identified in Federal court papers only as "Jane Doe Thompson."


U S West Seen Near Deal
U S West is close to acquiring two cable systems in Atlanta from a partnership consisting of Robert M. Bass and Lehman Brothers for $1.2 billion, several people close to the transaction said yesterday.
A spokesman for U S West declined to comment yesterday.
The planned sale, which was first reported by USA Today yesterday, would mark the transfer of ownership of systems with the largest single concentration of customers in one metropolitan area.
The systems -- Wometco and Georgia Cable Television -- have 460,000 subscribers.
While the Atlanta market is the country's ninth-largest metropolitan statistical area, it has the third-largest growth rate.


TBWA Expansion In Hungary and India
TBWA International said yesterday that it had expanded its global network by adding two affiliate agencies in Hungary and India.
Terms were not disclosed.


Simpson Industries Inc.(SMPS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Potlatch Corp.(PCH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Horace Collins; HBO Vice President, 44
Horace Collins, senior vice president and assistant general counsel of Home Box Office, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said Robert Del Deo, his companion.


Louisiana-Pacific Corp.(LPX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


South Korea Prohibits Trips To North to Mourn Leader
After an unusual period in which relations between North and South Korea had briefly lost their hostile edge, tensions flared today as the North sought to entice South Koreans to come and mourn the fallen Communist leader, Kim Il Sung, and the South responded by vowing to arrest anyone who did.
Ever since the two Koreas agreed last month to a first summit meeting, and especially since Mr.
Kim died from a heart attack last week, the acerbic comments normally exchanged by the countries had all but stopped.
Even the booming speakers on the North's side of the Demilitarized Zone started broadcasting funereal music instead of hateful tirades as Kim Jong Il, Mr.
Kim's son, moved to succeed him.


BANK OF NEW YORK CO. (BK,N)
The Bank of New York Company said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose 49 percent on increased loan demand, an improved loan portfolio and higher credit card revenue.
The company reported net income of $176 million, or 92 cents a share.
The earnings exceeded analysts' forecasts of 82 cents a share.
"It was a fine quarter that continues progress that they've been showing for the last several quarters," said George Salem, an analyst at Prudential Securities Research.


Shakespeare Is No. 1 On Breyer's Book List
What informs the mind and inspires the heart of the Supreme Court's newest nominee?
Members of the Senate Judiciary Committee want to know, and over the last three days they have poked into unusual corners of Judge Stephen G. Breyer's life to find out.
Senator William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine, looked for literary landmarks.
Judge Breyer's response spoke volumes.
Q. Tell me your favorite books.
A.
Where do people start?
They start with Shakespeare.
Say why Shakespeare and you say why -- -- this I tell students, you know, a lot of them come from some different school and they'll come from some place, they say, 'What's in Shakespeare for me?' You say, 'Well, if you're willing to put in the time, he's a little bit archaic, you know, the language, but if you put in the time, what you see there is, you see every different person, you see every different kind of person, you see every situation there is in the world.
You see people saying things that they would say if only they had that ability to say them.
And you see the whole thing in poetry.'
I mean, that's why people turn to that and they turn to that a little bit in literature to get some of the things that Senator  [ Paul ]  Simon was talking about, I think, which is what's in the heart of that person who is leading that different kind of life.
And sometimes you can find some of that in literature.
I like Conrad very much.
Why?
I think because I'm moved often by the way in which he talks about the need for people -- all of us -- to learn from the past and then to give something to the future.
Whether that's through our families or whether that's through our careers, we do learn from our parents, we do learn from the past, we do try to transmit things of value.
And I think he finds value in human communities.
I think he finds human communities to be ultimately the sources of obligations and values toward each other.
I read something that moved me a lot not very long ago.
I was reading something by Chesterton, and he was talking about one of the Brontes, I think her "Jane Eyre." He says you go and look out at the city -- I think he was looking at London -- and he said you know, you see all those houses now, even at the end of the 19th century, and they look all as if they're the same.
And you think all those people are out there going to work and they're all the same.
He says, but what Bronte tells you is they're not the same.
Each one of those persons in each one of those houses and each one of those families is different, and they each have a story to tell.
Each of those stories involves something about human passion.
Each of those stories involves a man, a woman, children, families, work, lives -- and you get that sense out of the book.
And so sometimes I've found literature very helpful as a way out of the tower.


Let Five Senators Forgo Health Care Coverage; Best in the World?
To the Editor:
I am sick of reading how great our health system is.
We are told that people from all over the world come to America for diagnosis and treatment.
But those who come are the wealthy, who can afford the best medical treatment money can buy.
How about the less affluent Americans?


Gus the Bear's Case
To the Editor:
Television news and your "About New York" column for July 2 have had a merry chortle over Gus, the Central Park polar bear.
When my wife and I visited the zoo at least three years ago, the bear was swimming the same, repetitive figure eights.
We could not assume it was more than that day's remedy for acute boredom, but even that was troubling.
Now we discover that the zoo has watched this disturbed behavior for years before doing anything.


People
*
Bob Matsumoto was named to the new position of associate creative director at Sacks Fuller Advertising, Los Angeles.
He was previously a freelancer. *
Madeleine Miller was named to the new position of director of account planning at Grace &amp; Rothschild, New York.
She was previously a senior vice president and director of planning and research at DDB Needham New York.


Acting Out the Jottings of a Renaissance Man
The performance piece called "The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci" is chock-full of ideas and images culled from the notebooks -- or at least the 5,000 pages that have survived -- of the Italian artist, architect, sculptor, scientist and engineer.
Here, fancifully illustrated by a cast of eight, are the great man's notions on flight, dreams, motion, light, anatomy, proportion and the difference between laughing and weeping, among a zillion or so other topics.
The insatiably curious Leonardo kept his notebooks from 1475 until his death in 1519, filling them with everything from nature studies and anatomical sketches to laundry lists and the odd philosophical reflection.


Let Five Senators Forgo Health Care Coverage
To the Editor:
The Senate Finance Committee has decided that health care coverage for 95 percent of Americans is good enough (front page, July 3).


Structural Dynamics Research Corp.(SDRC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dialogue Can Save Algeria
Algeria is one foreign policy issue the Clinton Administration continues to get right, most recently at this month's Naples summit meeting.
Though it does not get much attention in the U.S., Algeria's turmoil is a big international problem.
If the Islamic terrorists now murdering foreigners, outspoken Algerians and Government officials ever came to power, the consequences would be calamitous, threatening governments across North Africa and flooding Europe, especially France, with desperate refugees.


Butler Manufacturing Co.  (BTLR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


National Westminster Bancorp (NW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Walter A. Fairservis, 73, Dies; Was Archeologist and Author
Dr.
Walter A. Fairservis Jr., an authority on the rise and fall of ancient civilizations, died on Tuesday at his home in Sharon, Conn.
He was 73.
He had a long illness, his family said.


Texas Instruments: Net Up, Outlook Down
Despite record revenues and earnings at Texas Instruments Inc., the company's forecast today that the runaway growth in chip sales in the first half of the year would slow caused investors to flee the stocks of chip makers.
Earlier this week, the semiconductor industry reported its first monthly decline in orders since September, amid signs that corporate demand for personal computers that use the chips was beginning to slacken.


DANCE
Doodlings and More From Mark Morris  Page Auditorium, Duke University


Central Fidelity Banks Inc.(CFBS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Russell Corp.(RML,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


From Israel, An Envoy To Blacks
Speaking from the pulpit of a black church, the Israeli Consul General invoked Old Testament images to address two very current issues: changes in Israel since the peace accords and recent anti-Semitic remarks by some Black Muslim leaders.
"Like God made a covenant with Israel, let us make a covenant here today," the Consul General, Colette Avital, said, speaking on Sunday before several hundred congregants packed into the First Baptist Church on Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn, less than a mile away from the epicenter of the 1992 Crown Heights riots.
"Let us pledge to seek understanding by always seeking common ground and fighting together intolerance wherever it may rear its ugly face."


Hallmark's Shoebox Characters Go Beyond Cards
Move over, Homer, Marge and Bart Simpson. Step aside, Charlie Brown.
Make way for Maxine, Denise and the Lundquists -- the characters who have inhabited the feisty, irreverently witty greeting cards distributed by the Shoebox division of Hallmark Cards Inc. for the last eight years.


Europeans Agree on Luxembourger as Chief
Divided over whether the European Union should remain a free-trade zone or move swiftly toward federal-style political and economic unity, leaders of the 12-nation group agreed today on a new chief executive some hoped would make no bold new moves -- the Prime Minister of Luxembourg.
Jacques Santer, a 57-year-old Christian Democrat who has headed his country's Government since 1984 and was re-elected in June, will instead become President of the European Union's executive commission in Brussels next January, provided the European Parliament approves his nomination next week.
He will succeed Jacques Delors, who has held the post since 1985.


Meola Has Workout
TONY MEOLA, the goalie for the United States World Cup soccer team, is hardly ready for a second career as a National Football League kicker.
But in the future, who knows?
On Thursday, Meola worked out for 30 to 45 minutes for Jets' scouts and personnel people.


Pataki Raises $2.2 Million For Campaign
In the latest sign that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo faces his most credible election challenge since 1982, Senator George E. Pataki disclosed today that he had already raised far more money than was spent by the Republican gubernatorial nominees in either 1986 or 1990.
Although Mr.
Cuomo has raised more than twice as much as Mr.
Pataki and has almost triple Mr.
Pataki's cash on hand, it is largely because the Governor began the year with a $3 million war chest.
During the last six months, Mr.
Pataki has virtually kept pace with Mr.
Cuomo's fund raising.


Glatfelter (P.H.) Co. (GLT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Tilling Method Speeds the Plow's Demise
The cornfields of Dale Montgomery would probably have embarrassed a proud Midwestern farmer from an earlier generation.
Instead of cleanly plowed black soil, the ground between his corn rows is covered with the withering stalks of last year's crop, traditionally called trash.
"My grandfather would have snorted, 'How in the world can you grow corn like this?' " said Mr.
Montgomery, 43, who raises soybeans and corn on 1,000 acres in the rich farm country of DeKalb County here.


Corrections
A brief report on the Media Business page in some editions yesterday about a new editor in chief at New Woman magazine misstated the magazine's publishing schedule.It comes out 12 times a year, not 6.


Editors' Note
An article in Business Day yesterday about the Cheng family of Hong Kong, which controls Hong Kong's biggest global property development company, described the Chengs' partnership with the New York developer Donald J. Trump in their joint venture to develop the Riverside South project on Manhattan's West Side.


Sports of The Times; Good Job, But Good Riddance
ONLY one month and one day after Mike Keenan held the Stanley Cup aloft, he put a dent in it.
And in his credibility.
Insisting he was a "free agent" because the Rangers "failed to honor the obligations of my contract," the only Ranger coach to kiss the Stanley Cup since 1940 kissed the franchise goodbye yesterday.
The kiss was not returned.


Trail of Suffering as Rwandan Exodus Continues
The lines go on for mile after mile after mile, a river of people fleeing the war in Rwanda into neighboring Zaire.
Men, women and children -- barefoot and dirty, with bundles of firewood, rolled-up mattresses and suitcases balanced on their heads -- walking, walking, walking.
They lead goats on leashes, carry chickens by their legs and rabbits by their ears, and cradle baby goats.
People, and longhorn cattle, and cars.


Pele Roots For Brazil, And Soccer In the U.S.
"I just ask this one thing from God," said Pele.
"He gave me everything. I just ask him to give Brazil the World Cup, and it will be my dream come true."
If Americans did not realize it before, the last four weeks have made it abundantly clear: soccer is much more than recreation in Brazil.
And today, Brazil's greatest player left little doubt about what an unprecedented fourth World Cup title would mean to him and his economically struggling nation,


Comsat Corp.(CQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Arab-Americans Protest 'True Lies'
An ad-hoc network of Arab-American advocacy groups protested today against the new film "True Lies" in over a dozen cities.
Spokesmen for the organizations said the protesters were offended by the movie because they believed it depicted Arabs as violent, anti-American zealots.
The film, released by 20th Century Fox, stars Arnold Schwarzenegger as a spy for a secret Government agency who pretends to be a dull computer salesman to conceal his real job from his wife, played by Jamie Lee Curtis.
His real-life opponents are members of an Arab terrorist group, the Crimson Jihad, who threaten the United States with nuclear missiles.


FirstTier Financial Inc.(FRST,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mark Twain Bancshares Inc.(MTWN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Golf; Out of the Scottish Mist, the Old Watson
There was a special British Open moment today, the sort that Tom Watson has provided so many times through the years.
The wind was blowing and Watson was glowing, white hot against the Scottish chill, walking from the 10th green to the 11th tee.
He was tied for the lead, having just birdied the hole with a 13-foot, downhill slider.
Some Scottish fans were leaning over the metal barriers, screaming his name and trying to touch him, and Watson smiled at them as he walked up the steep incline to the tee.


L.A. Gear Inc.(LA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


RECORDINGS
Daniel Barenboim Conducts A Craggy Rarity  Liszt's 'Dante Symphony'


Health Care Developments
YESTERDAY  Television commercials became a source of dispute in the fight over universal coverage and the employer mandate.
President Clinton campaigned for his measure in Pennsylvania, and members of Congress focused on the extent of coverage.


Carner, 55, Gets Tired; She Also Gets Lead
The players on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour call her Big Momma.
That's understandable since JoAnne Carner was already winning tournaments before many of them were born.
Indeed, if there was a women's senior tour, the 55-year-old Carner would be one of the stars.
Carner, a Hall of Famer with 42 career professional victories and the winner of five United States Amateur titles, remains competitive with players young enough to be her daughters.
She keeps one goal uppermost in her mind: to become the oldest player to win a nonsenior Tour tournament (Sam Snead, who won a PGA tournament at the age of 52, currently holds that distinction).


Mercantile Bancorp (MTL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dow Advances by 14.56, But Chip Stocks Sell Off
The stock market moved mostly higher yesterday in a sluggish session highlighted by options-related trading and a sharp selloff in semiconductor shares.
Most of the rise in prices came late in the day, and was tied to expiring options contracts.
Earlier in the session the market was up only modestly, despite a set of economic reports that were generally well received in the bond market.


Bangladesh Court Will Rule on Writer
To the Editor:
Re "Censorship by Death" (editorial, July 6), on the Bangladeshi writer Taslima Nasrin: In The Statesman, a leading Indian daily, Ms.
Nasrin stated that "the Koran should be revised thoroughly." Such utterances create deep anguish in a country where more than 86 percent of the population is Muslim.
Following protests, a complaint was filed under section 295(a) of the Bangladesh Penal Code in which the maximum punishment is imprisonment up to two years or a fine, or both.


Friends and Foes Testify About Breyer
The Senate Judiciary Committee completed its hearings on the nomination of Judge Stephen G. Breyer to the Supreme Court after hearing from nearly two dozen witnesses today, some who praised him as a superb and intellectually gifted choice and others who called him an unfeeling and elitist advocate for America's corporations.
In the end, the testimony by witnesses will have little significance, because Judge Breyer is expected to be confirmed by the committee overwhelmingly, probably even unanimously.
The 18-member Judiciary Committee is expected to vote on the nomination next week under an expedited procedure that will allow the full Senate to vote on the confirmation before the end of the month.


24 Colombian Soldiers Die in Clash With Rebels
At least 24 soldiers who were part of a military commando unit protecting oil installations were killed early today in a clash with leftist guerrillas in southwestern Colombia, the army said.
It said the clash took place when rebels believed to belong to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia attacked the pumps of an oil pipeline run by the state-owned company Ecopetrol.
The commando unit, made up of about 70 soldiers, was attacked by an estimated 400 rebels, the army said.


Solving Homelessness
To the Editor:
Re your July 3 news article on homelessness in a land of affluence: There are two solutions to the homeless situation in this country:
(1) Build more housing to house these poor people.
This will create jobs and provide more tax revenue for our governments.


Walbro Corp.(WALB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cyberspace Swindles: Old Scams, New Twists
Same faces, different places.
The scammers, swindlers and sharpies who hunt for unwary investors on the phones and through the mail are now prowling on-line computer services and the Internet.
But in cyberspace, where the police are few and dubious offers can be sent to millions for under $2, such chicanery carries special twists.
"Thirty-five cents moving to $2" read a posting on the Prodigy on-line service in April.
The message, touting E.T.C.
Industries, an electric-car company traded on the Vancouver exchange, talked about a "$1 million profit" and a stock that is "primed for breakout!!"


Corrections
A front-page article on Tuesday about Eli Lilly &amp; Company's plans to buy the PCS Health Systems unit of the McKesson Corporation, and a related article in Business Day about the terms of the deal, misstated the tax obligations for McKesson shareholders.
A McKesson spokesman said the company's shareholders would be liable for capital gains taxes on the combined value of the cash and new McKesson shares that they would receive, minus their original cost for each old McKesson share; they will not receive the new shares tax free.


Tredegar Industries (TG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Q &amp; A
I.R.A.
Beneficiary  Q. When a spouse is the beneficiary of an I.R.A., can the spouse add a child as beneficiary after the account owner dies?
MILTON GREENWOOD, Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
A.
As the beneficiary of an individual retirement account, a spouse can either receive distributions or roll over the account into another I.R.A.
If the account is rolled over into the name of the surviving spouse, it is considered a new I.R.A.
The spouse can then name a beneficiary, which may be a child or grandchild.
If a younger person is named as beneficiary, minimum distributions can be stretched out by using the combined life expectancies of the account holder and the beneficiary.
"During the surviving spouse's lifetime, there is a special rule that limits to a maximum of 10 years the age difference that may be taken into account in the joint and last survivor life expectancy calculation," said Jeffrey L. Keyser of Deloitte &amp; Touche.
"So if the surviving spouse is age 70 1/2 and the designated beneficiary is age 40, the lives for purposes of determining minimum distributions would be 70 1/2 and 60 1/2."
Evaluating Annuities  Q. What sources evaluate variable annuities?
JOYCE FISCHMAN, Norwalk, Conn.
A.
There are almost 300 variable annuities and a much larger number of fund subaccounts, or possible investments, from which investors can choose.
Information is provided by Morningstar, Lipper Analytical Services and the Variable Annuity Research and Data Service, among others.
Performance data and fee comparisons are also published periodically in some newspapers and magazines.
"Investors should look significantly beyond performance data when considering variable annuity products," cautioned Kurt Cerulli, a Boston consultant.
"Consider whether the contract has a guaranteed death benefit, the ease of moving money among subaccounts, minimum guarantees on fixed accounts and withdrawal waiting periods."
Price-Earnings Ratio  Q. What is a price-earnings ratio?
JOHN J. HOWLEY, Rockaway Park, Queens  A. A price-earnings ratio, or P/E, gauges how  expensive a stock price is relative to a company's earnings per share.
In general, lower P/E ratios are considered better than high ratios.
The traditional way to calculate P/E ratios, the one used in newspaper stock tables, is the trailing earnings method, in which the current price of one share of stock is divided by the company's earnings per share over the last four quarters.
The alternative method is to divide the price by the earnings per share projected by analysts for the next four quarters.
"The ironic thing regarding P/E ratios is that the trailing earnings method actually works quite well," said Richard Bernstein of Merrill Lynch.
"Stock-picking methods based on P/E ratios tend to underperform during recessions, because out-of-favor stocks usually become even more out-of-favor during bad economic times."


Coleman Accused in Rape
A 22-year-old woman found crying on the steps of a Detroit precinct house early yesterday told the police that she had just been sexually assaulted at a nearby hotel by Derrick Coleman, the star of the Nets.
Coleman denied the charge.
His agent, Harold MacDonald, said later: "He didn't do it. Nothing happened. He didn't lay a hand on her. The only thing he's guilty of is being big, black and having N.B.A. money."


Giuliani's Support of Staff May Damage His Image
From the days when he was the hard-charging United States Attorney compared with Thomas E. Dewey and Eliot Ness, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has always been seen as the crusading prosecutor, with nothing but disdain for the usual accommodations of politics in New York.
As Mayor, he is a man who won't let his aides take even a free lunch or a free drink.
He scrupulously avoids accepting gifts.
On two occasions, he has twice publicly turned to the Department of Investigation in cases where there were hints that something might have been amiss or ignored during the Dinkins administration.


Bach's B-Minor Mass As Lean Chamber Piece
It was in the early 1980's that Joshua Rifkin first put Bach's B-minor Mass on a diet.
The early-music wars were in full swing, and Mr.
Rifkin had a new idea: that Bach's choral music was never meant for the massed sopranos, altos, tenors and basses who sing it today, but instead for a solitary singer on each part.
Since then, Mr.
Rifkin and his Bach Ensemble have made a cottage industry of reducing high-tonnage choral performance to the dimensions of chamber music.
At Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday night, their subject was again the B-minor Mass.


Fourth Financial Corp.(FRTH,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trail of Suffering as Rwandan Exodus Continues
The lines go on for mile after mile after mile, a river of people fleeing the war in Rwanda into neighboring Zaire.
Men, women and children -- barefoot and dirty, with bundles of firewood, rolled-up mattresses and suitcases balanced on their heads -- walking, walking, walking.
They lead goats on leashes, carry chickens by their legs and rabbits by their ears, and cradle baby goats.
People, and longhorn cattle, and cars.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Claimed Stan Royer, infielder, off waivers from the St.
Louis Cardinals.
Designated Sergio Valdez, pitcher, for reassignment.


Commerce Bancshares (CBSH,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Starting a Charity and Sustaining It
Joshua Lentin, now 5, was born with heart problems, which required surgery for the first time in 1989 and led to a heart tranplant last year.
Those medical problems caused his parents, Michael and Karen, to begin working with charities devoted to pediatric medicine and heart disease.
Ultimately, the Lentins decided to start their own charity.
A Gift From the Heart Inc.
The group relies on family and friends for labor and aims to keep expenses at a minimum while putting a personal face on its cause.


Italian Injury List Grows After Plane Ride
The Italians changed time zones for the first time in this World Cup on Thursday and made some unpleasant discoveries.
"We have one more problem and it is Donadoni," Coach Arrigo Sacchi of Italy said here this morning before putting his team through practice at nearby Loyola Marymount University.


At Deadline, Deal to Develop Site Of New York Coliseum Collapses
A nine-year effort to redevelop the New York Coliseum crumbled last night when the developer, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, failed to meet a deadline to sign a contract with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which owns the Columbus Circle site.
The chairman of the M.T.A., Peter E. Stangl, said that with Mr.
Zuckerman out of the deal, the authority was now free to begin exploring options for the redevelopment of the site.
This, he said, will most likely include some sort of interim use involving a modest upgrading of the exhibition hall and office building, rather than immediately seeking a new development project.


Hon Industries Inc.(HONI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Furor Over Feminist Writer Leaves Bangladesh on Edge
Aziz ul-Haq, one of the most powerful Muslim leaders in Bangladesh, smiled as he pondered the case of Taslima Nasrin, the feminist writer whose bold, often startling challenges to Islamic taboos on female sexuality and the role of women have shaken this country like a cyclone blowing in from the Bay of Bengal.
"If she doesn't come back to the faith, the punishment is clear," the 75-year-old Muslim cleric said, as a crowd of bright-eyed boys pressed their noses against an iron grate in the wall separating them from their teacher's sanctuary at the Jamaya Rahmania Arabia madrassah, Dhaka's leading Muslim seminary.
"She should be executed."


No Headline
I've stopped counting.
The situation is just overwhelming.
I don't know what's going to happen. -- JOHANNA GROMBACH, of the Red Cross, describing the Rwandan exodus.  [ 1:3. ]


Kim's Funeral Is Delayed for Two Days
In a move that set off speculation that the transfer of power might not be going smoothly in North Korea, its Government announced suddenly this morning that it was delaying for two days the state funeral for its late leader, Kim Il Sung.
In a broadcast monitored early this morning by South Korea's Government, North Korea said the postponement of the funeral, originally scheduled for Sunday, was needed to allow more mourners to pay their respects to the "Great Leader."


Flood Threatens to Wash Away Dreams
Almost every black person here over 40 remembers the fervor and exultation, the hymns and protest songs, the sense of a new world just over the horizon that suffused this river city more than 30 years ago, when the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. preached the gospel of freedom at the old Mount Zion Baptist Church.
But when the flood came this week, when the chocolate-colored water poured over the largely black river-bottom neighborhoods of low-slung cinder-block duplexes, dirt yards and old wooden houses in faded greens and blues, it was a bitter reminder of how fleeting that long-ago moment was.


John H. Martin, 78; Educator Developed Literacy Technology
John Henry Martin, a former superintendent of schools in Mount Vernon, N.Y., who studied how children learn to read and write, died at his summer home in Sugar Hill, N.H., on July 1.
Dr.
Martin, who was 78, also lived in Stuart, Fla.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said Thomas I. Pillsbury Jr., director of the Pillsbury Funeral Home in Littleton, N.H.


Italian Chief Stakes Office on New Decree
With Italy's magistrates, the opposition and even members of his own coalition ranged against him, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's spokesman said today that the Government would resign if Parliament rejects a decree depicted by its opponents as an attempt to limit corruption investigations and stifle the press.
Earlier, the Italian leader forcefully defended the decree, saying it was designed to protect civil liberties and prevent a "police state" in Italy.


Health Insurance Ad Criticizes Pizza Hut
A sharp battle broke out yesterday over a television advertisement that accuses Pizza Hut of hypocrisy for opposing a proposed requirement that employers buy health insurance for their workers in this country while providing such insurance for its own workers overseas.
The Health Care Reform Project, a coalition of groups that say employers should help pay for insurance, showed the commercial to reporters, along with a report criticizing Pizza Hut, a division of Pepsico, and McDonald's for lobbying against the employer mandate.
But the commercial, which mentions only Pizza Hut, will not be shown outside the Congressional hearing room where the coalition's news conference was held because Pizza Hut persuaded four Washington television stations not to broadcast it.


Chaparral Steel Co. (CSM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Riggs NationalCorp.(RIGS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Firefighter Shot While On Duty
A firefighter responding to what turned out to be a false alarm in Flatbush, Brooklyn, was shot in the foot early yesterday morning as he and other firefighters tried to roll up a supermarket's storefront gate, fire and police officials said.
The shot came from inside the store.
The firefighter, Dennis Williams of Ladder Company 113 in Flatbush, was not seriously injured and was released yesterday morning from Kings County Hospital Center.
The store's night watchman, Alvarado Molino Gilberto, 26, of 555 Front Street, Hempstead, L.I., who had been locked inside the store, was arrested at the scene and charged with assault and criminal possession of a weapon.


Ethnic Politics in the East
All politics is ethnic, or so it seems, in the former Soviet Union these days.
This kind of politics, with its attendant demagoguery and violence, can destroy all chance for peaceful change.
President Boris Yeltsin's hint last week that the withdrawal of 2,500 Russian troops still in Estonia would depend on better treatment of Estonia's Russian residents could run just such a risk.
In an effort to appease Russia's nationalists, he hinted that the troops might not all be out by Aug. 31, as promised.
The paradox is that delay would arouse the ardor of Estonians, making it more difficult to protect the rights of Russian residents.


Boatmen's Bancshares (BOAT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Regions Financial Corp.(RGBK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Apartment Complexes Accused of Discrimination
The owners of two apartment complexes in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., were charged by the state yesterday with discrimination for refusing to rent to blacks and single women with children.
"It's a disgrace that a New Yorker should be turned down for an apartment because of race," said the State Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, after filing a lawsuit in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Mr.
Koppell, who is seeking re-election, announced the charges yesterday at a news conference in front of Federal Court in Foley Square.


If You Can't Let It Go, Call Sheila
ONE thing you can be sure of in this city is that as soon as some new dysfunctional condition is identified, a specialist who is expert in that field will come forth to help people cope with it.
Take, for example, the case of rich women (or as they often prefer to call themselves, well-to-do women) who lack the courage to get rid of expensive dresses that they never wear.


Texas Industries Inc.(TXI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


One Group That Eked Out a First-Half Gain
During the first half of 1994, the sole standout among the 19 equity fund categories tracked by Morningstar Inc. was the financial services group, which eked out a 3.1 percent gain despite rising interest rates.
Rising commodity prices pushed up the natural resources group, which invests in companies in the oil, natural gas, forest products and related industries.
Although overseas funds lost money, they lost less than domestic funds did because the weak dollar provided a slight cushion.


Aristide Calls for Reconciliation on His Own Radio Station; U.N. PROPOSES PEACE FORCE
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, proposed today that the Security Council authorize interested countries to form a coalition force of more than 15,000 soldiers and police officers that could be sent rapidly into Haiti to maintain law and order if the military junta steps down.
No timetable was given for Council action on the report.
Council authorization would allow the United States to provide the bulk of the forces and move in quickly.
Since the soldiers would not fly the United Nations flag, this approach could also mute complaints that the organization is sacrificing its neutrality.


New Resident of Gaza at Friday Prayers


Wolohan Lumber (WLHN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


When a Charity Auction Raises Not Just Dollars, but Tax Questions
Seeking to curb tax cheating on gifts, the Government in January began requiring a written receipt for charitable contributions of $250 or more -- or gifts as small as $75 when something of value is obtained in return.
No longer is a canceled check enough to support a deduction.
What's deductible has not changed, however, even if it falls under the category of a donation to a university in return for seats for the football season.
In this case the school is obliged to issue a statement breaking out the deductible donation and the cost of purchasing the seats.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the reunion concert by the tenors Placido Domingo, Luciano Pavarotti and Jose Carreras tonight at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles misstated the size of the broadcast audience for their first concert, in Rome in 1990.
It was 800 million, not 800,000.


Land Sale Preserves Hudson River's Arctic-Like Habitat
More than 1,800 miles south of the Arctic Circle, near the headwaters of the Hudson River, lies an ice meadow, a rare and fragile habitat that supports Arctic-like species of plants.
The state regulatory agency that oversees land-use management within the six-million acre Adirondack Park today approved a permit that will turn ownership of 18 miles along the Hudson River -- including the ice meadow -- over from the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation to the Adirondack Nature Conservancy.
A director of the conservancy said the price is about $100,000 and the sale is expected to be completed by Sept. 1.


Bennington Redesign Returns to Roots
To the Editor:
Re 'How Downsizing Diminishes Bennington" (letter, July 5) by Debra Hecht and Anaheed Alani, Bennington College graduates: Literature, foreign languages and musical instruments will continue to be taught at Bennington and in ways that offer greater breadth and depth.


Veterans Hospitals Made Medical History
To the Editor:
Re "Veterans System Bodes Ill for Our Health" (letter, July 2) by Dr. Joe Wilder:


Insurance Suit Is Filed Over Weeping Icon
First there were mysterious tears, then brazen theft, followed by a seemingly miraculous return.
Now, the Icon of St.
Irene, a 1919 portrait that made a Greek Orthodox church in Queens the focus of worldwide attention, has become the subject of a multimillion-dollar lawsuit.
The litigation pits the church, the St.
Irene Chrysovalantou Cathedral, at 36-07 23d Avenue in Long Island City, against the Cigna Insurance Company, which has accused St.
Irene's of fraud.


MBNA Corp.(KRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Illegal Immigrants Rescued From Kidnapping in Queens
Two Chinese restaurant workers in Queens were kidnapped, beaten and held hostage for almost two days, the police said, but were rescued on Thursday after frantic family members called the police because they had trouble pulling together the $60,000 ransom.
Three men were arrested and charged with the kidnapping, which the police believe occurred because the victims, both illegal immigrants, had failed to pay their debt to smugglers who brought them into the country.
The victims were found badly beaten and stripped of their clothes in the basement of a two-story house in Flushing, the police said.


Pacific Bell Shapes Strategy For New Wireless Service
Pacific Bell said today that it hoped to begin building a customer base for a new wireless service by seeking regulatory approval to resell cellular phone service from other companies.
The new service is to be provided by Pacific Bell Mobile Services, a subsidiary formed by the regional Bell company expressly to provide wireless communications service.


Rangers' Power Play: Keenan Odd Man Out
Mike Keenan stood his ground in Chicago, argued fiercely and things did not work out the way he had wanted.
He challenged a man, Bob Pulford, who was close to team ownership and well-respected in the National Hockey League, and he lost the challenge when the Blackhawks chose to fire him less than two seasons ago.
Keenan thought it would be different in New York. He was wrong.


Grainger (W.W.) Inc.(GWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Illicit Passion, Danced as Such
A tormented, depraved Crown Prince of the Hapsburg Empire menaces his bride with a skull and pistol on their wedding night, observes the infidelities of his Imperial parents, fends off mistresses and political conspirators and finally ends up dead at Mayerling, an Austrian hunting lodge, with his 17-year-old paramour.
At their first tryst, she had dropped her fur coat and rushed toward him in a nightgown.
Such is the stuff of "Mayerling," the richly detailed three-act costume drama, choreographed by Kenneth MacMillan, that the Royal Ballet presented on Thursday night and that will have two more performances tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. at the Metropolitan Opera House.


Liberty National Bancorp Inc.(LNBC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Carbajal Gains Junior Flyweight Crown  Michael Carbajal's relentless pursuit of another world title paid off last night when he powered his way to a unanimous 12-round decision over Josue (Dickie) Camacho in Phoenix.
The World Boxing Organization's junior flyweight title changed hands when three judges, two from the United States and one from England, turned in their scorecards.
Carbajal (32-1), who lost his International Boxing Federation and World Boxing Council crowns Feb. 19 in a split decision to Humberto Gonzalez, stalked a backpedaling Camacho most of the way.
Camacho (15-3), of Puerto Rico, lost in his second defense and fourth fight since he knocked out Eddie Vallejo on July 31, 1992, in the sixth round to win the title. (AP)


CHRONICLE
DANIELE MITTERRAND, the wife of Francois Mitterrand, the President of France, underwent cardiovascular surgery yesterday, and aides said the operation went smoothly, The Associated Press reported.
No details were given about what condition sent Mrs.
Mitterrand to Broussais Hospital in Paris nor about her prognosis.


Time for a Hard Look at Realty Stocks
A three-year-old bull market in real estate investment trusts continued in the first six months of 1994, proving to be one of the few bright spots for investors.
But money managers and industry analysts are raising caution flags amid a flood of new real estate issues.
"Everybody is talking about REIT's, but what they are not saying is that you really have to differentiate between these companies," said Barry Vinocur, editor in chief of Realty Stock Review, a newsletter.


Microsoft and U.S. in Agreement To Settle Long Antitrust Dispute
The Microsoft Corporation reached a settlement today with the Justice Department to end a four-year antitrust battle over charges that the company unfairly tried to stifle competition.
Under the agreement, which is set to be announced by the Justice Department over the weekend, Microsoft will change some of its business practices.
The changes are expected to focus on Microsoft's licensing of the software used to run more than 50 million personal computers.


Cuomo Signs Bills to Help Bolster Racing
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo went to Belmont Park yesterday and signed two bills to revive the racing business during a well-staged ceremony in front of the parimutuel windows of the second-floor clubhouse and a mixed audience of bettors, jockeys like Mike Smith and Jerry Bailey, horse trainers like MacKenzie Miller and Pat Kelly and racing patriarchs like Alfred Gwynne Vanderbilt.
One bill was aimed at stimulating the breeding business, the other at stimulating the racing business.
The Governor declared that both were aimed at the same target: "To return your industry to the pre-eminence it once held."


CHRONICLE
On the mend in this country, Illinois Governor JAMES EDGAR went home from the hospital yesterday, eight days after undergoing quadruple heart bypass surgery.
A state-owned helicopter took the 47-year-old Republican Governor and his wife from EHS Good Samaritan Hospital in Downers Grove, near Chicago, to the Executive Mansion in Springfield, where he is expected to spend about a month recuperating.
NADINE BROZAN


Teleflex Inc.(TFX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Corrections
The headline of Thursday's column incorrectly stated the late Rudolf Muhsam's nationality.
He was German, not Hungarian.


Look at Vietnam Generation Now
To the Editor:
The two showings on television over the Independence Day weekend of Oliver Stone's movie "Born on the Fourth of July" reminded me of something older people should never forget and younger ones should learn more about.


A Duel Of Pitchers Is Settled By a Split
After banging out 19 hits and crossing home 10 times in the first game of a doubleheader at Shea Stadium last night, the hitters took a break in the nightcap.
They were forced to.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALCO STANDARD CORP., Wayne, Pa., an office products company, acquired closely held Larson Packaging Equipment Corp., St.
Louis, a distributor of packaging equipment and systems, for undisclosed terms.
IMCO RECYCLING INC., Irving, Tex., an aluminum and magnesium recycling concern, signed a letter of intent to buy Phoenix Smelting Corp., an aluminum recycling plant operator, for about $10 million.


U.S. Lets AT&amp;T Buy McCaw
The Justice Department approved the AT&amp;T Corporation's $12.6 billion takeover of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. today, setting the stage for the nation's biggest long-distance carrier to become the largest operator of wireless communications as well.
The decision came in the form of a consent decree, in which AT&amp;T agreed to a number of relatively uncontroversial safeguards intended to prevent the company from competing unfairly.


A Computer Glitch Disrupts Nasdaq Trades for 2 1/2 Hours
Yesterday was a quiet day on the Nasdaq market. Entirely too quiet.
Just as the nation's over-the-counter marketplace prepared to open its computer terminals for business yesterday morning, its mainframe system in Trumbull, Conn., simply passed out.
Before frantic technicians could revive the system and steady its pulse, more than two and a half hours had elapsed -- more than 150 minutes in which there was no Nasdaq.


Village Street Life Gains From Policing
To the Editor:
I am a resident of New York's Greenwich Village, who would like to thank the Police Department, under its new commissioner, and the Mayor for beginning to bring quality back to our neighborhood.
I was born in the Village, raised in New York and have lived around Washington Square Park for 20 years.


Rangers Coach Resigns


Giuliani Seeks a Review Of Fund-Raiser's Rents
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he had asked a top aide to begin reviewing the leases of dozens of tenants in three apartment buildings owned by a fund-raiser for the Mayor, to see if the terms matched those offered to 15 campaign staffers and administration members.
The Mayor said that he would take action against anyone in his administration who had accepted special favors, but that the review so far showed that the rents his aides paid were "very, very comparable to what everyone else in the building is paying."


Aristide Calls for Reconciliation on His Own Radio Station
Speaking to his countrymen via a new radio station set up specifically for his use by the Clinton Administration, Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, tonight called for "reconciliation, justice and democracy" in his homeland and forswore revenge against the soldiers who removed him from office.
Vowing to return to Haiti soon, Father Aristide promised that "there will be no violence" when he comes back.
"I will not accept any vengeance," he said.


Kaydon Corp.(KDON,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Polar Opposites Make Rebellious Music Together
Joan Jett is the chewing gum in rock-and-roll's trading-card pack of rebellion.
In the 1970's with the all-female group the Runaways and in the 1980's as a pop-metal solo artist, she turned the tough talk of girls' bathrooms into powerful songs packaged by men like Kim Fowley (the Svengali behind the Runaways) and Kenny Laguna (who managed Ms. Jett's solo career and was co-writer of many of her songs).
On her new album, "Pure and Simple" (Warner Brothers), Ms.
Jett collaborates with the women her faux independence inspired.
Most notable among these is Kathleen Hanna of Bikini Kill, the group with which Ms.
Jett performed on Thursday night at Irving Plaza.
Ms.
Jett produced a recent Bikini Kill single for the Kill Rock Stars label, and collaborated with Ms.
Hanna on four songs on "Pure and Simple."


Clinton, on the Stump, Opens a Final Health Care Push
President Clinton today began a vigorous and probably final crusade to sell his national health insurance program to voters and Congress, flying to rural Pennsylvania to assert that the program would be a boon to the middle class and that its critics were all but liars.
Standing in shirt sleeves, flushed in the vapory heat, Mr.
Clinton punched the air and pounded his lectern as he argued, again and again, that working people were the only ones who would suffer if his plan to guarantee health insurance to everyone did not become law.


Hovnanian Enterprises Inc.(HOV,A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Okinawa Gives Its Flavor To Rock
Rarely is an ethnic music, even an updated ethnic music, as striking and immediately accessible as the music of Okinawa.
Distinguished by the gleeful, high-pitched chirping of female singers, reggaelike rhythms and the melodies of the three-stringed, banjolike sanshin, the music of the island -- Japan's southernmost prefecture -- has been steadily gaining popularity in the rest of Japan.
It might be the first Japanese roots music that the country's youth, typically enamored with American pop, has embraced.
The result is comparable to what happened in Britain in the 60's as musicians like Mick Jagger, John Mayall and Eric Clapton discovered the blues, enabling older blues masters to recharge their careers.
Now interest in Okinawan music is picking up in the United States.
Shoukichi Kina, known as the father of modern Okinawan music, is to perform in New York for the first time tomorrow afternoon at Central Park Summerstage, midpark at 72d Street.
Nenes, a young Okinawan quartet, is to play at the Black Ships Festival in Newport, R.I., next Saturday night.


Fire Damages a Supermarket on the Upper West Side


An Early Verdi Comedy That He Wasn't Fond of
Few works by major composers began with as much going against them as "Un Giorno di Regno," Verdi's second opera.
Verdi, contracted to produce a work for La Scala, disliked the libretto and worked unenthusiastically.
While he was composing, both he and his wife fell ill, and his wife died.
Both audience and critics disliked the opera at its premiere in 1840, and it was immediately pulled from the repertory.
And Verdi found the exercise so depressing that he considered giving up composition.
The best he could say for the work, decades later, was that equally poor operas by other composers have fared better.
He had a point.
"Un Giorno di Regno" may be two hours of chirpy, formulaic music of numbing triviality, but works with similar attributes by Rossini and Donizetti have become repertory staples.
Vincent La Selva and his New York Grand Opera performed the work on Wednesday evening at Rumsey Field in Central Park as part of the company's seven-year chronological survey of all 28 Verdi operas.


Crestar Financial Corp.(CF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thomas Howe, 89, A Museum Director
Thomas Carr Howe Jr., director of the California Palace of the Legion of Honor in San Francisco for nearly four decades, died on Tuesday at the California Pacific Medical Center.
He was 89 and lived in San Francisco.
The cause was pneumonia, said a spokesman for the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, which was formed in 1972 when the administration of the California Palace of the Legion of Honor merged with that of the M.H. de Young Memorial Museum.


Dow Corning Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Europeans Agree on Luxembourger as Chief
Divided over whether the European Union should remain a free-trade zone or move swiftly toward federal-style political and economic unity, leaders of the 12-nation group agreed today on a new chief executive some hoped would make no bold new moves -- the Prime Minister of Luxembourg.
Jacques Santer, a 57-year-old Christian Democrat who has headed his country's Government since 1984 and was re-elected in June, will instead become President of the European Union's executive commission in Brussels next January, provided the European Parliament approves his nomination next week.
He will succeed Jacques Delors, who has held the post since 1985.


INSIDE
Korean Funeral Postponed
North Korea postponed the state funeral of Kim Il Sung, its longtime leader, causing speculation about the leadership succession there.
Page 3.
European Leader Chosen
The European Union, divided over the pace of unity, chose Prime Minister Jacques Santer of Luxembourg as its new chief executive.
Page 3.
Murder Suspect's 'Vacation'
Muhammad Abequa told his mother that he and his children are in Jordon on vacation.
He never mentioned that he is wanted for murder.
Page 23.
2 Arts


6 Hurt in Crown Hts. Fire
Six people were seriously injured early today when a fire broke out in a six-story apartment building at 130 Lefferts Place in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, fire officials said.


Phone Antennas Resisted Out of Fears of Radiation
The boom in popularity of cellular phones has created a demand by cellular companies for places to install more antennas, but villages and towns in the New York region and elsewhere are putting up stiff resistance to having the antennas in their backyards.
The antennas are needed, the companies say, to reduce irritating blackouts as car and other mobile phones move about and to meet a growing craving for the phones.
But in several communities, installation of the antennas has been blocked by residents who say they fear the electromagnetic fields may not be safe, a concern for which the phone companies and many scientists say there is no persuasive basis.


Whistle-Blower Suit Settled, Litton Shares Move Higher
Litton Industries' shares rose today after the company agreed to pay a total of $86 million to settle a lawsuit that had accused it of overcharging the Government for computer services.
The move eliminated what the company had estimated to be a $650 million potential liability.


Citizens Banking Corp.(CBCF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Swift Transportation Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Furor Over Feminist Writer Leaves Bangladesh on Edge
Aziz ul-Haq, one of the most powerful Muslim leaders in Bangladesh, smiled as he pondered the case of Taslima Nasrin, the feminist writer whose bold, often startling challenges to Islamic taboos on female sexuality and the role of women have shaken this country like a cyclone blowing in from the Bay of Bengal.
"If she doesn't come back to the faith, the punishment is clear," the 75-year-old Muslim cleric said, as a crowd of bright-eyed boys pressed their noses against an iron grate in the wall separating them from their teacher's sanctuary at the Jamaya Rahmania Arabia madrassah, Dhaka's leading Muslim seminary.
"She should be executed."


Public &amp; Private; A Good Fire
When I was a little girl I was enamored of the comic strip "Brenda Starr." Brenda was beautiful, a world traveler with masses of gracefully waving red hair and stars where her pupils ought to be.
She had a mysterious boyfriend with a black eye patch named Basil St.
John, and she never wore the same gown twice.
Brenda was a reporter. This was my introduction to the newspaper business.


Bridge
It can safely be predicted that New York City will produce some stars of national quality early in the 21st century.
In the last year, 10 schools have provided weekly bridge classes, with encouragement from the American Contract Bridge League, which provided textbooks and T-shirts, and the Greater New York Bridge Association.
Schools wishing to introduce such a program should telephone Sidney Rosen, (212) 427-1503.
For the last four years he has been the driving force behind the classes for 10-year-olds at Public School 158 in Manhattan.
Their season concluded with an all-day individual tournament, which had the following result: 1.
Luc Grison; 2.
Pelton Phinizy; 3.
Michele Hirsch.
The winner was aided by the diagramed deal from the event, on which he sat North.


Devers Is Out of Meet
GAIL DEVERS, the 1992 Olympic 100-meter champion and winner of the 100-meter dash and 100-meter hurdles at the 1993 world championships, has withdrawn from the Goodwill Games because of an injured left leg.
Her coach, BOB KERSEE, said Devers injured the leg during the indoor season, then reinjured it during the USA-Mobil Indoor Championships in March at Atlanta. (AP)


How a County Buried $52 Million; A Landfill Site Falls Afoul of Environmental Concerns
For $52 million, Orange County has constructed a garbage landfill that will never be soiled by garbage.
Indeed, in the decade since the project was proposed, taxpayer money is the only thing that has been poured into the 34-acre site.
The state permits required to operate the would-be landfill expired in early July, and the County Executive, Joseph G. Rampe, has announced that he will abandon the project entirely.
Mr.
Rampe, who took office in January, says that to operate the landfill now would only mean throwing good money after bad.


Barnett Banks Inc.(BBI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wanted: A Monitor With Teeth
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's pledge to keep "an open mind" on the question of an outside agency to monitor police corruption was encouraging.
A strong monitoring body is the only way the cycle of corruption documented in the Mollen Commission report can be broken.
But the resistance of some of New York's district attorneys is disappointing.
The district attorneys recognize that some kind of outside monitor is necessary, if not inevitable.
Still, some of them have proposed monitoring arrangements that are largely ceremonial and toothless.
Nearly all, for example, oppose an outside monitor with subpoena power.


John P. Mangan; Lawyer, 62
John P. Mangan, a vice president and associate general counsel of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of America, died on Tuesday at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital.
Mr.
Mangan, who lived in Bronxville, was 62.
The cause was cancer, said his son, James.


M.S. Carriers Inc.(MSCA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CIT Group Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Pianist Crosses National and Historical Borders  The Frick Collection


New Police Policy Opens Doors to TV
As he walked through Kennedy International Airport in handcuffs a few weeks ago, a suspect in a little-noticed drug shooting in Far Rockaway was visibly stunned to find a reporter and camera crew waiting for him alongside his police escort, filming his every move as police officers hustled him off a flight from St.
Louis into an unmarked car.
With the camera on, the crew then followed the car up the Van Wyck Expressway to the Queens Criminal Court Building, where court officials were even more amazed to find that every detail of the suspect's arraignment and prosecution were also recorded on tape.


Stryker Corp.(STRY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Phone Antennas Resisted Out of Fears of Radiation
The boom in popularity of cellular phones has created a demand by cellular companies for places to install more antennas, but villages and towns in the New York region and elsewhere are putting up stiff resistance to having the antennas in their backyards.
The antennas are needed, the companies say, to reduce irritating blackouts as car and other mobile phones move about and to meet a growing craving for the phones.
But in several communities, installation of the antennas has been blocked by residents who say they fear the electromagnetic fields may not be safe, a concern for which the phone companies and many scientists say there is no persuasive basis.


Israel-Jordan Handshake: Short Reach
When King Hussein of Jordan and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel get together in 10 days at the White House, some may inevitably find their thoughts drifting back to another extravaganza held not long ago in the same place: the famous handshake last September between Mr.
Rabin and Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader.
There is no comparison.


Huntington Bancshares Inc.(HBAN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oates a 49er, and a Starter
Bart Oates spent Thursday night agonizing over what he called the biggest football decision of his life.
By the next morning, the 36-year-old center knew what he had to do: he couldn't turn his back on a starting job, so he left a nine-year association with the Giants and signed a three-year, $2 million deal with the San Francisco 49ers.
Oates took about $100,000 less than what the Giants had offered, but with the Giants he would have been a backup on a rebuilding team; with the 49ers he will start and play for a Super Bowl contender.
San Francisco is moving its All-Pro center, Jesse Sapolu, to guard.
"If I was content with sitting back and watching a good player like Brian Williams develop, then I would stay," Oates said yesterday.
"I just wasn't ready to sit on the bench yet."


Illinova Corp.(ILN,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


American Players Dance Past the Dutch
While the harbor waters crashed against the pier just outside the stadium, a sea of orange-clad Dutch fans inside tried to turn the tide in their favor against the favored United States Davis Cup team today.
Orange was everywhere in the 12,000-seat stadium for the first day of the World Group quarterfinal match.
Fans showed the home color on hats, T-shirts and their bodies.
But the commotion barely ruffled the United States singles lineup of the world No. 1, Pete Sampras, and a former world No. 1, Jim Courier.


Religion Notes
Does the Pope believe in Christ?
That is the kind of direct, no nonsense question that Pope John Paul II will deal with in a book that will be published this fall, said the journalist who supplied the questions on which the book is based.


Protest Strikes Paralyze Nigerian Business and Transportation


Gore Urges Wilder to Back Robb's Candidacy
L.
Douglas Wilder, the former Democratic Governor who is running for the Senate from Virginia as an independent, said today that Vice President Al Gore had indirectly suggested that he drop out of the race by voicing worry that his candidacy could contribute to the election of the Republican nominee, Oliver L. North.
At a news conference today, Mr.
Wilder said he met with Mr.
Gore at the White House on Thursday evening for half an hour.
He added, "I told him under no circumstances was I withdrawing."


CHRONICLE
President Clinton yesterday appointed STEPHEN J. SOLARZ, the former Representative from Brooklyn, to head the new Central Asian-American Enterprise Fund, designed to promote investments in the former Soviet republics of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan.
Mr.
Solarz, who lost a bid for re-election two years ago, had been in line to be Ambassador to India but withdrew as a candidate at the White House's urging after questions arose about his dealings with a Hong Kong businessman reputed to have ties to organized crime.
A Federal investigation found no criminal wrongdoing, but the Administration decided not to proceed with the nomination.


RABIN IS TO MEET WITH KING HUSSEIN IN U.S. ON JULY 25
President Clinton announced today that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and King Hussein of Jordan will meet here on July 25 in a session that is not expected to produce a peace treaty, but could yield accords to improve relations between the Middle East neighbors.
Administration officials said the meeting had a secondary goal as well -- to encourage Syria to move toward a more flexible course in its own talks with Israel.


Schooling Today Includes More Than Teaching
To the Editor:
In a report July 5 on a New York City proposal that seeks a major share of a $400 million gift from Walter H. Annenberg to create 50 small schools, you repeat a canard that deserves scrutiny.
Especially in light of the budget controversy between the city and the Board of Education.


Yanks Rally Again to Win In 11 Innings
His first home run nearly elicited a brawl in the Yankees dugout.
His second home run gave his team the lead.
The leaping catch of Bernie Williams's shot to the wall in center field?
Grit and grace rolled into one.
It has now become clear: Ken Griffey Jr. is finding ways to get under the Yankees' skin never before imaginable.


FOLK MUSIC
Christian Conviction  And Down-to-Earth Detail The Supper Club


Workers Clash With Restaurant Over Meals
The 25 waiters, busboys and kitchen workers at the Cafe Des Artistes on West 67th Street have accused the restaurant's owners of charging them for meals even though they said they were promised they could eat without paying.
In an unfair labor practice complaint filed in Federal Court in Manhattan, the workers accused the owners, George and Jenifer Lang, of unlawfully making them pay for the meals over a five-year period.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.22
3.13
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.25
4.27
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.68
4.66
3.12
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.23
7.22
5.69
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.54
7.53
6.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.30
7.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.41
6.44
5.69
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Synovus Financial (SNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
The column on July 7 about Oscar Brotman erred about his age and the date of his death.
He died on May 30 at the age of 82, not 90.


Tomjanovich Charge Is Dropped in Houston
Harris County prosecutors in Houston yesterday threw out a drunken driving charge against Houston Rockets Coach RUDY TOMJANOVICH because of insufficient evidence.
Tomjanovich was arrested early Wednesday in West University Place, an affluent enclave, after he refused to take a sobriety test.
He also declined a breath test at the police station and was jailed for seven hours before being released on $500 bond.
But the Harris County District Attorney's office dropped the charge.
"We reviewed the videotape of the driving and the tape made at the station and based on that, it's the opinion of all involved that the proper disposition of this is that it be dismissed," said the prosecutor, LYN McCLELLAN.


Deals for Older People If They Will Just Ask
GROWING older has an upside for those who aren't shy about discussing their age.
More and more companies are trying to capture the elderly market by offering discounts and special deals to older people.
The topic may bring early-bird dinner specials and movie discounts to mind, but much bigger returns are available.
Financial services companies and even the Internal Revenue Service offer tax breaks based on age.


Pizza Chain Blocks Critical Commercial
A sharp battle broke out today over workers' health insurance, pitting Pizza Hut against Senator Edward M. Kennedy and a coalition supporting President Clinton's proposal for universal health insurance.
The Health Care Reform Project, a coalition of unions and other groups that would require employers to help pay for insurance, held a news conference here to release a report and show a television commercial accusing the company of hypocrisy on health care.
The report said Pizza Hut and McDonald's paid for workers' coverage abroad while fighting legislation that would make them do the same in the United States.


Corrections
An article yesterday about American military planning for a possible invasion of Haiti misstated the number of marines staging a mock evacuation on an island in the Bahamas.
It was more than 400, not more than 4,000.


Citizens Bancorp (Md.) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


JAZZ
Drummer Looks for New Ways To Structure the Music  Sweet Basil


Elmer E. Klaus, Chemical Engineer, 73
Elmer E. Klaus, an authority on the viscosity of fluids, died on Tuesday at Centre Community Hospital in State College, Pa.
Dr.
Klaus, who lived in State College, was 73.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Star Banc Corp.(STB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Tilling Method Speeds the Plow's Demise
The cornfields of Dale Montgomery would probably have embarrassed a proud Midwestern farmer from an earlier generation.
Instead of cleanly plowed black soil, the ground between his corn rows is covered with the withering stalks of last year's crop, traditionally called trash.
"My grandfather would have snorted, 'How in the world can you grow corn like this?' " said Mr.
Montgomery, 43, who raises soybeans and corn on 1,000 acres in the rich farm country of DeKalb County here.


BancorpSouth Inc.(BOMS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Crash of the Comet
Virtually all the Earth's major telescopes will be turned on Jupiter today as the first chunk of a ruptured comet plunges into the solar system's largest planet.
This will be the first such collision ever monitored in the solar system, though how awesome it will be is a matter of conjecture.
The reverberations in the Jovian atmosphere may help astronomers gain new insights into the composition of Jupiter, the formation of the solar system and the structure of comets.
But for most people the fascination in this distant event will manifest itself in the shivers of apprehension that great forces can strike from afar, with little advance warning.


ELI LILLY &amp; CO. (LLY,N)
Eli Lilly &amp; Company said yesterday that it expected to earn $4 a share from its core pharmaceutical business next year, not counting any costs or income from its planned $4 billion acquisition of PCS Health Systems from the McKesson Corporation.
James M. Cornelius, the chief financial officer, said Lilly was "comfortable" with analysts' earnings estimates of $4.55 to $4.68 a share for 1994, before the PCS acquisition and other one-time expenses.
Lilly earned $4.58 a share in 1993.


National Data Corp.(NDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Observer; Advice for a Vicar
Dear Pontiff:
Welcome to the book trade.
It needs a touch of class, and you're just the author to provide it.


Present at Retailing's Creations
In the many financial dramas that have buffeted the biggest names in American retailing over the last decade, Ronald W. Tysoe has always been a key supporting actor.
So it was in the recent Macy-Federated deal.
As vice chairman and chief financial officer of Federated Department Stores, Mr.
Tysoe spearheaded the company's apparently successful bid to merge with R. H. Macy &amp; Company, forming the country's largest department-store chain.
For the last seven months, he patiently attended meeting after meeting with Macy creditors and executives until he fashioned a deal that all sides could live with.


Falcons Sign Sanders
The Atlanta Falcons signed wide receiver RICKY SANDERS to a one-year contract yesterday, three months after voiding a longer and more lucrative contract because of a shoulder injury.
The team would not disclose details of the new contract, but The Atlanta Journal-Constitution said it was believed to include a base salary at or near the veteran minimum of $162,500, plus a package of incentives.
The receiver played for the Redskins for eight seasons. (AP)


Mexico City Journal; Soap Opera From Past With Fears From Present
People all over Mexico are watching an era come to an end.
A President who opened up the nation's economy is under intense criticism for helping the rich and ignoring the poor.
He is accused of turning his back on Mexico's rich past.
An aura of violence and budding revolt hangs over his final months in office.
The last days of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari?
No, a 155-episode nightly television soap opera about the life and times of Gen.
Porfirio Diaz, whose 34-year autocratic rule ended with the first shots of the Mexican revolution in 1910.


Henry J. Karsch, 72, A Naval Architect Of Seagoing Vessels
Henry J. Karsch, a naval architect with a long career of designing seagoing naval and commercial vessels, died on Monday at St.
Barnabas Hospital in Livingston, N.J.
He was 72 and lived in Short Hills, N.J.
The cause was a cerebral stroke, his family said.


Collective Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Suntrust Banks (STI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


At Deadline, Deal to Develop Site Of New York Coliseum Collapses
A nine-year effort to redevelop the New York Coliseum crumbled last night when the developer, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, failed to meet a deadline to sign a contract with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which owns the Columbus Circle site.
The chairman of the M.T.A., Peter E. Stangl, said that with Mr.
Zuckerman out of the deal, the authority was now free to begin exploring options for the redevelopment of the site.
This, he said, will most likely include some sort of interim use involving a modest upgrading of the exhibition hall and office building, rather than immediately seeking a new development project.


Business Digest
Markets  Nasdaq's huge computer system passed out.
Before frantic engineers could revive the system and steady its pulse, more than two and a half hours had elapsed.  [ 37. ] The stock market moved mostly higher in a sluggish session highlighted by options-related trading and a sharp selloff in semiconductor shares.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 14.56 points, to close at 3,757.81.  [ 38. ] The bond market failed to extend Thursday's strong rally, ending the day with little change after giving up its early gains.
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond edged up to 7.54 percent, from 7.53 percent on Thursday.  [ 42. ] The dollar fell against the Japanese yen, ending a two-day rally, after Japan said its trade surplus with the United States had surged 43 percent in June.  [ 43. ] Cocoa jumped to its highest price in four years and coffee resumed its climb.  [ 43. ] The Economy  Industrial production rose 0.5 percent in June, as hot weather forced a surge in utility output, the Government said.


Kim's Funeral Is Delayed for Two Days
In a move that set off speculation that the transfer of power might not be going smoothly in North Korea, its Government announced suddenly this morning that it was delaying for two days the state funeral for its late leader, Kim Il Sung.
In a broadcast monitored early this morning by South Korea's Government, North Korea said the postponement of the funeral, originally scheduled for Sunday, was needed to allow more mourners to pay their respects to the "Great Leader."


Italian Chief Stakes Office on New Decree
With Italy's magistrates, the opposition and even members of his own coalition ranged against him, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's spokesman said today that the Government would resign if Parliament rejects a decree depicted by its opponents as an attempt to limit corruption investigations and stifle the press.
Earlier, the Italian leader forcefully defended the decree, saying it was designed to protect civil liberties and prevent a "police state" in Italy.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  ISRAEL-JORDAN MEETING SET
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and King Hussein of Jordan will meet July 25, and their meeting is expected both to improve their relations and to encourage Syria to move toward peace with Israel.  1


Keenan Abruptly Quits a Month After Cup Victory
A month after they joined in joyful celebration of the Rangers' first Stanley Cup championship in 54 years, Coach Mike Keenan and the team came to a sudden parting yesterday, with Keenan resigning.
He blamed the Rangers for breaching his contract while the Rangers accused Keenan of a splitting of contractual hairs.
Keenan's departure was not totally unexpected because of persistent differences with General Manager Neil Smith during the second half of the season and the playoffs.
Their relationship had grown so bad, according to several people familiar with the situation, that they did not speak at all during the Stanley Cup finals, in which the Rangers defeated Vancouver in seven games.


E-Systems Inc.(ESY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


METRO DIGEST
PHONE ANTENNAS RESISTED OUT OF FEAR The boom in popularity of cellular phones has created a demand by cellular companies for places to install more antennas.
But in several communities, installation of the antennas has been blocked by residents who say they fear the eletromagnetic fields may not be safe, a concern for which the phone companies and many scientists say there is no persuasive evidence.
Page 1.
COLISEUM DEAL CRUMBLES AT DEADLINE A nine-year effort to redevelop the New York Coliseum crumbled when the developer, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, failed to meet a deadline to sign a contract with the owner of the site, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Page 1.


30th Season in the Parks For the Philharmonic
The New York Philharmonic's 30th season of free summer parks concerts is to begin on Aug. 1 on the Great Lawn in Central Park.
Zdenek Macal is to conduct the orchestra in Howard Hanson's Second Symphony and Dvorak's Eighth.
The program is to be repeated at Great Kills Park, Staten Island, on Aug. 2; Heckscher State Park, East Islip, L.I., on Aug. 6; and Cunningham Park in Fresh Meadows, Queens, on Aug. 7.
On Aug. 8, also on the Great Lawn, Leslie Dunner is to make his Philharmonic debut, conducting Verdi's "Nabucco" Overture, Mozart's Symphony No. 36 and Tchaikovsky's Fourth Symphony.
The same program will be offered in Prospect Park in Brooklyn on Aug. 11; at Westchester Community College in Valhalla, N.Y., on Aug. 12, and in Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx on Aug. 13.


Compass Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ms. Wolpin, Mr. Tinkham
Berenice Wolpin, a daughter of Sara and David Wolpin of Aloha, Ore., is to be married today to Christopher M. Tinkham, the son of Elenore Tinkham of Cheektowaga, N.Y., and the late Marvin Tinkham.
The Rev.
Arlene Bodge, a United Methodist minister, is to officiate at the Old Whaling Church in Edgartown, Mass.
Rabbi David Kudan will take part in the ceremony.
The bride, who graduated from the State University College at Purchase, N.Y., is a freelance translator.


Staring Ends in a Killing
A staring contest on a subway train in Manhattan early yesterday grew into a fight in which a 21-year-old man was stabbed to death in the chest with a dagger, the police said.
About 3:40 A.M. at the Union Square station, the victim, Ramon Medina of Woodbine Avenue in Ridgewood, Queens, and a 15-year-old friend boarded the Brooklyn-bound L train, said Sgt.
Luis Medina, a transit police spokesman.


How Airlines Share Flights
THE airline ticket may say you are going to take American Airlines Flight 6032 from Kennedy International Airport to Bahrain on the Persian Gulf.
Nonetheless, although there is no indication on the ticket, the flight will not be aboard American, but on Gulf Air, the national carrier of Abu Dhabi, Bahrain, Oman and Qatar.
A ticket for the same trip bought from Gulf Air will show the flight as Gulf Air 32.
This piece of cooperation, started July 1, illustrates a basic form of the practice of code-sharing: The same flight is sold by both airlines under their own codes, AA6032 and GF032.


POP MUSIC: Striving to Be Rock's Next Seattle; Miami -- A Little of This, A Little of That
As befits a city that is a jumble of cultures and languages, Miami has not one music scene, but several -- and each seems largely oblivious to the others.
So while teen-agers suffering from suburban anomie flock to hard-core bands like Collapsing Lungs and Marilyn Manson, hip young Cubans have made the roots singer Albita Rodriguez, who arrived here less than a year ago, the toast of Spanish-speaking Miami.
But Haitians gravitate to groups like Koleksyon Kazak, and black rap fans are still looking for the successors to 2 Live Crew.
Some of the most interesting new music in Miami, though, comes from performers who have a foot in more than one camp.
The Cuban-American singer and songwriter Nil Lara, who has made the Stephen Talkhouse club in Miami Beach his home base, is a prime example: here is someone as familiar with Led Zeppelin as with Beny More, who artfully blends rock and Latin elements into music both muscular and intelligent.
Mary Karlzen, whose first record on Atlantic will soon be released, is a more familiar hybrid, writing and singing elegant pop songs filtered through a strong country sensibility.


Backlash
To the Editor:
Christina Hoff Sommers tracked down studies that have been widely cited in support of the argument that our society is systematically hostile to girls and women.
Over and over she found doubtful science, questionable interpretation and selective reporting of data.


Art; In Greenwich, Scenes From the Silk Route
LAST year, the death sentence: Eastman Kodak announced that it would no longer provide the makings for the dye transfer process.
This year a requiem: the process is being celebrated in a traveling show of dye-transfer prints by Luke Powell.
The photographer, who grew up in North Carolina and went to Chapel Hill as well as Yale, lives in Vermont.


POSTINGS: Astor Penthouse Sold; 23 Rooms, Gym And 2 Libraries
When Vincent Astor wanted an apartment, he built an apartment house and took the 17th floor.
His 23-room penthouse with its planted terraces and 63-foot-long entrance gallery at 120 East End Avenue at 85th Street, was sold last Tuesday for $5.85 million, not too far from the original $6.5 million asking price.
The apartment, owned by the financier Asher Edelman, had been on the market since April 1991.
According to several real-estate agents, the apartment took a while to sell for three reasons: its far East Side location, its huge size and its maintenance: $8,100, not high for a 10,000-square-foot apartment, but still, "a pretty big nut to crack every month," according to one broker.


Maradona's Ride
To the Sports Editor:
Being an Argentine soccer fan, I have had the enormous fortune (and misery) of following Diego Maradona's career.
It has been a roller coaster ride.
I am not going to deny his many problems with drugs, with journalists and ultimately with himself.
But I found George Vecsey's "Argentina Won Gamble With Diego" (The Times, July 1) too harsh.


Weekend Volunteers Pitch In to Repair Neglected Houses
ON a tree-lined street in Glen Cove sits a dilapidated house, its paint peeled away by the ravages of time.
A section of the roof is warped, as are several window frames.
The outer front door hangs askew.
Neighbors say the house was once among the prettiest on the block.
But now the owners, who are in their 60's, live on a fixed income.
The husband, a laid-off service worker, has not found steady work.
Their child, who is disabled, struggles to balance college classes and a part-time job.


Fehr Itself
To the Sports Editor:
As a baseball shutdown impends, would it be proper to say that the only thing the owners have to fear is Fehr itself?
ABBOTT KATZ  Brooklyn


Cricket Keleher, John T. Braun
Frances Vaughan Keleher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter D. Keleher of Duxbury, Mass., was married there yesterday at the Church of St.
John the Evangelist to Dr.
John Tomas Braun, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William E. Braun of Solon, Ohio.
The Rev.
Michael J. Marrone performed the Episcopal ceremony, in which the Rev.
Joseph K. Raeke, a Roman Catholic priest, took part.
Mrs.
Braun, 25, is known as Cricket.
She graduated from Middlebury College and is a candidate for a master's degree in environmental biology from Antioch New England Graduate School.
Her father is the president of Evergreen Resources, commodities traders in Kingston, Mass.


Amid Uncertainty, Exploring Options for the Coliseum
Over the nine years of Mortimer B. Zuckerman's effort to develop the site of the New York Coliseum, prospective tenants and partners came and went, plans were drawn and revised, the site itself was scaled back and the developer's down payment was reduced.
One constant, at least in recent months, was acrimony.
Yesterday was no different.
On the morning after the transaction unraveled, all sides were still insisting that their honest intent was to see a project go forward while charging one other with negotiating in bad faith.


From Schoolgirl to Older Woman, in Record Time
Julie Walters made her name, and got an Oscar nomination, playing the avid working-class student in the 1983 film "Educating Rita," so it's a surprise 11 years later to discover that she seems to be cornering the British film market in portraying older women.
What happened to the middle years?
The actress, who is 44, laughed animatedly in response to that question.
She was in the sitting room of a hotel near her home in the Sussex countryside and looked younger than she does in most of her recent roles.
"I find older women, I suppose, more interesting, and I like interesting people," said Ms.
Walters, who has two movies opening in New York this week.
"My season of films," she smiled.


How We Won The Moon
A MAN ON THE MOON The Voyages of the Apollo Astronauts.
By Andrew Chaikin.
Illustrated. 670 pp.
New York: Viking. $27.95.
MOON SHOT The Inside Story of America's Race to the Moon.
By Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton with Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict.
Illustrated. 383 pp.
Atlanta: Turner Publishing. $21.95.


Goin Placed on Leave During Ethics Inquiry
Florida State put Athletic Director BOB GOIN on paid leave yesterday while an ethics panel investigates whether he improperly used his position to get his house a new roof and his son a job.
Florida State's president, TALBOT D'ALEMBERTE, said that he actually made the decision two days before, when the Florida Ethics Commission voted unanimously to investigate whether Goin violated state ethics laws.


Simon Templar Was a Template
To the Editor:
In her article " 'Morning, Moneypenny. Glad to See Me Again?' "  [ June 26 ] , Suzanna Andrews implies that the James Bond films originated the combination of violent international intrigue with elegant wine, women and wit.
Yet the tuxedo-clad boulevardier battling the forces of global evil is an ancient cinematic and literary conceit.
The most obvious progenitor of James Bond in both fields was Simon Templar, the Saint, created by Leslie Charteris and played by Louis Hayward and George Sanders in a series of films during the late 1930's and early 40's.


Successful Grilling, No Matter What the Grill
THE first time I grilled a steak over a wood fire, I did it in the fireplace of my Greenwich Village apartment.
This wasn't very practical, and since then I graduated to a proper charcoal grill, which I use in the country.
Now, outdoor grills are getting more and more fancy.
I had never even considered buying one that uses gas, however, until a secondhand model was offered to me at a very cheap price.
Now, even my husband -- who was convinced that one would never get that great smoky flavor cooking with gas -- has become a convert.
The great thing about it is that the cook is able to control the cooking temperatures.
No longer do you worry about the fire going out before the food is cooked properly, nor do you run the risk of serving food that is charred outside and raw in the middle.


What a 29 Stamp Buys: Speed in Montana, Languor in Manhattan
Party-Goers desperate for small talk can always turn to the post office.
The card for the 40th birthday delivered in time for the 41st.
The postcard from summer vacation that arrived with the first frost.
The angry utility company looking for a payment mailed weeks ago.
But the United States Postal Service would rather be known for amazing performance.
With this goal in mind, it hired Price Waterhouse in 1990 to do regular independent surveys of mail delivery.


New York City Cuts Tax on Hotel Rooms
New York City is further reducing taxes on its hotel rooms, taking one percentage point off its 6 percent occupancy tax, effective Dec. 1.
The action came as part of the city budget, adopted by the City Council June 23 and approved by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.


A New Guise for a Former Speakeasy
THE Wild Rose Cafe is a casual new spot at 203 Sag Harbor Turnpike, just north of Bridgehampton, that is stretching, yawning and coming to life.
The former speakeasy is more about fun than food.
That is apparent from the moment a waiter with a ponytail and wearing a baseball cap absent-mindedly approaches to the arm-waving routine necessary to obtain a check at the end of an evening.


Q and A
Dancing in New York
Q.
I am an avid dance fan and nonprofessional dancer who would like to take a two-week respite in New York from my desk job to be in residence at a modern dance school.
Do any of the well-known dance companies offer a short-term program? -- Judith Calem, Washington


Fate in the Pocket of a Raincoat
THE SILENT ANGEL By Heinrich Boll.
Translated by Breon Mitchell. 182 pp.
New York:  St.
Martin's Press. $19.95.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
WEST VILLAGE Going French, and Out, For Bastille Day
In Paris, Bastille Day is celebrated in the streets, so five years ago Florent Morellet, owner of the French diner Restaurant Florent, decided to do the same.


In America; Dear Mr. President
From New Orleans comes the story of James Darby, a terror-stricken 9-year-old who, as part of a class project, wrote a letter begging President Clinton to do something about crime.
"I want you to stop the killing in the city," said James, a third grader at the Mahalia Jackson Elementary School.
He told the President that too many people already were dead and he was afraid.
This was not a child crying wolf.
James Darby had reason to worry.
The homicide rate in New Orleans is streaking toward a record.
The streets are surpassingly dangerous.
And, as in most large American cities, the killing of teen-agers and children is commonplace.


State Senator, A Democrat, Is Nominated For Governor
The president of the Connecticut Senate, John M. Larson, easily won the Democratic nomination for Governor at the party's state convention today but now faces a primary challenge from state Comptroller William E. Curry Jr., who won 35 percent of the delegates' votes.
Mr.
Larson, a Senator from East Hartford since 1983, who was strongly supported by the party's leadership, said his economic plan to put Connecticut residents back to work and his ability to raise campaign funds would carry the party to victory in November.
He won 65 percent of the votes.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  The first time he saw a ship rise high over the docks, Steve Kalil stared in wonder.
After 20 years, he says, he's still amazed.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  I.B.M.'s decision to shut its Brooklyn plant looked like another blow to city industry.
It hasn't turned out that way.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 9  Sounds of the Andes in Prospect Park; films by French women on the East Side.
GOOD EATING 10  Multicultural as Queens itself: From Shanghai dumplings in Rego Park to Portuguese seafood in Richmond Hill.
SOAPBOX 11  In praise of a doctor of the old school (95 1/2 years old, to be precise).
Plus letters and Photographer's Journal.
MOVIE CLOCK 12  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.


Corrections
An article continuation on page 18 of the Travel section today, about water parks in the United States, carries an incorrect page number in some copies for the further continuation.
It is on page 25.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CARTOONS  MY LIFE IN 'TOONS  From Flatbush to Bedrock  in Under a Century.
By Joseph Barbera.
Turner, $19.95.


Successful Grilling, No Matter What the Grill
THE first time I grilled a steak over a wood fire, I did it in the fireplace of my Greenwich Village apartment.
This wasn't very practical, and since then I graduated to a proper charcoal grill, which I use in the country.
Now, outdoor grills are getting more and more fancy.
I had never even considered buying one that uses gas, however, until a secondhand model was offered to me at a very cheap price.
Now, even my husband -- who was convinced that one would never get that great smoky flavor cooking with gas -- has become a convert.
The great thing about it is that the cook is able to control the cooking temperatures.
No longer do you worry about the fire going out before the food is cooked properly, nor do you run the risk of serving food that is charred outside and raw in the middle.


The Woman in 'True Lies,' A Mouse That Roared
IN THE EARLY SCENES OF "TRUE Lies," Helen Tasker doesn't look like a woman who is wearing Victoria's Secret underwear.
Her hair is mousy, her clothes are frumpy, and her job as a legal secretary seems to offer all the excitement she can handle.
It's as if she doesn't know she is married to Arnold Schwarzenegger.
That, of course, is the plot and the joke of "True Lies," which opened on Friday: Helen (Jamie Lee Curtis) doesn't realize that her snooze of a husband, Harry (Mr. Schwarzenegger), is a globe-saving spy.
But that's just the start of the story.
Like Sandra Bullock, who drives the bus in "Speed," in the course of "True Lies" Ms.
Curtis changes from a mouse to an action hero.
Her change is witty and liberating, and a turning point in a film that might be a comic-action version of "Scenes From a Marriage."


Unit Owner Defends 1050 Fifth Avenue
To the Editor:
As one of the original and surviving tenant owners of 1050 Fifth Avenue, I must respond to the disparaging comments in your Streetscapes column on June 12 titled "A Building Ennobled by the Company It Keeps."


Christie Questionable
LINFORD CHRISTIE, the Olympic 100-meter champion, may be questionable for the Goodwill Games.
While leading his race on Friday at the TSB Games in London, Christie pulled up, clutching his left hamstring.
The American JON DRUMMOND won in a record 10.03, the Briton was second in 10.07.


BROOKLYN UPDATE
*
MIDWOOD After receiving complaints from motorists, the Department of Transportation has removed eight European-style multispace parking meters along Kings Highway.
But 11 others in neighborhoods throughout the city will remain because there have been no complaints, said Larry Berman, the executive director of parking for the department.
The bulk of the Brooklyn motorists had complained about having to walk to the meter and take a receipt back to the car's dashboard.
On the remaining meters, written instructions have been replaced with pictograms, and motorists can now take their receipts.


Making Changes In Higher Education
Re: "Heading the Restructuring of Education," June 12:
I was astonished to find in the Q &amp; A interview with the Douglass College dean, Mary Hartman, about her work on Governor Whitman's "advisory panel" on higher education the statement that the Governor "has already embraced the group's call to dismantle the State Board of Higher Education and the State Department of Higher Education."


Federal Law Requires New Faucets and Toilets
PART of the National Energy Policy Act of 1992 governs household water fixtures, including toilets, shower heads and bath and kitchen faucets.
All have to have water-saving designs.
There is no need to remove existing fixtures, but if you plan to remodel or add new devices you have to meet the law.
The act also requires that fixtures be manufactured to comply.
But ask questions and read labels to avoid buying out-of-date merchandise.


War Stories
To the Editor:
Your June 12 issue, which highlighted Civil War books, was truly magnificent -- a rare case of superb reviewers matching a superb collection of books.
The reviewers unflinchingly asked the right, albeit difficult, questions about the causes, consequences and events of the war.
HERBERT C. ROSEMAN  Brooklyn


The World; Argentina Is Booming But There Is No Rest For Its Tortured Soul
After Diego Maradona was expelled from the World Cup earlier this month for using banned drugs, the shock to this country of soccer fanatics went deeper than you might expect.
Argentines looked at their soccer superstar and saw themselves, and it troubled them.
Maradona, with his uncontrollable personality yet brilliant playing abilities, had risen from the poor barrios to become the greatest player in the world.
Repeatedly he was unable to cope with the pressures of success and eventually was banned from international play for 15 months for drug use.
But he staged a dramatic comeback, regaining enough of his old form to raise hopes that he could lead Argentina to a World Cup championship, until the day he was led off the field for a urine test that he failed.


TALKING ABOUT THE MEDIA CIRCUS
As a survivor of 42 years in the newsroom, 24 of them at The Washington Post, I would add two points to your fine discussion of the press:
Since Bernstein, Woodward and Watergate, the business has attracted people who have a different agenda than we had when I broke in at $40 a week.
Then, you had to love the work.
Today, there is money in journalism, lots of it, and fame.
Now, the financial rewards are so great that it's no wonder people are tempted to rummage in celebrities' garbage.


Elizabeth Ferrell, W. J. Wilson Jr.
Elizabeth Anne Ferrell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robertson G. Ferrell of St.
Louis, was married yesterday to William Jewell Wilson Jr., a son of Mimi B. Wilson of Ridgewood, N.J., and the late Dr.
Wilson.
The Rev.
David Kerr officiated at Salem United Methodist Church in Ladue, Mo.
The bride, 29, is a dancer with the American Ballet Theater in New York.
Her father is a supervisor of airfield operations at Lambert-St.
Louis International Airport.


Jumping Into the Lead
The Olympic and world triple jump champion, MIKE CONLEY, has leaped past sprinter LEROY BURRELL and into the men's overall lead in the Mobil Grand Prix standings.
Conley, winner of the triple jump at Friday's TSB Games at London with a leap of 56 feet 10 inches, has 43 Grand Prix points. (AP)


Rallying Around Old Police Academy
Seven days a week, from 7 A.M. until midnight, hundreds of police recruits -- unarmed but highly visible in their crisply pressed uniforms and garrison caps -- stream in and out of the Police Academy at 235 East 20th Street.
They are a reassuring sight in a city where crime consistently ranks as the top concern in opinion polls.
Now powerful forces -- bolstered by an $11 million appropriation from the Giuliani administration -- are pushing to relocate the academy to the Bronx, but there are vociferous opponents as well.
The dispute has developed into a case of P.I.M.B.Y. -- please in my back yard.


See Dick and Jane Give Attitude
IN "Pat the Beastie," the illustrator Henrik Drescher introduces Paul and Judy, two shark-toothed youngsters who torment a pet named Beastie.
Young readers are invited to join Paul and Judy in yanking Beastie's lime-green hair, jiggling his eyes and poking his nose.
In exasperation, Beastie eats Paul and Judy.
Parents and older children will instantly recognize "Pat the Beastie" (Hyperion, 1993) as a wicked-hearted spoof of Dorothy Kunhardt's tender "Pat the Bunny," which for more than five decades has been many infants' first book.


Ideas &amp; Trends; From Masses to Mass-Market
EVEN 16 years into his pontificate, Pope John Paul II has not lost his capacity to surprise in finding new ways to get his message out.
From the beginning, the Pope has aggressively sought out vehicles to reach the rank-and-file in the pews and beyond, whether that involved regularly jetting off to speak before vast audiences of the faithful or occasionally using satellite link-ups to address special groups, like Catholic youth.


Sound Bytes; A TV Producer Tries His Hand at Interactive Books
IN the short history of interactive multimedia, Living Books has established a gold standard with its line of children's titles.
Spun out of Broderbund Software Inc. last year in a joint venture with Random House, Living Books now has eight interactive, animated story books, all on CD-ROM for Macintosh or I.B.M.-compatible personal computers.
Living Books will soon leave the corporate nest at Broderbund in Novato, Calif., for San Francisco, and in April recruited Jeffrey Schon as president and chief executive.
Mr.
Schon has most recently been vice president of production for Hearst Entertainment Distribution Inc., where he managed the production of animated television series.
Question. Now that Living Books is to have a life of its own, what is your charter?


Trigger Happy
Roy Rogers's horse seemed to come thundering down the halls of Congress last month: the word on all lips was trigger, not so famously used in politics since Nelson Rockefeller called Barry Goldwater trigger-happy.
When you pull a trigger, a gun goes off.
From the Middle Dutch trecken, "to pull" (same root as trek, as in "Star Trek"), the English word began in 1621 as tricker, meaning "the lever that springs a trap"; it soon became the name for the small steel catch that releases the hammer or firing pin of a gun when drawn, pressed, pulled or -- to use the verb my sergeant preferred -- squeezed.


The Metric Superhighway Is Coming
To the Editor:
In "Excited? Just Remember Metric" (June 26), Ron Beathard divines the advent of the information superhighway as devotedly as Americans supposedly use the metric system: "I'll ride it when it gets here." Happily, Mr.
Beathard won't have to wait too long to ride metric superhighways.
According to the March-April 1994 issue of Fencepost, all Federal and federally aided highway construction -- as much as $25 billion annually -- will be built in metric after Sept. 30, 1996.
JAMES PARADISO  Highland Park, Ill., June 26


Comet Crashes Into Jupiter In Dazzling, Galactic Show
The first of 21 huge fragments of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 blasted its way into the depths of Jupiter's atmosphere yesterday, exploded with a bright flash and hurled a white-hot plume of gas high above the giant planet, leaving a huge, circular wound in Jupiter's dense cloud cover.
The show last night was so spectacular it could be seen even by amateur astronomers with small telescopes, despite the fact that all the comet fragments were striking the far side of Jupiter, out of direct sight of Earth.


Diane L. Peligal, Kevin O'Halloran  1
Diane Lori Peligal, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eli Peligal of East Brunswick, N.J., was married last evening to Kevin Sullivan O'Halloran, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Kevin M. O'Halloran of Washington Township, N.J.
Rabbi Bernard Perelmuter officiated at the Grand Summit Hotel in Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Mark Dolak, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
O'Halloran, 26, is a media supervisor at Waring &amp; LaRosa, an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is a vice president, in Metro Park, N.J., with Paine Webber, the securities brokerage.
Her mother, Rita Peligal, is a sales associate, in Woodbridge, N.J., with Fortunoff's.


The Discreet Near-Perfection Of Pierre Monteux
PERHAPS ARTURO Toscanini, the subject of a recent RCA commemorative collection, is worth 82 compact disks to only 15 for Pierre Monteux.
Although he recorded prolifically, Monteux, the French-American maestro, wasn't so fecund as Toscanini, the Italian, and most of his records from the 1960's were not for RCA.
Still, RCA's boxed set (09026-61893-2), mid-priced with the disks also available individually, is a cause for celebration.
Monteux (1875-1964) was not the household name Toscanini was, partly because he hadn't the Italian's volcanic temperament and partly because between 1936 and 1952 (roughly Toscanini's tenure with the NBC Symphony in New York), Monteux was based in proud but provincial San Francisco.
Still, Monteux won perhaps even wider respect and reverence from his fellow musicians, and his recordings -- even the inevitably selective sampling in this set -- hold up remarkably well.


The S.E.C. and Public Filings
To the Editor:
The Securities and Exchange Commission is not only unsupportive of the Edgar on the Internet project, but in general favors a few private companies at the expense of the general public (The Executive Computer, June 19).


As Election Nears in Mexico, Rebel Apparitions Add to the Fear of Violence
When federal agents patrolling the hilly back roads 100 miles from here captured a band of armed men wearing ski masks and uniforms last weekend, they suspected they had found what people all over Mexico have feared since January: that the Zapatista National Liberation Army had moved beyond its southern stronghold and was spreading violence throughout the country.
That wasn't it at all, although who the eight men really represent isn't clear.
Investigators say they are bandits who dressed as Zapatistas to gain the sympathy of residents where they were operating.
But relatives said the men had been beaten and forced to wear the masks in an elaborate scheme to justify the deployment of large numbers of Government agents and troops to search the area for anti-Government guerrillas.


All Across America, Plunging Into Summer: THE SOUTH; GEORGIA: WHITE WATER ATLANTA
There's a watery tree house, a simulated ocean that doubles as a movie theater and the standard array of chutes, flumes and tubes, but what really makes White Water Atlanta work is something else: the trees.
If water parks often veer from the heaven of cool, blue water to the hell of baking concrete, White Water Atlanta, with some 5,000 pines, oaks, dogwoods and maples on its 40 landscaped acres, is surprisingly and pleasingly green, shady and inviting.
Owned by Silver Dollar City, the company that runs such popular amusement parks as Silver Dollar City in Branson, Mo., and Dollywood in Pigeon Forge, Tenn., White Water, which is in Marietta, Ga., is extremely well managed.
The army of lifeguards and attendants is both friendly and capable.
The grounds are scrupulously clean, and the attractions are varied and imaginative.


F.Y.I.
Mailbox on the Move
Q.
I would love to know why the mailbox at 96th Street and Amsterdam Avenue keeps moving.
It moves from the north side to the south side of 96th Street from time to time, and sometimes lands on the Amsterdam side of the corner instead of the street side.
It would seem not an easy thing to do -- to pull up a mailbox from its moorings, fix the holes it leaves, and then re-install it.
So why?
A.
Well, first of all, you're quite right.
That mailbox has been moving around, said Andrew Sozzi, a postal spokesman.


Miss Bogdan, Mr. DeCesare
Leah Jane Bogdan, the daughter of Jane and Edward Bogdan of Newtown, Conn., was married there yesterday to Nicholas DeCesare, the son of Ottavia and Patrick DeCesare of Weehawken, N.J.
The Rev.
Fred Pellegrini performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Old Congregational Church.


World Markets; Again, a Sinking Feeling for the Lira
WHILE attention in Washington and Tokyo has focused on the psychological barrier of 100 Japanese yen to the dollar, traders here have been preoccupied with their own equally subjective marker: the 1,000-lira German mark.
Ever since September 1992, when the lira was withdrawn from the European Union's Exchange Rate Mechanism, the value of the Italian currency has responded primarily to the political turmoil caused by the nation's huge corruption scandal.


Sarah M. Avellar, Robert F. Mathias
Sarah Marie Avellar, the assistant director of the University of California office of Federal Government relations in Washington, was married yesterday to Robert Fiske Mathias, a former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Energy.
The Rev.
Eugene Duggan, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Star of the Sea Church in Sausalito, Calif.
The Rev.
Linda Peyton, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
The bride graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony A. Avellar of Sausalito.
Her father, now retired, was the director of labor relations at Pan American World Airways in San Francisco.


Don't Blink, Or You Might Miss the Bliss
Before cars and highways bred suburbs and bedroom communities, people often lived and worked in the same neighborhood.
In a collection of 14 blocks at the eastern edge east of Long Island City, the idea was pushed to its limits for generations, as immigrants, most of them Polish, lived in stark, two- and three-story houses wedged between small factories and auto repair shops.
Today, about 200 residents of varying ethnicities still coexist with truck drivers who block the streets and mechanics who fix cars on the sidewalks and sometimes spill oil in the open.
On a recent morning on Van Dam Street, two elderly men, oblivious to the industrial din, played cards outside a house.


Blurred Images of North Korea's 'Junior'
Depending on who is doing the talking, Kim Jong Il is a depraved movie fan who abuses women and alcohol; a terrorist who masterminded the 1983 bombing of the South Korean Cabinet and the 1987 midair bombing of a South Korean airliner; an awkward, misunderstood technocrat who longs to be a statesman, or all, some or none of the above.
The sharply divergent views underscore the scarcity of reliable information about the portly 52-year-old who has begun to emerge as North Korea's new leader, a man American intelligence officials still refer to as "junior" or "the kid."


Yosemite Camping
To the Editor: I was dismayed at the poor example of backcountry camping that the writer David Weintraub sets in "Leaving the Crowds Behind" (June 19).
Over 15 years I've enjoyed the Hoover Wilderness and Yosemite National Park half a dozen times.
As Mr.
Weintraub points out, among the area's charms are its spectacular scenery, solitude and relative freedom from the backpacking crowds.
I was, therefore, appalled by Mr.
Weintraub's photo of Smedberg Lake with his tent illegally pitched just feet from the lakeshore, in violation of back-country regulations.
Seasoned hikers such as Mr.
Weintraub know that hikers must pitch camp well back from the water's edge because of the fragility of the alpine lake environment.


True Grit: Jacome Pitches Well, Squirms, Wins Again
At least for now, the Mets have themselves a solid third starter.
The promising rookie Jason Jacome hurled six gritty innings and then had to squirm through a ninth-inning San Diego rally before John Franco notched his 20th save in a 5-4 victory in front of 23,897 at Shea Stadium last night.


SUNDAY, July 17, 1994; Miracle Herb: Valium
Even in this age of new alternative medicines, the claims for the Chinese herbal pills seem extraordinary.
The $10 packages of "Cow's Head Brand Tung Shueh Pills" sold in shops and by street vendors in New York's Chinatown include claims that the small, shiny, black pills will cure lumbago and knee cramps and "remove congestion from brain" while "preventing the blood vessel to be solidified."
Depending on the particular brand, they are also supposed to prevent hypertension and cure rheumatism, headaches, dizziness, neck aches, deafness, insomnia and palsy.


A Flock Of Hats
The nearly vanished art of the milliner was on vivid display earlier this month during a convention of the Bible Way Church World Wide in Manhattan.
New Yorkers were delighted by the conventioneers' hats -- the whimsical shapes, soaring brims, face-framing flowers dotted with jewels resembling dew drops and 1920's-style bandeaus with large horsehair bows or cascades of pearls.


Peekskill Is a Focus of U.S. Pilot Program
FOR Darcy Blair, a 26-year-old Washington State native who recently returned from a two-and-a-half year assignment with the Peace Corps, coming to live and work in Peekskill as a Vista volunteer was almost as much of a culture shock as living in Micronesia.
"I was sitting in a little diner in Peekskill, looking at the menu and not recognizing a thing, but it all smelled incredible," said Ms.
Blair, who was raised in Tacoma.
"I find it real exciting being here, because I'm surrounded by all these wonderfully diverse cultures in this place. Micronesia was one culture, but here I'm surrounded by 5 or 10 different cultures. I just feel really enriched."


Rwandan Army in Disarray at a Camp on Border
In this border town, once a gracious spa favored by Rwanda's rich and powerful, hundreds of weary and dirty families were camped today, waiting until they could cross the border, hoping to flee the country before the arrival of rebel troops, who were only 10 miles away.
If the rebels come, the refugees can be certain they will get no protection from what is left of the Rwandan Army.
The Government soldiers here today guzzled beer, wantonly fired their weapons and looted expensive lake-front villas.


Minorities in Blue -- A special report.; New York Police Force Lagging In Recruitment of Black Officers
Police commissioners past and present say that to be effective, New York's police force should resemble the city it patrols.
But relative to the racial mix of its population, New York has been the slowest of the nation's 10 biggest cities to open its police ranks to minority groups, especially blacks.
The city, which is almost 29 percent black, is patrolled by a police department that is 11.6 percent black.
While other forces substantially increased the proportion of black officers in the last decade, New York stood still.
In fact, in the last two decades, the number of black men on the force has declined, the department's personnel records show.


Houston Fajitas
To the Editor: Mary Davis Suro's "Houston's Favorite Fajitas" (May 1) did not mention some of the best fajitas in Houston -- those prepared at Lupe Tortilla's.
Lupe's is in an old house, much enlarged with open-air porches and decks, at 318 Stafford in Addicks, a tiny municipality of sorts within the Houston city limits at the intersection of I-10 and Highway 6.


Yankees Belt Johnson And Lift Key to 14-2
Buck Showalter was explaining the dominance of Randy Johnson the other afternoon, of how the Mariners' overpowering 6-foot-10-inch left-hander had rearranged American League hitters' thinking.
"I don't understand how Don Mattingly hits him so well," Showalter said.
"He'll wake up telling himself to stay in tight on his breaking ball, and then one will come at your dome, and all that gets thrown out the window."


SUNDAY, July 17, 1994; Teaching the Art of War
The drawing above was done by Mg Chit, a schoolboy in the village of Kyeit Doh in the country once called Burma and now known as Myanmar.
The village has been the scene of battles between rebels and troops of the authoritarian Myanmar regime.
Jim Robbins of Tacoma, Wash., spent his own time and money teaching art to children of hill tribes in rebel areas.
He is going back to Asia in September with grants from the Lila Wallace/Reader's Digest Fund and the National Endowment for the Arts.
He plans to teach in Cambodia and Vietnam and in refugee camps along the border between Thailand and Myanmar.
The children, says Robbins, see their drawings as a desperate way to get a message of their plight out to the rest of the world.


The Nation; Why Nothing Ever Changes
SIX years ago, his voice cracking with emotion, Jack F. Kemp pulled out of the 1988 race for the Republican Presidential nomination.
But the Federal Election Commission lingered over Mr.
Kemp's ill-fated bid until last month, when it finally slapped his multi-million dollar campaign with a $120,000 fine for numerous election law transgressions.
This was hailed by commissioners as a success story: they noted that their Presidential inquiries often take even longer and end up settling for even smaller fines.


WHEN HOPE DIED
Let's extend a little further Chira's theory that "life" does not truly exist unless its physical component is joined by "a mother's hopes . . . a place for it in her heart and her life." Where does that leave elderly people with no relatives, orphans abandoned to the care of the state, homeless people?
If we apply her standard to those who have been deprived of their "birthright" to be loved and cared for wholeheartedly, euthanasia might be a benefit.


Within a Song-Filled Grove
BRING a basket, a blanket, a bottle and a beau for a serenade under the stars at The New York Botanical Garden.
Tonight, and for the next four Sunday nights, the Manhattan School of Music will present its Sunday Supper Serenade, a series of international concerts that is part of the Botanical Garden's annual summer festival.


In the New Math of America's Cup Boats, Does 2 Plus 2 Equal 2 or 4?
It's as if it were a decade ago in the America's Cup when, in 1983, Australian yachtsmen came to the America's Cup races with a secret winged keel.
Suspicion turned to anger that summer when United States sailors found they had been hoodwinked by a faster boat with questionable origins.
Still bruised by the episode, American sailors are crying foul play early this time.
In a protest with other challengers, the three United States defense teams are trying to prevent Australia from building three, and possibly four, new America's Cup-class sailboats.
The groups insist that the Australians should be allowed only two new boats.


Beautification Around a Bridge
With $360,000 in the city budget devoted to sprucing up the area around the Queensboro Bridge, a community group is setting its sights on creating a "greenway" from the Roosevelt Island Tram plaza between 59th and 60th Streets along Second Avenue to the East River, where part of the waterfront view is now devoted to a parking lot.
"It's a landmarked bridge, a beautiful bridge," said Jeffrey Stull, "and all we're trying to do is give it due respect with landscaping to frame it, dress it up properly and showcase it." He is co-chairman ofthe 59th Street Task Force, a coalition of Community Boards 6 and 8, the Sutton Area Community groupand East Sixties Neighborhood Association.


All Across America, Plunging Into Summer: THE MIDWEST; OHIO: THE BEACH
Until this month one of the few water activities you couldn't indulge in at the Beach was swimming.
On July 4, however, the water park, in Mason, Ohio, opened the Pearl, a 100,000-gallon swimming pool in a tropical setting.
It features water coves, rocks and waterfalls, and two lap lanes delineated by fiber optic lines that change colors at night.
There are plenty of other ways to enjoy the water here.
Meandering a mile and a half around the 35-acre park, the Lazy Miami ride is a relaxing antidote to such attractions as the Bonzai water slide, with its three stomach-jumping dips, or the Cliff, with its "free fall" drop of 20 to 30 feet (the only ride in the park that no one in our family of four dared to brave).


Helmut Lang: Fresh Glitter
NAME: Helmut Lang.
IDENTITY: Fashion designer, unwilling progenitor of the "new glamour" movement.
AGE: 38.
HOME: Vienna.
CAREER: Began designing his own collection in Vienna in 1980, and showed in Paris for the first time in 1986.
Since then, he has been developing what he calls a non-referential view of fashion: one that does not look back.
His clothes typically use high-tech fabrics and clean tailoring, but with a rock-and-roll edge.
In the last year, the Lang influence has been inescapable in glossy magazines and on other designers' runways: satiny and silky sheens, deft touches of glitter, simple silhouettes.
Fashion insiders are calling it "the new glamour." He wishes they wouldn't.
Q.
Why are there so many Helmut Lang rip-offs this season?
A.
I give that question back to you.
That's your role in this industry, to define this kind of movement; it's not mine.
I'm just doing it.
Q.
You don't like people using past references to describe your style.
Why?
A.
Because the past has nothing to do with it.
It's all about today.
We all know there is a history, and we all have our own history and past.
There can be some references, but you can't always compare everything using the same old images and the same feelings.
I think the history and the past we have is just an energy we've built up to do what we do now.
Q.
Your success has come from a steady evolution of your style.
Does fashion try to change too much each season?
A: If something is good, it doesn't go out of style every six months.
The fashion wheel of today doesn't have to go as quickly as it was pushed in the 80's.
Q.
Culturally, why do you think this "new glamour" movement is happening now?
A.
Simplicity, deconstruction, was what we had the moment before glamour, and it was celebrated like a religion.
That caused the change.
It's never good to exaggerate a movement.
When that happens with glamour, when it's overexaggerated, we'll go quickly to something else.
Q.
How is this glamour different from yesterday's?
A.
The difference is it's more mature.
It's more mature than the glamour of the 80's, when it was important to be sun-tanned, before we knew what the sun could do to us.
Today, it is being able to show you can play with sophistication.
Q.
So, are designers forcing too much change?
A.
I don't even think it's only the designers who influence it anymore.
It's the media and what they promote to their readers.
If there's one lipstick in your bathroom, you're out of fashion, or another, you're in fashion.
We should have progressed much more at this point.
Q.
But obviously, since the new cry is "glamour," you're profiting.
How would you prefer to see magazines handle trends?
A.
The media is looking every season for a designer to tell a story.
I have a long story I have to tell, continuing fluently year after year.
I don't think I'm the one that invented glamour at all.
I just built up my style year by year.
I'm just lucky that the times are coming closer to what I do.
But that wasn't the purpose of my work, to establish a new glamour.
I do what I do.
It has to do with my personality and my life, and I'm not thinking of what kind of provocation or sensation I want to make with my next collection.
That wouldn't be a very good basis for a collection.
I just try to do very honest, good clothes.


A Naive Belief
To the Editor:
Mark Cohen and Joel Solomon do a disservice to the cause of recovery from substance abuse in their June 26 column (Viewpoints).
The column cites 15-year-old studies to make the point that chief executives are shielded from the consequences of their addiction by their secretaries and subordinates.
In stating that "the chief executive is accountable only to the board of directors" the authors imply that impaired performance is noticeable only by those with no power to affect the boss's future.
That is simply not so.
Chief executives interact with other executives, stockholders, analysts and journalists on a regular basis.
It is naive to believe that a clearly impaired chief executive can be shielded from criticism.
RAY BROWNE  Washington, June 27  The writer is a partner in the Browne Company, a Washington insurance firm, and served on the District of Columbia Drug Strategy Team.


Target Date for Ferry? September, at the Earliest
The start of a ferry between Long Island City and Midtown Manhattan has been delayed until fall because of snags in negotiations, said officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
The ferry, aimed at reducing traffic tie-ups on either side of the Queensboro Bridge and the Queens-Midtown Tunnel, was scheduled to begin in the spring.
But New York Waterway of Manhattan, the chosen ferry operator, completed its initial site plan for the Queens side in March and a revised plan just last week.
The company is awaiting final approval from the Port Authority.


Conversations/Motti Sarid; A Settler Near Jericho Feels It All: Anger. Resignation. Fear. Hope.
Israeli-Occupied West Bank MOTTI SARID is a settler.
It is not a word that he much likes.
He is, he says, an Israeli farmer, a strapping man who works eight acres of parched soil to grow seedless grapes and feed his five children.
It just so happens that his farm is at the edge of the Judean Desert, on land known to much of the world as the occupied territories.


WHEN HOPE DIED
In "When Hope Died" (Hers, June 26), Susan Chira has more to say on a single page about a woman's loss of an unborn -- whether spontaneously or by planned abortion -- than all the vast literature that attaches to this subject.
In the closing sentence of her essay, "Adieu, my small hope, my phantom daughter," she has captured the essence of the experience.
ROBERT A. WARREN Santa Fe, N.M.


An Earlier Effort
To the Editor:
On June 19, The New York Times ran a column by Thomas A. Cole advocating "a rule, to be put forth by the S.E.C., which would make a management's proxy statement machinery available to certain investors when some objective evidence suggests the board may not be doing its job adequately."


July 10-16: U.S. Weighs Options; Haiti's Latest Tactic Sends Monitors Packing
Choosing once again to thumb their noses at the United States and its allies, Haiti's leaders last week abruptly expelled nearly 100 human rights monitors belonging to the United Nations and the Organization of American States, calling their presence "a menace to the security of the state." Dante Caputo, the U.N.
Special Envoy for Haiti, immediately denounced the action as "a provocation," but in Washington the Clinton Administration reiterated earlier statements that an invasion of Haiti is "not imminent."


A Graying Onetime Double Agent Returns to Scenes of Old Intrigue
"I still remember, I remember this town," Boris Yuzhin murmured, looking for landmarks as he piloted his Dodge van up the steep curves of the Diamond Heights section here.
Recognizing a small shopping center, he veered off, parked the van outside a pizzeria and circled on foot through Christopher Park to a secluded pathway among cedars and pines.
There, on his knees, he pried at the planks of a wooden staircase, searching for holes.
In the late 1970's and early 80's, Mr.
Yuzhin and other officers of the K.G.B., the Soviet intelligence agency, scouted this "drop" and others like it in the Bay Area as places to hide microfilm for pickup by other Soviet spies.
Then, as a double agent, he disclosed those locations, and much other information, to the F.B.I.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about the film director David O. Russell misstated the given name of his father, a publishing executive in New York.
The father is Bernard Russell, not David.


Which Box to Check? White, Asian or None of the Above?
To the Editor:
My wife (a citizen of China) and myself (a citizen of Britain) have recently settled in your country.
We like it here very much and hope to be accepted as citizens one day.
But we are both utterly baffled by this business of "racial classification" on which your Government seems to expend so much time and effort (news article, July 8).


Taking the Wheels of Justice Out for a Spin in the County
DURING a sidewalk sale on Mamaroneck Avenue a few weeks ago, Arleen Ferreiras was startled to see a man wearing navy-blue shorts and a white plastic helmet coming toward her booth on a mountain bicycle.
"What I first registered was that he was in good shape," said Ms.
Ferreiras, who runs a health club here.
"Then I realized who he was -- one of the policemen patroling the avenue on his bike."


Habitats/111 Barrow Street; A Loft in a 'Small Town'
WHEN they first looked at the loft on Barrow Street in Greenwich Village, the ceilings were covered with what they called "popcorn," some kind of decorative finish from the 70's applied when the old warehouse building was converted to co-op apartments.
Wallpaper with green and gold birds covered the back hallway leading to the master bedroom; a wild green vinyl fern print still blankets the walls of the small kitchen.
Traces of old leopard wallpaper can be seen behind the door of the second bathroom.


Ms. Milano, Mr. DiDomenico
Nicole Milano, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Milano of West Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to Vincent DiDomenico Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
DiDomenico of Allenhurst, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas Petrillo, the bride's cousin, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Cross Church in Rumson, N.J.
Mrs.
DiDomenico, 26, is a sales assistant in the CK clothing division of Calvin Klein Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Seton Hall University.
Her father is the president of Automated Communications Inc., a telecommunications concern, and Centro-Tel Inc., a debit card company, both in Fords, N.J.


Martin Gardlin Christine J. Smith and James L. Gray
Christine Joanne Smith, the general counsel of AEA Investors Inc., in New York, was married yesterday to James Lee Gray, a first vice president at the Concord Holding Corporation, a mutual fund administrator in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
James' Church in New York.
The bride, 42, will be known as Christine Smith Gray.
She graduated from the University of Arizona and received her law degree from Boston College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Smith of Morris Plains, N.J.


A Jackhammer Lullaby Off Broadway


Don't Make a Deal
The report on Thursday that Myanmar's military rulers have made a new overture to Washington may seem like good news.
Lift the U.S. arms embargo, they offered, and the army will defeat Khun Sa, the drug trafficker who controls the mountainous Shan state, where much of the country's opium is grown.
Myanmar produces more than half the world's opium, the raw material used in making heroin.
With cheap, high-quality heroin now available in many American cities -- and fears that a new heroin epidemic may be looming -- supplying Myanmar with the helicopters and weapons it needs to fight the drug war may sound like a smart move.
But cooperating with the ruling military junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council, or Slorc, will not solve our drug problem and will further strengthen one of the world's most repressive regimes.


Gambling Nation
We are the boat people.
That is casino workers' slang for the millions of Americans now arriving at their portals in smelly diesel waves.
We come by bus -- "motorcoach," if you want to get la-di-da about it.
Tonight we have been plucked from rainy parking lots all over the Houston area, and we have clambered aboard prepared: pillows, shawls, lucky trolls, full thermoses, white bread, thick stacks of Saran-Wrapped luncheon meat.
We're toting worn cotton slot gloves.
Intensive Care hand lotion.
Insulin.
Tylenol.
Cash.
Doritos.
"We all here? Pedal to the metal, John. Let's git!"


Ranging Far But Treading Lightly
IN A GREAT MUSEUM, HIGH SUMMER is the season for gently provocative in-house exhibitions.
The organizer is given a free hand, a one-size-fits-all title and a short lease on a privileged corner in the galleries.
Loans are discouraged, but voluminous reserves are ready and waiting.
The show may range far, but it is encouraged to tread lightly.
Ideas by the dozen can be glimpsed in passing, but appetite should not be sated.
A show of this sort is "Modern British Drawings: Selections From the Collection" at the Museum of Modern Art (through Sept. 13).
With works ranging in date from 1910 to the 1990's, it is well mannered to the point of reticence.
"Ready when you are," the drawings seem to say to the visitor, and "After you, Sir," to one another.


Some Dramatic Changes For Scarsdale Singers
THE Scarsdale Summer Music Theater has developed many traditions in its 26 years of teaching theater arts to high school and college students.
Each summer, sweltering audiences in the uncooled Heathcote Elementary School here have good-naturedly crammed the auditorium to watch talented youngsters from around the county perform such staples as "The Music Man," "Damn Yankees," "Kiss Me, Kate" and "Oklahoma."
Now comes something different as the music theater adopts the air-conditioned Scarsdale High School Auditorium as its permanent home, begins its season with a new director, Steve Zawel of Larchmont, and makes its debut in an entirely new arena: Shea Stadium.


We Don't Need a Rerun of Cold War in Bosnia; Crippling the Civilians
To the Editor:
In "Wage a Cold War Against Serbia" (Op-Ed, July 3), David Gompert calls for stricter sanctions against Belgrade.
Yet even now the innocent civilian population is suffering, not those who rule.
International aid organizations and agencies describe the situation in Serbia and Montenegro as a major humanitarian catastrophe affecting 10 million innocent civilians.


Bookshelf
THE WAY OF THE EARTH: Native America and the Environment.
By John Bierhorst.
Morrow. $15. (Ages 12 and up) Drawing on a lifetime of scholarship, the author has assembled a sampling of American Indian observations, including many aphorisms and parables, wisely organized into five parts -- personality, kinship, restraint, death and renewal.
A splendid, richly annotated sourcebook.
IN SEARCH OF THE GIANT.
By Jeanne Willis.
Illustrated by Ruth Brown.
Dutton. $13.99. (Ages 4 to 8) A little boy and his older sister search through a forest for a giant who is evocatively revealed in the text and illustrations.
Or is the giant in their imaginations?
Look very closely.
Now look again.


Anna-Karin Nilsson, Stephen B. Mark
Anna-Karin Nilsson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bjorn Nilsson of Umea, Sweden, was married yesterday to Stephen Berman Mark, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reuben Mark of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Anita Wikell, a Lutheran pastor, performed the ceremony at the Church of Sweden in New York.
The bride, 26, graduated last month cum laude from Fairfield University.
Her father is an agronomist for the Swedish Department of Agriculture in Umea.
Her mother, Ulla-Britt Nilsson, teaches the first, second and third grades in Umea.


Homecoming


Franklin Patterson, College President, 77
Franklin Patterson, the first president of Hampshire College in Amherst, Mass., died on Wednesday at his home in Framingham, Mass.
He was 77.
He died of natural causes, his family said.


The Lighthouse Keeper's Log
HALF A LOOK OF CAIN A Fantastical Narrative.
By William Goyen.
Edited and with an afterword by Reginald Gibbons. 136 pp.
Evanston, Ill.: Triquarterly Books/Northwestern University Press. $22.50.


Kathleen Maguire, William Noonan
Kathleen Lorraine Maguire, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Maguire of Newton, Mass., was married yesterday to William Sylvester Noonan, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Noonan.
The Rev.
Thomas Frechette officiated at the Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in West Harwich, Mass.
The bride is an account executive at The Boston Globe.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Boston College.
Her father is the president of the Maguire Company, building contractors in Newton.


A Rich Celebration Of a Voyage Not Taken
WHEN DIATONIC harmony began to lose its sharp edge of finality a century or so ago -- when the dominant-seventh chord no longer bit with authority and Wagner's home keys roamed where they might -- mystery gained a sympathetic medium.
If uncertainty was to be thrust on music by historical process, then why not make the most of it?
Mystery used to be harder, a fact that makes Beethoven's famous bridge to the finale of the Fifth Symphony and Haydn's "Chaos" section at the beginning of "The Creation" that much more remarkable.
The first dawdles indeterminately, leaving the listener to grope for direction.
The second modulates with seeming aimlessness, allowing no solid perch on which to feel at ease.


Picture-Perfect Family Kept Turmoil Hidden
In their family portrait, Mohammad and Nihal Abequa look the model couple: proud and content, with handsome, dignified smiles.
Their little son, Sami, is in a suit, bow tie and pageboy haircut, with a trace of an impish grin.
Their daughter, Lisa, wears a polka-dot dress and looks shy.
The Abequas' pose reflects none of the turbulence that some close friends and relatives say marked the last half of their eight-year marriage and, authorities charge, led to Mrs.
Abequa's death when Mr.
Abequa visited her apartment in Parsippany-Troy Hills during the July 4 weekend.


Innovative, Robust and Tasteful Cuisine
THE ocean is out there.
Diners see it before they enter Below the Royal Atlantic in Montauk.
That is their last glimpse, for the restaurant is literally below the Royal Atlantic Motel, a few steps down from street level.
Visitors who expect Montauk to be water views, umbrella tables and blue skies will be turned off by Below the Royal Atlantic's knotty-pine 1950's recreation-room look.
But if standout food by an exceptional chef matters, this restaurant is the catch of the day.


A Life Dedicated to Saving the Cetaceans
ROBBINS BARSTOW -- tall, razor thin and white bearded -- could pose for a painting of a captain of a 19th-century New England whaling ship hunting down the great creatures of the sea.
But the image would be totally misleading.
Even though some members of his family actually were whaling captains of the last century, Mr.
Barstow has been one of this century's leading voices in the effort to stop the slaughter of whales.
For two decades he has roamed the world, speaking about them, photographing them, writing about them -- and imploring that they be saved.


In Praise Of Risk Taking
To the Editor:
It was satisfying to read Perri Klass's article "A 'Bambi' for the 90's, Via Shakespeare"  [ June 19 ] , which addresses a timely issue that theater educators and children's-theater directors face on a regular basis.
Those of us who select literature for young audiences or choose material for young actors deal with pressures from administrators and parents, who try to steer us away from delving into many bold, emotionally challenging episodes or passages of dialogue.
We are often confronted directly, but typically the pressure is more subtle.
Nevertheless, we get the hint: refrain from plays, poems and stories that deal with suffering, hurt and fear.


Needed: Internet Foundation for Business Investment
To the Editor:
Buried in your article on the rising commercial use of the Internet ("Getting Down to Business on the Net," June 19) are two important and related observations.
You note that "the Internet . . . has no ownership or central management" and later claim that "there is typically no charge for mail messages . . . regardless of volume." The first point is correct and deserves elaboration, but the second is misleading.
Electronic mail is free only in the sense that the public highways are free.


Remembering the Faces In the Civil Rights Struggle
FOR ANYONE WHO lived through the 1960's, photographs of the civil rights struggle will always stir up deep feelings.
That struggle disrupted and changed the nation; those pictures helped sway the public's mind.
A reality that northern whites had acknowledged but seldom felt suddenly leaped to life on the front pages of the papers.
In the midst of postwar prosperity and a continuing sense of national triumph, events and images presented examples of immense courage as well as ample reason to be ashamed of America.
Week after week the news amounted to a call to action.
Many responded.
A quarter of a million people marched on Washington in August of 1963 to hear Martin Luther King Jr. say "I have a dream." Real changes were made, some of them radical, but race issues are still tearing this country apart and images of the 60's continue to resound.


Charles Allen Jr., 91, Founder Of Investment Company, Is Dead
Charles Allen Jr., who quit school at the age of 15 to become a runner on the New York Stock Exchange, founded the influential investment house of Allen &amp; Company and became the financial speculator known as the shy Midas of Wall Street, died on Friday at his apartment in the Sherry Netherland Hotel.
He was 91.
The Allen firm, since it was founded in 1933 by Mr.
Allen, has been engaged in many hugely profitable investment-banking endeavors throughout the world, initially buying companies in the early Depression years when large blocks of stock were for sale at bargain prices.


All Across America, Plunging Into Summer: THE SOUTH; FLORIDA WET 'N WILD
A heart-stopping, nearly vertical drop of 250 feet is part of the macabre charm of Der Stuka, a water slide at the Wet 'n Wild water park in Orlando, Fla.
After climbing a six-story ramp, riders sit atop the slide before plunging over the edge and hurtling back to earth in a dramatic burst of water before coming to a gradual stop along 115 feet of "runway." The 40-acre water park, 10 miles from Walt Disney World in Orlando, has 30 water rides, including 5 huge water slides, 5 tube rides of various heights and speeds, and a childrens' playground.
While Der Stuka, named for a German World War II bomber built for nosedives, offered the biggest thrills, my husband and I preferred the park's newest attraction, The Surge.
After climbing up to a huge geodesic dome, riders board a five-passenger tube, which drops 600 feet in a fierce rush of water; the tube twists and turns in the rapids, giving those sitting backward the scariest ride.


Reform Synagogue to Open Private School
A few years ago, struck by the rise in two-parent households, Park Slope's Congregation Beth Elohim started a day-care center to help provide care for children ages 2 to 5.
Now, amid growing disenchantment with public education and greater debate about private religious education that reflects the teachings of Reform and Conservative Jews, the congregation is planning to open the area's first day school specifically geared to those movements' needs.


Ex-Mental Patients And Ocean Grove
At the crux of the Ocean Grove fiasco ("Needy Residents Clash With Town's Vision," June 12) is the near-total agreement by most experts that the Kennedy Administration's Community Mental Health Centers Services Act of 1962 has been a national failure.
Not only has mental health in communities like this one failed to be realized, in terms of centers and other supports for discharged patients, but also states like New Jersey continue, nevertheless, to dump patients.


New Rector Takes on Legacy of St. Bart's
The Rev.
William H. Tully says he wants a new challenge, and he will certainly get his wish when he starts as the new rector of St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church on Sept. 1.
Despite a rich history that includes Vanderbilt money and a landmark Byzantine building at a prized address on Park Avenue at 50th Street, the parish is struggling to recover from years of strife, growing deficits and a dwindling congregation.


The Nation; A Crowd Gathered for the Men on the Moon


'Virtual' Companies Leave the Manufacturing to Others
FROM California to Detroit to New York, American corporations are finding that if you want something done right, the best answer may be to have someone else do it.
The notion of the stripped-down, lean-and-mean company has been alive and well for years.
But nowhere is it more in fashion than in Silicon Valley, a swashbuckling swath of Corporate America built by venture capital and computer code.
Its inhabitants are betting their brains and fortunes not on factories, assembly lines and loading docks, but on companies without them.
They are creating new products and attempting to thrive in the world of so-called virtual companies.


On Sunday; The Craftsman Who Builds The Saints
OF all the measures of the city's resilience in the face of degeneracy, none offers the pink-cheeked glow and serpent-trodding posture of the blue-and-gold lawn madonnas of Bensonhurst made by Lou Campanella, a craftsman in concrete and pastel who is celebrating the return of boom times.
"She's in the top five, selling stronger than ever," exults Mr.
Campanella of his outdoor statues of Mary, mother of Jesus, as he labors in his Brooklyn shop to get his madonna flesh tones just right -- virtuous, pink, shimmering, demure.
He works seven days a week to meet a lawn-madonna demand that the city's hired boosters have somehow missed lately as they desperately tick off marginal symptoms of recovery.


On Film, Them There Eyes Are Often Contact Lenses
THE EYES ARE SAID TO be the mirror of the soul, but with a new special effect used in "The Shadow," the eyes (covered with Mylar contact lenses) can also mirror the lighting, the key grips and the film's director.
"The Shadow" had a budget for special eye effects that exceeded $50,000.
So did the recent "Wolf," which used a different kind of specialty lens.
Optometrists can spend months designing and fitting custom lenses to actors' eyes, making them look otherworldly, blind or, at the very least, bloodshot.
The optometrists are flown to the movie set (first class) with their technicians, put up in the best hotels and often stay for the entire filming.


Despite Talk of Invasion, Haiti's Terror Continues
The United Nations observers had presented themselves at the airport in compliance with an expulsion order, but Haiti's military could not resist inflicting a few humiliations.
Before the group boarded the plane this week, soldiers acting as functionaries poked through their belongings and contemptuously questioned the validity of some of their passports.


Sung-Hee Suh and Peter E. Dolotta
Sung-Hee Suh, an assistant United States attorney in Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Peter Edward Dolotta, an associate at the New York law firm of Stillman, Friedman &amp; Shaw.
Judge Robert L. Carter of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York officiated at Bridgewaters in Manhattan.
Ms.
Suh, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Harvard University, from which she and her husband received law degrees.
She is the daughter of Chung Kyun Suh of Port Washington, L.I., and the late Chong Cha Suh.
The bride's father is a freelance writer.


Vicious Circle; Hate Returns to Haunt Those Who Cradled It
STARTING in the 1970's, Rwanda was a favorite laboratory for international aid.
Largely because it was so small, it was considered a fine place to test how effective various development strategies could be in a land with a cooperative Government and good transportation.
Now it is a laboratory of a different sort -- a microcosm from which to learn what can happen when politicians seek to ride sectarian forces of hate.


TALKING ABOUT THE MEDIA CIRCUS
The most significant statement in your article "Talking About the Media Circus" (June 26) was Jeff Greenfield's admission that probably 80 percent of those in the press voted for Clinton.
That's almost double the vote the public gave him.
This disproportionate ratio of liberals in the news media makes a mockery of its stated attempt to "work harder at being balanced."


M. B. Tsimbinos, Erik J. Wortmann
Melanie Barbara Tsimbinos, the daughter of Helene and John Tsimbinos of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Erik Joseph Wortmann, the son of Lydia and Malcolm Wortmann of Bellerose Terrace, L.I.
Msgr.
Thomas Hartman performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Victory Roman Catholic Church in Floral Park, L.I.
Mrs.
Wortmann teaches the first grade at Public School 222 in Brooklyn.
She graduated cum laude from St.
John's University in Queens, from which she also received a master's degree in elementary education.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Roosevelt Savings Bank in Garden City, L.I.


High Noon Showdown: One Team Will Be First To Win 4 World Cups
Shortly after high noon in the once-wild American West, the Italians will march into the Rose Bowl in a thin blue line.
Next to them, holding hands in their brilliant yellow jerseys, will be the Brazilians.
For the next two hours, the streets of the world will go quiet.


Europe Inc. Has a Novel Idea: Cut Costs
SIGNS of change abound at Siemens Nixdorf's personal computer factory here.
The German technology company slashed the number of production workers to 1,000 from 1,300 earlier this year even as it added a third shift.
Pay is being tied for the first time to meeting quality and volume goals.
Engineers, who once focused on designing the most sophisticated possible product, now concentrate on making the assembly process more efficient.


Tracy Manning, Mark Winterbotham
Tracy Jane Manning, the daughter of Jo and Robert Manning of St.
George, S.I., and Mark Charles Anthony Winterbotham, the son of Sundra and the Rev.
Canon Tony Winterbotham of Portsmouth, England, were married yesterday by a civil registrar at the Wadsworth Registry Office in London.
Mrs.
Winterbotham, 27, expects to begin as a conservation consultant for English Heritage, a historical preservation organization in London, next month.
She graduated from Vassar College and studied at the Courtauld Institute of Art in London.
Her father is an independent film maker.
Her mother is the head librarian at Reader's Digest General Books in New York.


As Carner's Game Falters, Daniel Takes Full Advantage
The small and severe greens at the Wykagyl Country Club exacted their revenge on 55-year-old JoAnne Carner today, much to the dismay of the large gallery following her.
Putts that had dropped to give the popular Hall of Famer a two-stroke lead midway through the JAL Big Apple Classic on Friday missed more often than not on this sultry afternoon as Carner soared to five-over-par 76 with only the final round remaining in the $650,000 event.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday about violence in the New York City public schools mislabeled the figures for the annual rate of violent incident reports.
The numbers represented incidents per 1,000 students at the most violent schools in each borough, not per 100.


Lisa A. Bael, Peter T. Aman
Lisa Ann Bael, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Bael of Stamford, Conn., was married last evening to Peter Thorndike Aman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Aman 3d of Wayne, Pa.
Cantor Robert Abelson officiated at Le Chateau in South Salem, N.Y.
The Rev.
Gary Wilburn, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the interfaith ceremony.


Federal Law Requires New Faucets and Toilets
PART of the National Energy Policy Act of 1992 governs household water fixtures, including toilets, shower heads and bath and kitchen faucets.
All have to have water-saving designs.
There is no need to remove existing fixtures, but if you plan to remodel or add new devices you have to meet the law.
The act also requires that fixtures be manufactured to comply.
But ask questions and read labels to avoid buying out-of-date merchandise.


War Stories
To the Editor:
Your Civil War reviews prove the truth of an old joke:


Using TV to Create Skewed Window on Nation
Seldom have so many frowned so earnestly.
Day after day here, to the accompaniment of tolling bells and morose soap opera music, typical Americans drive along small-town streets, gather in kitchens, offices and hospitals, knit their brows and fret over what Congress is going to do about health care.
These television images could be in Akron, Miami or Duluth.
But the commercials that contain them are not.


Quite a Cache Of Police Lore
The Al Capone machine gun is the star of the show.
There is also a police shoulder patch from Salem, Mass., portraying a witch on a broom.
And the antique six-pointed shiny copper badge that may have inspired the term "cop." Not to mention the authentic sawed-off shotgun in a violin case, which no self-respecting mobster of yore would have been without.
These exhibits are in New York's Police Museum.
Its fate is hitched to that of the Police Academy, where it is housed and used as a research and teaching aid.
Plans call for both institutions to move to the Bronx together.


Corrections
A drawing credit on page 1 of the Real Estate section today with a rendering of the planned exterior of the former Gulf and Western Building misspells the artist's surname.
He is Luis Blanc.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PHILOSOPHY  BREAKFAST AT THE VICTORY  The Mysticism  of Ordinary Experience.
By James P. Carse.
HarperSanFrancisco, $21.


Successful Grilling, No Matter What the Grill
THE first time I grilled a steak over a wood fire, I did it in the fireplace of my Greenwich Village apartment.
This wasn't very practical, and since then I graduated to a proper charcoal grill, which I use in the country.
Now, outdoor grills are getting more and more fancy.
I had never even considered buying one that uses gas, however, until a secondhand model was offered to me at a very cheap price.
Now, even my husband -- who was convinced that one would never get that great smoky flavor cooking with gas -- has become a convert.
The great thing about it is that the cook is able to control the cooking temperatures.
No longer do you worry about the fire going out before the food is cooked properly, nor do you run the risk of serving food that is charred outside and raw in the middle.


The Woman in 'True Lies,' A Mouse That Roared
IN THE EARLY SCENES OF "TRUE Lies," Helen Tasker doesn't look like a woman who is wearing Victoria's Secret underwear.
Her hair is mousy, her clothes are frumpy, and her job as a legal secretary seems to offer all the excitement she can handle.
It's as if she doesn't know she is married to Arnold Schwarzenegger.
That, of course, is the plot and the joke of "True Lies," which opened on Friday: Helen (Jamie Lee Curtis) doesn't realize that her snooze of a husband, Harry (Mr. Schwarzenegger), is a globe-saving spy.
But that's just the start of the story.
Like Sandra Bullock, who drives the bus in "Speed," in the course of "True Lies" Ms.
Curtis changes from a mouse to an action hero.
Her change is witty and liberating, and a turning point in a film that might be a comic-action version of "Scenes From a Marriage."


Streetscapes/Prospect Park; The Other Olmsted &amp; Vaux Landscape Masterpiece
LANDSCAPE connoisseurs sometimes make the glib observation that Central Park is just a rough draft for Olmsted &amp; Vaux's even more masterful Prospect Park, created in 1866-1874 in Brooklyn.
There is some truth in that, for a walk through Prospect Park is like a tour of an impeccably chosen private art collection.
Over the last decade, Central Park has been burnished to a rich glow in part with $40 million raised by the Central Park Conservancy.
But Tupper Thomas, the Prospect Park Administrator appointed in 1980, has had to follow a different path, even though she hopes it will bring Olmsted &amp; Vaux's second New York City park to the same destination.


007 Minutiae
To the Editor:
Two footnotes regarding James Bond films:


Successful Grilling, No Matter What the Grill
THE first time I grilled a steak over a wood fire, I did it in the fireplace of my Greenwich Village apartment.
This wasn't very practical, and since then I graduated to a proper charcoal grill, which I use in the country.
Now, outdoor grills are getting more and more fancy.
I had never even considered buying one that uses gas, however, until a secondhand model was offered to me at a very cheap price.
Now, even my husband -- who was convinced that one would never get that great smoky flavor cooking with gas -- has become a convert.
The great thing about it is that the cook is able to control the cooking temperatures.
No longer do you worry about the fire going out before the food is cooked properly, nor do you run the risk of serving food that is charred outside and raw in the middle.


What a 29 Stamp Buys: Speed in Montana, Languor in Manhattan
Party-Goers desperate for small talk can always turn to the post office.
The card for the 40th birthday delivered in time for the 41st.
The postcard from summer vacation that arrived with the first frost.
The angry utility company looking for a payment mailed weeks ago.
But the United States Postal Service would rather be known for amazing performance.
With this goal in mind, it hired Price Waterhouse in 1990 to do regular independent surveys of mail delivery.


Peruvian Treasures At New York Museum
The American Museum of Natural History has mounted a dazzling show of gold, silver and gilded copper objects excavated from pre-Incan tombs found in 1987 near the Peruvian village of Sipan.
"Royal Tombs of Sipan," which opened in late June, will be on view until Jan. 1, 1995.
The artifacts belonged to the mysterious Moche people of northern coastal Peru, who had no written language.
Their civilization collapsed near the end of the 8th century for unknown reasons.
When the Spaniards arrived in the area in 1528, it was ruled by the Incas.
Most of the objects displayed were taken from the burial chambers of three high-ranking Moche officials, discovered in an eroded adobe pyramid.
Artifacts from the tomb of the Lord of Sipan, the "Warrior Priest," include a two-foot-high gold and silver carved scepter, elaborate headdresses and a gold-and-turquoise warrior in full regalia about the size of a thumb.
There is also a gallery featuring Moche ceramics and tapestries, and a re-creation of the Warrior Priest's Tomb.


Designers Invoke Wit in Suburban Fantasies
IN ARCHITECTURAL design Long Island bridges extremes.
It has Levittown, the postwar subdivision that has become an icon of suburban conformity, and the Hamptons, a pocket of affluence and artistic ferment that has stood on the cutting edge of design.
An exhibition on view through Aug. 7 at Galley North in Setauket weaves those threads together.
The show, "Suburban Follies: Structures for the Residential Landscape," offers a witty commentary on architecture and suburbia.


The safety of rides is an issue at nation's water parks
The drowning last month of a teen-ager from the Bronx on a school trip to a water park has focused attention on the issue of safety in such places.
Daniel Maracallo, 14, drowned on June 15 at Dorney Park and Wildwater Kingdom in Allentown, Pa.
According to an investigation by the school that sponsored the trip, Intermediate School 166 in the Morrisania section of the Bronx, three students said they told lifeguards at the park that Daniel, who could not swim, had slipped below the surface of the wave pool and could not be found.
The students said the lifeguards tried to convince them that their classmate had probably left the pool.


Counterrevolutionary Families Are All the Same
GENERATIONS OF WINTER By Vassily Aksyonov.
Translated by John Glad and Christopher Morris. 592 pp.
New York:  Random House. $25.


As Multicultural As Queens Itself
GOODY'S *  (718) 896-7163; 94-03B 63d Drive, near Queens Boulevard, Rego Park; $; no credit cards
Setting: a bright and welcoming little storefront.
Fare: tasty Chinese.
Service: friendly.
Clientele: locals at lunch, Manhattan imports for dinner.
Shanghai-style soup dumplings,called xiao long bao, are unforgettable: delicate pastry filled with a mixture of pork, shrimp and crabmeat in a hot rich broth.
The dumplings come with small dishes of black vinegar and ginger.
Other excellent dishes include any bean curd dish; braised beef with noodles; flaky turnip pastries holding a savory mixture of shredded turnips, dried shrimp and pork and sprinkled with sesame seeds; and fried yellowfish fingers in seaweed batter sectioned in finger-size pieces.
Two other winners are house specialties: the slow-braised pork shoulder in a concoction of rice wine, soy sauce and sugar, and braised spiced duck with straw mushrooms, bok choy, bamboo shoots and thin slices of carrot. (Review: 5/20/94) LONDON LENNIE'S


Proud to Be 90
To the Editor:
I am sure your July 7 article on 95-year-old triplets in Texas is written in the kindest spirit.
And we old people appreciate the new humane attitude to aging.
But why such condescension?
The article's subjects seemed chosen to provide quotes bringing out their laughable limitations.


Cafeterias Adapt to Recycling Law
WITH the advent of widespread plastic recycling, employees and students using office and school cafeterias in Suffolk County may need extra time to sort their debris.
Some employers and six school districts have recycling programs in their cafeterias.
Others are planning programs, to comply with a new county law that requires people who use polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride to recycle the waste.


Improper Label
To the Sports Editor:
The murder of the Colombian soccer player Andres Escobar was a tragic example of how sports have taken on an importance far beyond providing entertainment and exercise.
But to label Colombia a backward country full of fanatics ignores the fact that the mentality that blurs sports and real life exists in this country as well.
JOHN BURY  Kenilworth, N.J.


Avery L. Horning, Clyde Wilmeth Jr.
Avery Laurence Horning, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Horning of Fairfield, Conn., was married on Wednesday to Clyde Fairfax Wilmeth Jr., the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Wilmeth.
Christine McCleod, the deputy magistrate of the Sitka, Alaska Trial Court, officiated at Castle Hill, a state park in Sitka.


Portofino
To the Editor: Paul Hofmann's article "Portofino, for the Rich and Less So" (June 19) conveyed the delight of that wonderful place, as did Simon McBride's fine photographs.
While the season is surely as grand as described and pictured, I wish to suggest another time, with a different mood -- and temperature -- but as such pleasure.


As Vote Approaches on Bosnian Settlement, Sarajevo Limps Along


Drawing the Line at Rhubarb
To the Editor:
For years I have been perplexed by your increasingly outlandish Authors' Queries.
No matter how bizarre the topics, however, I assumed them to be bona fide.
Since such credulity has only encouraged you to greater excesses, I must draw the line at rhubarb.
Am I really supposed to believe that someone is writing "a history of culinary and horticultural rhubarb" (June 19)?
While I do not want to create a rhubarb rhubarb, I cannot credit that there is an author who is really seeking amusing rhubarb anecdotes.
I am even more bemused about "nonfood uses" of rhubarb, not to mention the author's apparent belief that there may be an entire genre of rhubarb books and articles.


Journal; Trail Of Lies
As early as Tuesday the United States Senate may vote to maim American cultural institutions from the Old Globe Theater in San Diego to the Art Institute of Chicago to Kennedy Center in Washington.
And it has all happened because of a firestorm accidentally ignited by two middle-aged friends -- Dennis Yelkin, a hair stylist, and Jim Berenson, a flight attendant -- who went to a performance in a tiny cabaret theater in Minneapolis four months ago.
How did a visit to a show by two arts-loving suburbanites evolve into a crisis imperiling the National Endowment for the Arts?
The story would be a farce if the stakes weren't so high -- and if the threat to the N.E.A. were not another example of how the religious right poisons the civic atmosphere.


Whitney Alexanderson, Frank Heavey
Whitney Alexanderson, an art teacher at St.
James (Md.) School, and Frank John Heavey, the head of the history department at St.
James, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Donald S. Dunnan, headmaster of St.
James and an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
Christopher's Church in Chatham, Mass.
The Rev.
Laurence LaPointe, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.


Lordly Living in a French Fortress
ON a sunny morning, a smattering of guests sat down to a pastoral breakfast on the high lawns of Chateau de Bagnols.
The Victorian chairs were ample, the young waitresses puttered through the grass in long frilly frocks and carried strawberries and little glass pots of yogurt.
Beyond the terrace, past the lavender beds, the cherry trees and the dovecotes, shimmered a great valley, tressed with undulating vineyards.
It could have been a supreme Merchant-Ivory moment.
That is, as long as no one turned around.
Behind the guests stood the true commander of this valley in the Beaujolais region: a 13th-century fortress of immense walls and five towers, its bold outline anchored to an outcropping of rock.
Behind a moat, a drawbridge and arrow slits for windows, its builders lived here for generations.
Successive noblemen came to hoist their banners and gradually expanded the place to represent their might.
Now that a meticulous and sumptuous restoration has been completed, affluent travelers can stay here, eat copiously and wander the grounds.


Three Voyagers to the Moon: Life After Making History on TV
"Space changes nobody," says Stuart Roosa, an astronaut on the Apollo 14 lunar mission.
"You bring back from space what you bring into space."
His observation was quoted by Andrew Chaikin in "A Man on the Moon: The Voyages of the Apollo Astronauts," just published by Viking.
The lives of the three astronauts of Apollo 11, before and after the first lunar-landing mission, serve as case studies testing this proposition.


All Across America, Plunging Into Summer: THE EAST; PENNSYLVANIA -- SESAME PLACE
After my two daughters, Jessica and Susannah, outgrew Big Bird, I thought we had seen the last of Sesame Place, the theme park in Bucks County, Pa., that Anheuser-Busch developed in 1980 with the Children's Television Network, the creators of "Sesame Street." But the nine-acre park seems to have grown up too, adding more sophisticated water rides over the years.
Sesame Place is now geared to families with children aged 3 to 15, but it's better to have at least one child under 12 if there are any self-conscious adolescents in the family who might need an excuse for having fun in Bert and Ernie's neighborhood.
Now that Jessica is 14 and Susannah is 10, the family hurries past the amusement park area and goes right to the water rides. (Some of the major rides require riders to be at least 42 inches tall.) Slippery Slopes -- four separate undulating slides, each 70 feet long -- are the tamest of the three major rides.
Jessica and my wife, Susan, prefer Sesame Streak, which consists of three flumes, each 200 feet long; riders sit on inner tubes, twisting in and out of tunnels before splashing down in a pool.
Runaway Rapids is a single 300-foot flume with lots of twists, turns and a bumpy bottom to simulate (vaguely) river rapids.
Riders, on inner tubes, often end up going backward, which lends an out-of-control sensation as they speed through a steep tunnel and waterfall before the final splashdown.


Backlash
To the Editor:
Bravo to Nina Auerbach for her insightful review of Christina Hoff Sommers's "Who Stole Feminism?" (June 12)!
Finally, an intelligent review that reveals this latest backlash for what it really is.
As the executive director of the American Association of University Women, I think Ms.
Auerbach has done her profession proud by looking beneath the surface and ferreting out the truth.


Using a Mortgage Broker
WORKING with a mortgage broker is something relatively new.
It's only in the last seven years that they have become popular, largely because prospective borrowers seem too busy these days to shop for themselves and some prefer to let a more qualified person find the best rate and terms.
Mortgage brokers have also gained an excellent reputation for helping marginal borrowers who cannot negotiate a loan on their own.
Moreover, they can help the novice borrower collect the necessary documents and fill out the forms.
A good mortgage broker will even make a prior credit check and help the borrower clear up any problem areas before the credit record is seen by a lender.


The New Britain-Wroclaw Connection
WHEN the Iron Curtain collapsed of its own weight in Europe in the late 1980's, no group rejoiced more than the Polish-Americans of New Britain.
For decades, New Britain's Poles -- the major ethnic group in the city for most of the century -- had been agonizing over the fate of relatives and friends in Poland.
Now Poland would be free at last, free at last.


Phantom Tears
To the Sports Editor:
When it comes to tennis, few newspapers provide the kind of comprehensive and lively coverage supplied by The New York Times and Robin Finn, who heads the pack as one of the world's most keenly observant and accomplished tennis reporters.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
CULTURE AND IMPERIALISM By Edward W. Said.
Vintage, $13.
The author analyzes the relationship between art and the politics of empire.
Examining the reflections of colonialism in novels by authors like Austen and Dickens, he also surveys the contributions of once subordinated cultures.
His "account of the dialectical relation between imperialism and resistance is the most persuasive one I know," Michael Gorra said here last year.


Carolyn G. James, W. B. McDonough
Carolyn Grant James, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Alan James of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to William Bartley McDonough, a son of Joyce Thompson and William J. McDonough, both of New York.
The Rev.
Paul F. Goetting officiated at St.
Michael's Lutheran Church in New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Diane Drach-Meinel, the bride's cousin, assisted.
Mrs.
McDonough is an associate in banking and corporate finance at Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
She and the bridegroom received masters' degrees in management from Northwestern University.
Her father is a management consultant with offices in Brussels and Rowayton, Conn.
Her mother is a silk floral designer.


Political Notes; Court Battle Seems Likely Over New Jersey Lottery
Increasingly it appears that a judge will be the final referee in a competition over who will run New Jersey's state lottery that has involved not only the vendors, but also some of the most politically well-connected law offices and lobbying firms in the state.
Among those involved has been one of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's closest political advisers, Hazel Gluck, a lobbyist and a former director of the state lottery.
At various times, each of the three companies seeking the $100 million-plus contract -- Automated Wagering International of Hackensack, G-TECH Corporation of West Greenwich, R.I., and Autotote Lottery Corporation of Owens Mills, Md. -- has emerged as the apparent front-runner.


Did a Man Or a Woman Write That?
IN A PROVOCATIVE ESSAY IN A NEW COLLECTION of musicological essays about sexuality and music, Leo Treitler, a professor of music at the City University of New York, recalls an anecdote about the psychoanalyst Bruno Bettelheim:
"He is said to have interrupted a lecture to inform a woman student who was knitting in the front row that knitting is symbolic of masturbation, and she is said to have responded, 'Professor Bettelheim, when I knit, I knit; when I masturbate, I masturbate.' "


Christmas Trees in July? It's a Classroom.
VISITORS wandering onto Leonard Wolgast's farm here might wonder if the heat has finally got to them, when they find themselves surrounded by Christmas trees in July.
But what they see is not some thermal-induced mirage.
It is the working farm of Dr.
Wolgast, a professor of wildlife ecology and management in the department of natural resources at Cook College of Rutgers University.


Commercial Property/New York Room Tax; Surcharge End Delights Hotels
IT took New York's travel industry four years to get the state to repeal the hated 5 percent surcharge on hotel rooms renting for more than $100.
It took New York City hotel managers probably four minutes to start marketing the fact that as of Sept. 1, that tax will be history -- and that three months later, the city will shave an additional percentage point off the tax as well.
"We're getting the message out that New York is visitor-friendly once again," said an ebullient Joseph E. Spinnato, president of the Hotel Association of New York City, which rushed out a four-page newsletter celebrating the repeal.


Why Hurry?
To the Editor:
I agree that stories can provide a pathway to deeper understanding for children.
But the experience of being read to (or of reading oneself) is vastly different from viewing a movie.
Upon hearing or reading a story, children use their imagination and past experiences to shape impressions and feelings about what they have heard.


Quartets at Caramoor: Tokyo and Colorado
THE spotlight is on strings this week at Caramoor in Katonah with performances by two superb chamber groups, the Tokyo String Quartet and the Colorado String Quartet.
The former plays Beethoven, Puccini, Wolf and Schumann today at 5:30 P.M. in the Venetian Theater.
The Colorado group will perform next Friday at 8:30 P.M., with music by Mozart, Mendelssohn and Smetana.
Boccherini's Duo for Cello and Bass begins the Summer Serenade presented by the resident St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble on Thursday at 4:15 P.M.
Also on the program are Haydn's Cassation for Flute, Oboe and Strings and the Spohr "Grand Nonetto" for Winds and Strings.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's views on the death penalty overlooked his position on commuting death sentences if capital punishment is reinstated in New York.
He has indeed commented on the issue.
Discussing a hypothetical situation in which state law changed to allow executions, Mr.
Cuomo has said that he would not commute a death sentence solely because he opposes capital punishment.


Bill Brandt's Britain
There are plenty of arresting images in BILL BRANDT: Photographs 1928-1983 (Thames and Hudson, paper, $24.95).
But one leaves this book of black-and white landscapes, literary portraits, abstract-looking nudes and studies of English upper-class and lower-class life wondering just what makes Bill Brandt Bill Brandt.
What links the man who in 1944 took a striking shot of an unhappy couple sitting at a pub with the man who in 1957 photographed an East Sussex landscape dominated by a large human ear?
Why are the linkages in Brandt's work so unclear?
Even when Brandt (1904-83) was on assignment for magazines, Mr.
Jeffries says, he often became "engrossed or seduced by motifs." Here, one gets an occasional glimpse of Brandt's juxtapositions.
There is, for instance, an eerie trio of photographs under the title "The Magic Lantern of a Car's Headlights." But many of the photographs here are stripped from their intended context.
That does not completely explain the uneasiness of this retrospective, though.
The uncanniness of Brandt's art, as Mr.
Jeffries points out, is the suggestion "That what is ostensibly on show is not the whole story, that all those motifs are part of a larger, secret scheme, a private universe to which we are on the point of gaining access." SARAH BOXER


Nancy L. Weinstein, Gregory S. Picker
Nancy Lynn Weinstein, the daughter of Shirley Weinstein of New York and the late Jerold Weinstein, was married last evening to Gregory Steven Picker, a son of Beverly and Ed Picker of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi David Posner officiated at the St.
Regis in New York.
Mrs.
Picker, the New England sales manager at Mirabella magazine in New York, graduated from Vanderbilt University.


Bronx Community Groups Find Strength in Unity
In the early 1970's many residents of the Norwood neighborhood in the northwest Bronx embraced the illusion that their middle-class enclave would resist the creeping wall of flames that was incinerating entire communities to their south.
But as 10 blocks a year fell to abandonment, anxiety and arson a few miles away, simple geography told Anne Devenney that the fire next time would inevitably rage next door.
Spurred by clergy members and a handful of young organizers, she took to the hallways and and community centers of her neighborhood, determined to jolt people out of their complacency and into partnership with residents of surrounding areas where the blight was beginning to creep.


Mistress Underdone, at the Delacorte
WHETHER OR NOT Shakespeare wrote "The Merry Wives of Windsor" at the order of the Queen, which scholars now think unlikely, the comedy still has the manner of an Elizabethan equivalent to something that Hollywood might title "Falstaff III."
Yet "The Merry Wives of Windsor" is far from being the work of an opportunist writing at top speed; tradition is that Shakespeare completed it in 14 days.
The Falstaff of "The Merry Wives of Windsor" is no bogus spinoff of the great, proud rapscallion of the two "Henry IV" history plays.
He has heard the chimes at midnight, if not in this comedy.
He's the original character, returned to participate in a lighthearted summer masque with all of his bluster, self-dramatizing rue and fragile dignity intact.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LITERARY EVENING
Since John Cheever died in 1982 his family members have earned literary reputations in their own right.
His wife, Mary, is a published poet, and his daughter, Susan, and son, Benjamin, have become successful authors.
Susan and Benjamin will read from their work at Encore Books in Eastchester on Wednesday at 7:30 P.M.
Susan's "Home Before Dark," "Treetops" and "A Woman's Life: The Story of an Ordinary American and Her Extraordinary Generation" were published by Bantam Doubleday Dell.
"The Plagiarist" and "The Partisan" by Benjamin were released under the Atheneum imprint.


Fairfield County's 'Captain Traffic' Takes Pictures Too
MORGAN KAOLIAN likes to say that he's "a guy with both feet on the ground." But try telling that to his multitude of radio listeners in Fairfield County and beyond.
To them, it's as if Mr.
Kaolian has been airborne for most of the last 30 years, warning of traffic tieups and telling motorists how to get around them.
Though he is not a broadcaster per se, Mr.
Kaolian's voice is probably better known to more people in the Fairfield County area than that of any other individual Connecticut radio personality as a result of his longtime air traffic reports over station WICC-AM in Bridgeport.


Jennifer Mogck, Daniel Wallick
Jennifer Linn Mogck, the daughter of Mrs.
Leonard H. Mogck of St.
Paul and the late Mr.
Mogck, was married there yesterday to Daniel Walter Wallick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip B. Wallick of Brooklyn Heights.
The Rev.
Dr.
James Carter performed the ceremony at the House of Hope Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is to become an associate at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment bank, in Philadelphia next month.


Mary Jane Palermo, H. Curtis Meanor
Mary Jane Palermo, a special-education teacher at the Millburn (N.J.) Regional Day School, is to be married today in Franklin Lakes, N.J., to H. Curtis Meanor, a senior partner in Podvey, Sachs, Meanor, Catenacci, Hildner &amp; Cocoziello, a Newark law firm.
Arthur J. Simpson Jr., a retired judge of the Appellate Division of the New Jersey Superior Court, will officiate at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph McKenna, friends of the couple.
The bride graduated from William Paterson College, from which she also received a master's degree in teaching children with disabilities.
She is the daughter of Mary Elizabeth Whitehead of Freehold, N.J., and the late James A. Whitehead.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
An Old Friend Lives Again Amid the Bookshelves
After Potemkin, a German short-haired pointer, died on Feb. 9, 1984, Margot Rosenberg and Bern Marcowitz say, their lives weren't the same.
For 10 years, the husband and wife tried to figure out a way to memorialize their pet -- and to change careers.
So, last month, the couple opened the Dog Lovers Bookshop at 9 West 31st street, and decided that Potemkin would be the founding dog, "whose image will not only watch over the shop but will soon be emblazoned on everything we have in the store," said Ms.
Rosenberg.


We Don't Need a Rerun of Cold War in Bosnia; Bolster the U.N.
To the Editor:
All nations have agreed that no territorial acquisition resulting from aggression shall be recognized as lawful.
David Gompert (Op-Ed, July 3) is to be applauded for opposing the partition plan in Bosnia -- a reward for Serbian aggression.
To repudiate international law is to invite international lawlessness.
But suggesting that the remedy lies in unremitting economic sanctions until Serbs overthrow their criminal leaders is a cure worse than the disease.


JUDITH REGAN
"Judith Regan," SHE SAYS IN HER CLIPPED VOICE, returning my first phone call from her office at Simon &amp; Schuster in November.
"Judith, hi. How are you?" I ask.


When Streamlined Meant Bauhaus
IN THE 1990'S, DESIGN AFICIONADOS sit in Bauhaus chairs, drink from Bauhaus teacups and read by Bauhaus lamps.
Yet the sleek, glittering style known as Bauhaus modern is older than most of its admirers.
Now the 75th anniversary of the century's most influential design movement is being celebrated in "Bauhaus Workshops: 1919-1933," an exhibition at the American Craft Museum, through Oct. 9.
The 87 objects represent a mere sampling of the thousands produced in the movement, which originated at the German design school during its brief, turbulent existence.
But they document many innovative achievements.


Confessions of an In-Line Commuter
LET me just say that I do not consider in-line skating fun.
House-painting would be a more enjoyable form of recreation.
The idea of sweeping in circles around Central Park with no particular destination sounds like an Off Off Broadway producer's idea of updating "Waiting for Godot."
Fortunately, I do not skate for fun.
I skate to conquer my New York commute, TriBeCa to Times Square.
And my Rollerblades are the $200 tools of my triumph.
My bicycles have been stolen.
I don't like being so compressed in a subway car that I emerge with the sort of creases on my skin that bedsheets leave after a particularly solid sleep.
Walking is, most of the time, impractical.
Skates, though, leave me at no one's mercy.


July 10-16: Diagnostics in Doubt; Backache Not Necessarily Connected to Backbone
It seemed so simple: A backache sufferer sees a doctor, who suggests magnetic resonance imaging, or M.R.I.
The costly procedure shows a bulging disk.
The problem diagnosed, surgery often follows.
But a study published last week in The New England Journal of Medicine used M.R.I. scans to examine the spines of 98 people who had no back pain.
Two-thirds of them had spinal abnormalities, including herniated disks and degenerated ones.
If such problems had been seen in someone with back pain, they might have justified an operation.
The researchers concluded that in many cases it may be sheer coincidence -- not cause and effect -- when a person with back pain is found to have an abnormal disk.


Burmese Using Forced Labor on Tourist Projects
Gilding the great Lion Throne of the last kings of Burma, Aung Soe Min was looking a little gilded himself.
The yellow-gold paint splattered on his arms and legs as he crawled up the ladder, moving his brush across the newly carved reproduction of the 18-foot-high wooden throne.
"Excellent," he pronounced his work, part of a five-year project to rebuild the 19th-century Gold Palace, the centerpiece of the last imperial capital of the country that is now called Myanmar.


A Revival Plan For New Haven
The article about Mayor Richard Lee, "He Who Once Rebuilt New Haven" (May 1), failed to mention the heartfelt criticism of his redevelopment work.
With all due respect to Mayor Lee, he and many others during the 50's and 60's destroyed New Haven and many other cities in this country.
The tragedy of New Haven was that in the name of progress, entire neighborhoods were bulldozed away, families were dispersed and ugly concrete buildings were erected in their stead.


Corrections
An article on June 19 about the making of "Freedom on My Mind," a documentary about the 1960's voter-registration drive in Mississippi, characterized the civil rights pioneer Medgar Evers incorrectly.
He was the Mississippi field secretary for the N.A.A.C.P., not an attorney for the organization.
The article also misidentified a farmer, Herbert Lee.
He was the first black voter registered by Robert Moses, a civil rights worker, not the first black man ever registered to vote in Mississippi.


We Don't Need a Rerun of Cold War in Bosnia
To the Editor:
Re "Wage a Cold War Against Serbia" by David Gompert (Op-Ed, July 3): The origins of the war are indeed complicated.
They involved the collapse of Yugoslavia, the victory of nationalist parties at the polls in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1990 and the outbreak of fighting in March 1992 between the Serbs and the Croats, followed by attacks on Bosnian territory by Serbian forces in April 1992.


SURFACING
FASHION  Straight and narrow: Skinny ties and belts are reappearing on runways and streets.
Young men's collections by both Gianni Versace and Dolce &amp; Gabbana featured the look recently. (Christopher Moore)


Sports of The Times; This Final Is From The Heart
BRAZIL-ITALY.
Passion and Experience.
Italy-Brazil.
Heart and Soul.
In either order, the very mention of their names sends chills down my spine.
Nothing against Germany and Argentina, who have beaten each other in the last two World Cups, but this would have been the dream finale in the States -- the two major continents of soccer, Brazil's stereotyped flair and Italy's stereotyped tactics.
Next time in France, we absolutely must have new finalists.
But let America see the glamorous old champions.


Profile; He's Finding the Fire, This Time, in Interactive Media
FOR Robert Stein, it all began with a premonition.
A decade ago, personal computers were just beginning to enter the home, and cutting-edge products like CD-ROM's and on-line services were only a dream.
That was when Mr.
Stein, with his wife, Aleen, founded the Voyager Company to explore the digital frontier.
Started in the trendy Southern California beach town of Santa Monica, Voyager began by offering little more than classic movies on laser disk.
The Steins, though, soon hooked up a computer to the video machines, producing annotated films that added everything from outtakes to interviews with the film makers, and for some foreign films even offering a choice between original and dubbed audio tracks.


July 10-16; A Bill Change To Foil Counterfeiters
In an attempt to thwart high-tech counterfeiting, the Treasury Department announced last week a series of currency changes, starting with the counterfeiters' favorite, the $100 bill.
Benjamin Franklin's image on that bill will grow 50 percent and move three-quarters of an inch to the left.
The shift makes room for a watermark-shaped image, which is undetectable to copying machines.
By the year 2000, all denominations will be printed in the new style.


THE REVOLT OF THE BLACK BOURGEOISIE
Talk about racist stereotypes!
Mr.
"I'm an individual" Gaiter should recall that it was the ranks of "semiliterate, hoop-shooting former prison inmate"-"African-print wearing"-"black accent"-hollering blacks -- those like Fannie Lou Hamers, H. Rap Brown, George Jackson, Fred Hampton and Malcolm X -- who served as cannon fodder in the black social protest movements that forced open the doors of elite white institutions for lucky blacks like him and me.


The World; Germans in Paris Herald the Future
They did not goose-step down the Champs Elysees.
In fact, so painful is France's memory of Nazi boots that the 200 German soldiers who paraded in this year's Bastille Day ceremonies did not even walk down the great avenue.
Rather, they swept by in light tanks, with only a small black-and-white military cross distinguishing their armored vehicles from scores of others in the parade.
Still, even with France and Germany now friends, even with the visiting German troops attached to an embryonic five-nation Eurocorps, the sight of uniformed Germans returning to Paris was bound to upset older French who lived through Nazi Germany's occupation of the city between June 14, 1940 and August 25, 1944.


'SPEED TRIBES'
As a journalist who has lived with Japanese Yakuza (gangsters) to research a forthcoming book of my own, I was pleasantly taken aback by the adaptation of Karl Taro Greenfeld's "Speed Tribes: Days and Nights With Japan's Next Generation" (June 26).
In a nation where conformity is revered, it is these subcultures that are the most compelling to Japan's alienated young people. ("Losers" is literally what the Yakuza call themselves.)


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Americans Toppled In Davis Doubles
After being almost identically matched through four sets, the experience factor of Paul Haarhuis and Jacco Eltingh entered the equation today.
It was enough to lift the Dutch Davis Cup pair to a 2-6, 7-6, 6-3, 6-7, 6-2 victory over the rookie duo of Richey Reneberg and Jared Palmer to cut the United States' lead to 2-1 in the quarterfinal series.


Tech Notes; A Front Brake for In-Line Skates
AT a time when a lot of attention is being paid to the health hazards of in-line skating, a new front-mounted brake that promises to make stopping easier is being introduced in skate shops nationwide.
The product, called Skids, is conceptually similar to the front brake on standard roller skates.
A high-impact nylon composite bracket attaches to the inside of the wheel chassis and holds the polyurethane brake pad in the front center of the in-line skate.


Sedate Splendor on the Costa Brava
WHEN the pressure of time present becomes nigh unbearable, fantasies of time past invade our thoughts and some primal voice demands a getaway to a place of beauty and traditional, very human services.
One of the most enduring abodes of such old-time indulgence hugs a promontory on Spain's rocky Costa Brava.
Situated 64 miles northeast of Barcelona (and as many miles south of the French border), the Hostal de La Gavina has gathered three generations of the world-weary within its whitewashed walls to savor Catalan hospitality.
Though the Hostal includes 57 rooms and 17 suites, the welcome remains that of a family-run inn, which is just what it is.
From father to son, the Ensesa family has created and maintained La Gavina and the surrounding community of S'Agaro.


Housing for the Elderly, or Maybe the Over-40s
After several months of accusations about bad promises and hidden intentions, neighborhood groups opposed to plans for Euclid Hall, a large single-room-occupancy hotel at 86th Street and Broadway, will get a chance to take their case to City Hall this week.
The seven-story hotel, with more than 290 rooms, has been at the center of a fierce campaign since residents in the area discovered last year that the nonprofit manager, the West Side Federation for Senior Housing, did not intend to stick to its original intention to house only people over 50 years old with no special problems with drugs or mental illness.


Stan Marx; Book Collector, 74
Stan Marx, a collector and seller of rare books, died on Wednesday at his home in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 74.
The cause was an aneurysm, his daughter, Rabbi Jo David, said.


Mary Pat Roggenburg, Charles Bennett
Mary Pat Roggenburg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley L. Roggenburg Jr. of Todt Hill, S.I., was married at her parents' home yesterday to Charles Dowdle Bennett, the son of Addie L. Bennett of Columbus, Miss., and the late Terry W. Bennett.
Judge Michael J. Brennan of the New York City Criminal Court in Stapleton, S.I., officiated.
The bride, a graduate of Skidmore College, received a master's degree in nursing from Hunter College.
She is the manager of health services for Time Warner in New York.


Macedonia Census Just Inflames the Disputes
Amid the ethnic rivalries of the former Yugoslavia, a simple rule holds: the more people an ethnic group can claim, the greater its pretensions to land and power.
So it has proved in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where everything from the first Austro-Hungarian census of the 19th century to the last Yugoslav census of 1991 has been invoked to justify Serbian, Croatian or Muslim claims to a percentage of a village or a couple of hills.
And so it is in Macedonia, a place with the potential to make the Bosnian war look like a mere warm-up.


Elizabeth Skinner, N. M. Grumbach
Elizabeth Anne Skinner, the daughter of Anne R. Skinner of Williamstown, Mass., and the late James F. Skinner, was married yesterday to Nicholas Munroe Grumbach, a son of Antonia and George Grumbach of New York.
The Rev.
Robert Buckwalter, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at Mount Hope Farm in Williamstown.
Mrs.
Grumbach and her husband, both 27, graduated from Bowdoin College, she summa cum laude and he cum laude.
The bride teaches science at the Brearley School in New York.
Her father was the chairman of the chemistry department at Williams College in Williamstown, where her mother teaches chemistry.


Jill M. Constantine, Daniel O. Wolsk
Dr.
Jill Marie Constantine, an assistant professor of economics at Williams College in Williamstown, Mass., was married yesterday to Daniel Owen Wolsk, an administrator in North Adams, Mass., for the Community Health Plan, a health maintenance organization.
The Rev.
John F. Edwards, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Robert Allan Keenay Memorial Cultural Center in Wethersfield, Conn.
Dr.
Constantine, 29, who is keeping her name, graduated from Smith College and received a Ph.D. in economics from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Betty Constantine and Dr.
Joseph Constantine of Wethersfield.
The bride's mother, a registered nurse, retired as the manager of the intravenous therapy department at St.
Francis Hospital in Hartford.
Her father retired as a coordinator of guidance and health services for the Hartford Board of Education.


1980's Redux? Deals Making A Comeback
TALK about a blast from the past.
The latest Wall Street revival is Dealzapoppin, really big deals, billion dollar deals.
Deals like the ones in the 1980's, when every investment banker wore a big gold Rolex, every trophy wife reeked of industrial-strength perfume, and every overpriced plate of nouvelle cuisine came adorned with radicchio.
Last week alone, there were big companies buying bits of other big companies, led by Eli Lily's $4 billion purchase of McKesson's PCS unit.
There were employees buying their own companies, as UAL's shareholders approved a $4.9 billion recapitalization.
There was high drama, as Macy's succumbed to Federated Department Stores.
There was even a hostile offer, as Comcast made a run for QVC, scuttling that company's deal with CBS and leaving the latter vulnerable to unsolicited offers.
That's not counting smaller deals.


Overturning Conviction Is Upheld
A state appeals court has unanimously upheld the overturning of a conviction of a man wrongfully imprisoned for seven years in the rape of a 5-year-old girl at a day-care center.
The ruling, which was highly critical of the handling of the child sex-abuse case by the Bronx District Attorney's office in the 1980's, says that prosecutors working in the office of District Attorney Mario Merola, now deceased, withheld documents that could have led to the defendant's acquittal.


You Sightsee Your Way, I'll Sightsee Mine


High Court Call: Father's Rights or Child's Interest
Legal experts say the Illinois Supreme Court decision last week ordering that an adopted child be given to his biological parents highlights the continuing uncertainties about how to define fathers' rights and children's best interests.
These uncertainties could be resolved by the United States Supreme Court, where the adoptive parents in the case say they plan to turn next.


Walkers in the City
To the Editor:
Simon Schama's enthusiastic review of E. L. Doctorow's novel "The Waterworks" (June 19) sends one sailing to the bookstore.
A footnote perhaps might state that the great stone masonry holding pond formerly on the site of the New York Public Library -- the book's central image -- was known as the distributing reservoir.
James Renwick (1818-95), the architect of Grace Church and St.
Patrick's Cathedral, was almost surely responsible for its design.
One would not know from your cover drawing that the walls, 45 feet above street level, provided a protected promenade popular with strolling New Yorkers.
BANNON MCHENRY  New York


TALKING ABOUT THE MEDIA CIRCUS
Wouldn't it have been a good-faith gesture toward the "balance" that Jerry Nachman advocates for your panel to have included at least one representative of "those shows" against whose prurient tactics it so valiantly struggles?
ANJALI GALLUP-DIAZ Princeton, N.J.


Belarus Winner Remakes His Image
The angry young man who just became the first President of Belarus learns fast.
Elected by flailing away at the Government, belittling the idea of free enterprise and promising that crime would stop at once, Aleksandr Lukashenko performed a quick pirouette this week.
After five months of shouting that the ex-Communist leadership of Belarus was running the country into the ground, Mr.
Lukashenko said he was "shocked" to find out how bad things really were.
He called for peace.
And despite hints to the contrary during his campaign, he said only true democracy could save the struggling country.


E. M. Campbell, David B. Walker
Elizabeth Moffitt Campbell, a daughter of Roy Campbell Jr. of Mooresville, N.C., and the late Mary Hill Moffitt Linder, was married yesterday to David Bray Walker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Walker of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Wilson Carter officiated at Grace Episcopal Church in Lexington, N.C.
The bride and bridegroom are vice presidents at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is a furniture manufacturers' representative in High Point, N.C.
She is a stepdaughter of Frances G. Campbell.


A Little Dancing, A Little Supper
Opening night of the Royal Ballet, Metropolitan Opera House, July 6.


IN SHORT: FICTION
DOMESTIC DRAMA  MAYBE IN MISSOULA  By Toni Volk. Soho, $22.


Corrections
An entry in the Residential Sales listing in the same section misstated the address of a house in Glen Cove, L.I.
It is at 39 Willits Road, not 39 Willis Avenue.


Next Thing You Know, Countertenors Could Be Stars
IT WAS BOUND TO HAPPEN.
THE early-music world, being as fashion driven as anything else, was bound to see the day when incremental course corrections, in matters of sound and technique, would give way to radical sea changes.
And with each generation finding it easier to produce antique sounds, it was inevitable that the traditional research-heavy arguments about how-it-probably-sounded-back-then would give way to a performance style rooted in the notion of doing what sounds good.
Brian Asawa, the 27-year old countertenor who will sing Handel and Gluck at the Mostly Mozart Festival on Saturday evening, is one of several young male altos who think more about ravishing the ear than about the niceties of Baroque style, yet who manage to have it both ways.
There is a market for them in early music, where falsetto singing is considered the closest modern facsimile of the castrato voice, for which composers wrote coloratura roles in the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries.
But mainstream opportunities are opening up as well.


California Crash Forces an Evacuation


Corrections
An article on July 3 headlined "Paris Is Still a Moveable Feast" misattributed a quotation from a work by Balzac and quoted one word of it incorrectly.
The words "A nous deux maintenant"were spoken by Eugene de Rastignac in "Le Pere Goriot," not Lucien de Rubempre in "Illusions Perdues." The phrase was not "A nous deux, Paris."


Microsoft's Grip on Software Loosened by Antitrust Deal
The Microsoft Corporation, which thus far has reigned as the premier creator of software for personal computers, bowed before Federal antitrust regulators today and agreed to immediately abandon a number of its important sales practices, which the Government said had smothered competition.
Under a consent decree signed with the United States Justice Department on Friday night, Microsoft agreed to give computer manufacturers considerably more freedom to install programs from other companies.


On the Left Bank
To the Editor: I stayed at the Hotel du Dragon in 1951 ("A Slice of Neighborhood Life on the Left Bank in Paris," June 19).
Nothing seems to have changed except one no longer has to put in brass franc pieces to get light in the hallway, and the showers are new.


July 10-16; Waking Up in Space


Some Referees Deserve Red Cards
Referees for this 15th World Cup had exceptionally clear marching orders -- to punish violent fouls, tackling from behind and tackles that stop a player from advancing on goal.
Linesmen also had strict instructions to give attacking players the benefit of the doubt in making offside calls.
As officials strained to follow these orders, there were some glaring inconsistencies.
But, after some harsh criticism in the earlier rounds, officials of FIFA, soccer's world governing body, now insist that they are content with the officiating over all.


Patching Up Health Care
Richard Gephardt, the House majority leader, and George Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, face a fiendishly difficult job as they try to fashion health care legislation from the partial and contradictory committee bills now before them.
The majority leaders must find a bipartisan consensus where one is now lacking and shape compromises that will win support without wrecking the health care system they intend to improve.
Mr.
Gephardt is trapped because he is forced to work with a badly flawed bill from the Ways and Means Committee.
It would impose an employer mandate to achieve universal coverage.
But it would also create a government-run plan of last resort that is cynically configured to drive private plans out of existence.
In that and other ways, the bill would damage the quality of heath care Americans routinely enjoy.
Mr.
Gephardt also knows that the key provisions of the Ways and Means bill could not possibly make their way past the Senate.


Bill Brandt's Britain
There are plenty of arresting images in BILL BRANDT: Photographs 1928-1983 (Thames and Hudson, paper, $24.95).
But one leaves this book of black-and white landscapes, literary portraits, abstract-looking nudes and studies of English upper-class and lower-class life wondering just what makes Bill Brandt Bill Brandt.
What links the man who in 1944 took a striking shot of an unhappy couple sitting at a pub with the man who in 1957 photographed an East Sussex landscape dominated by a large human ear?
Why are the linkages in Brandt's work so unclear?
Even when Brandt (1904-83) was on assignment for magazines, Mr.
Jeffries says, he often became "engrossed or seduced by motifs." Here, one gets an occasional glimpse of Brandt's juxtapositions.
There is, for instance, an eerie trio of photographs under the title "The Magic Lantern of a Car's Headlights." But many of the photographs here are stripped from their intended context.
That does not completely explain the uneasiness of this retrospective, though.
The uncanniness of Brandt's art, as Mr.
Jeffries points out, is the suggestion "That what is ostensibly on show is not the whole story, that all those motifs are part of a larger, secret scheme, a private universe to which we are on the point of gaining access." SARAH BOXER


Russian Emigree Conjures Up a Kansas Epic
SEVEN years ago, when Paullina Simons announced that she was pregnant, her mother, a Russian emigree living in Queens, was devastated, Ms.
Simons recalled.
" 'That's it,' " Ms.
Simons recalled her mother's telling her.
" 'You'll never have a career. It's either one or the other.' "


Beverley Hsiao And C. E. Blume
Beverley Kuang-ping Hsiao, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry S. Hsiao of Chapel Hill, N.C., was married yesterday to Christopher Edward Blume, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Marshall E. Blume of Villanova, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
Peyton Craighill performed the Episcopal ceremony at Fearrington House, an inn in Pittsboro, N.C.
Mrs.
Blume, 25, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Her father is a professor of biomedical engineering at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her mother, Linda Hsiao, is the business manager of Microcomputer Interfaces, a computer consultancy in Chapel Hill.


The Care and Feeding of the Butterfly
THEY'RE silent, they're beautiful, they're butterflies.
When these creatures visit the garden, pause, if you can, to watch as they flit from flower to flower to sip the nectar.
Experts, the lepidopterists, estimate that there may be 18,000 species or more in the world, each with its unique markings.
No wonder butterflies can be a source of ceaseless fascination.


Distillation Of the Essence
After reading "An Ailing Author Shelves the Epilogue,"  [ June 19 ]  I realize that it is possible to redefine one's self almost immediately.
Pam Conrad had to sort out all the complicated factors of her public and private life.
She measured all the facets of her personality, cast off what was extraneous and found what was most essential for her survival.
Without a lot of soul searching, she has recognized the differences between fantasy and reality.


For Sweden, No-Nonsense Consolation
For many, the third-place match in the World Cup carries little weight, but Sweden and Bulgaria fought vigorously for victory on the Rose Bowl grass today and 83,716 fans paid an average of $95 a ticket to watch on a sweltering afternoon.
Taking the most direct, no-nonsense approach that brought them success, the Swedes captured third place with a 4-0 triumph over the Bulgarians, the team that earned Cinderella status in this World Cup of surprises.


Federal Law Requires New Faucets and Toilets
PART of the National Energy Policy Act of 1992 governs household water fixtures, including toilets, shower heads and bath and kitchen faucets.
All have to have water-saving designs.
There is no need to remove existing fixtures, but if you plan to remodel or add new devices you have to meet the law.
The act also requires that fixtures be manufactured to comply.
But ask questions and read labels to avoid buying out-of-date merchandise.


Where a Family Vacation Is No Oxymoron
WHEN our son was 2, we foolishly decided to rent a cottage on a secluded lake in Maine for three weeks.
What we had envisioned as a placid vacation quickly turned into a round of car rides to Storyland in Concord, N.H., afternoons at the small play area in the local McDonalds and trips to Toys "R" Us in the attempt to keep him amused.
We returned home chastened and determined to reconcile our son's need for activities and playmates with our own desire to read, hike and enjoy the lakes and woods of northern New England.


Sports of The Times; Does Keenan Equal Fedorov?
EVEN with the Stanley Cup, the Rangers' franchise remains the hypochondriac of sports.
It's not happy unless it's suffering.
Just when the Rangers' faithful assumed "the curse" had been exorcised, the coach has deserted.
Mike Keenan declared himself a "free agent" in search of another National Hockey League job, presumably with the Detroit Red Wings, because the Madison Square Garden treasury was one day late with his playoff bonus.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/1995 Buick Riviera; Haute Couture Coupe In Size Large
BUICK'S Riviera was perhaps the most eye-popping car at the New York Auto Show this year, but when I spotted those sleek 1995 lines, they took me back through more calendars than I care to recall.
I was in junior high school when General Motors rolled out the original Riv, and we kids thought it was just about the best thing we'd ever seen.


The Nation; Why Breyer's Hearing Was Meant to Be Dull
THE hearing room was almost deserted as Judge Stephen G. Breyer finished his three days before the Senate Judiciary Committee last week.
Summer interns claimed the few seats that were filled.
The cameras were gone.
The interest groups were never there.
Also absent, for the second Supreme Court confirmation hearing in a row, was the scent of war.
Following a similarly peaceful exercise last summer for President Clinton's first Supreme Court nominee, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the image of the confirmation hearing as a bloody battle over the future of the Court and the Constitution has finally begun to fade.


GOVERNORS OPPOSE KEY DOLE PROPOSAL ON A HEALTH PLAN
In a letter to Senator Bob Dole, governors from both parties said today that they opposed an important element of the health care plan offered by Senate Republicans because it sets strict limits on Federal spending for Medicaid.
The plan, an alternative to the proposals of President Clinton and Congressional Democrats, seeks to widen access to health care without raising taxes.
In addition, at a news conference here, the leaders of the National Governors' Association called on Congress to pass health care legislation this year even if the bill is less sweeping than the President's proposal.


All Across America, Plunging Into Summer: THE WEST; COLORADO: HYLAND HILLS WATER WORLD
On a typically crowded Sunday at Hyland Hills Water World, about a 15-minute drive north of Denver, the long uphill processions of people shouldering cream-colored rubber rafts twice their size look like ants transporting larvae.
On 60 undulating acres, Water World would seem to come by its steepness naturally, given the snow-streaked Rocky Mountains in the blue distance, though the hills in the park are paved with concrete paths.


Woodstock Nation, and Address; Social Conscience and Freedom Shine for Those Who Stayed
In June 1969, Tobe Carey and the other members of his family commune, the True Light Beavers, moved here to the town that would provide the inspiration, if not the setting, for the famous festival bearing its name.
"This is my brother Marty and his wife, Susan," Mr.
Carey said, pointing at two nude figures sitting in a field with a group of unclothed others, their young images displayed this morning on a video screen in his attic studio.
"And there's Abbie Hoffman," he added, identifying a bearded man with his bare buttocks to the camera.


A 42d Street Building With Oh, What a Past
To the Editor:
To say, as you do in "The Cat Came Back" (July 3), that the building at 232 West 42d Street used to house a peep show misses a lot of history.
The building on which Dr.
Seuss's Cat in the Hat has been painted was constructed in the 1880's as a schoolhouse, with the prestigious firm of McKim, Mead &amp; White as architects.
In 1908, as a residential 42d Street was becoming part of the city's new rialto, the former school was converted into New York's first theme restaurant, Murray's Roman Gardens.


Don't Children See Art in Museums?
I am appalled by the position in the letter defending the Manhasset Public Library's ban of nude paintings  [ "Artist Included Rejected Paintings," Letters, June 19 ] .
"Library Sued Over Ban on Nude Art"  [ May 8 ]  has raised a very important issue.
Artists, like myself, hold the freedom of expression sacred.
Institutions should not censor what an artist can include in an exhibition simply to exclude paintings of nudes.
We live in an enlightened society, and there should be no place for this Iranian fundamentalist kind of thinking.


Bias Cases: A Mystery 2 Years Later
It was the kind of story that takes New Yorkers by storm, then fades from memory.
For the first weeks of 1992, the quiet, well-kept neighborhoods of Pelham Parkway and Williamsbridge were the site of protest marches, helicopter searches and live television broadcasts.
The reason: two incidents in which three black and Hispanic children said they had been attacked and their faces painted white.
Two and a half years later, suspects and witnesses remain to be found, despite an intensive investigation and a $20,000 reward.
Many residents have forgotten the hate crimes, although some bitterness remains.


To Skate or Not: A Debate on Wheels
In-line skaters do seem to be everywhere these days -- on the sidewalks, in the crosswalks, in the passing lanes, in the supermarkets, bars and bookstores.
And with their ubiquity have come concerns about safety.
"It clearly has come up as an issue in the last several years," said Alexander Brash, chief of the Urban Park Service, which monitors activities in all 1,560 of the city's parks.
"There are 200-some severe accidents in Central Park each year, with bicyclists or Rollerbladers, and that doesn't bespeak small accidents where people fall down or collide with each other and then just go home." And, he added: "Some of our worst accidents are with passive recreationalists, who are just trying to cross the Park Drive."


'SPEED TRIBES'
If models in Japan or any other country want to assume victim roles for a paycheck, that's their right.
But I don't need to see a sample photograph.
Perhaps future articles could explore the troubling issue of why some men find women as victims sexually exciting.
I also wonder if anyone is documenting trends in real physical violence against women and children in Japan.
MARTHA B. WITWER Wilmette, Ill.


Burning Questions
The most-asked question among fashionable New Yorkers this past year was, "What do you think of the new Barneys?"
The cognoscenti never asked each other, "Have you been to the new Barneys?" Instead, they'd say, "What do you think of the new Barneys?" so that no one would be caught in the unenviable position of having to admit that he or she hadn't attended the uptown store's gala opening last September or eaten at its trendy restaurant, Mad. 61.


Under F.D.R., Hidden Home For Horses
Underneath the F.D.R.
Drive at 61st Street, below the whiz and rumble of the 20th century, 28 horses stand in stalls, amid sawdust and bales of hay, sometimes venturing outside to be washed or hooked up to pull a carriage through the streets.
The site, Shamrock Stables, is so hidden that many of its neighbors do not know it exists, though the evidence is certainly there.


SUNDAY, July 17, 1994; Reining Cats and Dogs
Australia has a problem.
Cats that long ago went feral are accused of gobbling up endangered species like the rabbit-eared bandicoot, or bilby, and the rufous bettong.
The remedy, one scientist contends, is to hunt cats.
As it is, some towns have cat curfews; pets must be inside after dark.
And a couple of years ago, the Minister of the Environment called in army sharpshooters when wild cats chased 2,000 rare letter-winged kites from their nests, ruining a field experiment by John Pettigrew, a neuroethologist at the University of Queensland.
The cats, like the one above, had occupied the birds' nests.


Cam's Card Shark Claims Meadowlands Pace in 1:50
Cam's Card Shark won his second $1 million race in three weeks tonight, taking advantage of a leisurely first half-mile to win the Meadowlands Pace for 3-year-olds in a lifetime best 1 minutes 50 seconds.
The even-money favorite with the driver John Campbell, Cam's Card Shark took the lead from his stablemate, Pacific Rocket, just past the quarter-mile mark, which was paced in a slow 274/5 .
He then cruised virtually unchallenged, holding off a mild threat by Magical Mike at the top of the stretch.


The Big City; FALLING FOR IT
Each of these letters to dog shelters across America bears the logo of a nonexistent Korean company, Kea So Joo, which means Dog Meat Soup.
The company offers 10 cents a pound for dogs that will be cooked and canned for sale to Asians fond of this traditional dish.
"Dog is good food. Dog is good medicine," the letter explains.
"Our business getting very big. Need more dog." It offers free pickup and a promise: "Dog no suffer. We have quick death for dog."
This is the first stage of a genre that Skaggs has been developing since the 1960s.
Now 48 years old, he began as a conventional artist in Greenwich Village: painter, sculptor, organizer of political protests.
He carried a cross up Fifth Avenue on Easter, built a Vietnamese nativity scene in Central Park and gradually got annoyed at the way the press covered him.
Like everyone else in America, he resented having the world explained by journalists in midtown Manhattan.
He realized that many of New York's media know-it-alls are just moderately educated folks churning out information obtained from press releases and from phone conversations with strangers.
They're paid to sit in windowless rooms and pretend they can see the political situation in Prague or the best place to rock climb in Arizona.
Skaggs saw an opportunity for what he calls conceptual performance art or media pieces.
He has staged dozens of media hoaxes that have fooled hundreds of newspapers and television shows ranging from network news programs to "Geraldo."


Wall Street; How a Hot Investment Lost Its Air
MARTIN CHOPP had big dreams when he began a company last year.
His last venture, a video duplication business, fell on hard times, but this was supposed to be his ticket to fame: a featherweight, inflatable car seat for toddlers.
Such a product, he reasoned, would easily appeal to baby-boomer parents, who would appreciate a mid-priced car seat that weighs 5 pounds rather than the customary 18.


East Side Uproar: Did Police Steal The Fourth of July?
Multitudes of New Yorkers jockeyed for position along the East River to see the annual fireworks on July 4 -- but some, apparently, were more equal than others.
Community Board 6 officials say that the police threw people out of a public park on the Manhattan waterfront, then commandeered it as a private viewing stand for officers and their guests.
A police spokesman confirmed the incident.


At Work; Examining the Working Human
THE path by which Emily Martin came to be standing on a wobbly platform 25 feet in the air is a circuitous one.
As an anthropologist, she has a professional interest in health and disease and in how people think about themselves physically.
That interest has led her into an immunology laboratory, to volunteer as a buddy for people with AIDS and into her own memories of how the public health system responded to the threat of contagion during the polio epidemic of the late 1940's and early 50's.
She has written about this work in a new book, "Flexible Bodies: Tracking Immunity in American Culture From the Days of Polio to the Age of AIDS" (Beacon Press, $25).
Anthropologists, as Ms.
Martin would point out, must follow their noses, not quite knowing where their noses may end up.
When she was doing fieldwork in Baltimore on conceptions of health, the people she interviewed frequently raised the effect their work loads had on how they felt.


Rediscover Garland?
To the Editor:
In his essay "Farewell, Judy; Hello, Madonna"  [ June 19 ] , Robert Plunket says he hopes that Judy Garland will someday be rediscovered.
Someone should tell him this is happening all the time, proven by current projects in release, which Mr.
Plunket glosses over.
What's "low-key" about E! doing an hour special on Garland?


POP MUSIC: Striving to Be Rock's Next Seattle; Louisville, Ky. -- Here Today, Gone Tomorrow
Unlike the Ohio River, which borders this small, ethnically diverse city, Louisville's rock scene is a fast, narrow and winding stream emanating from a single source.
That source is the band Squirrel Bait, an idiosyncratic hard-core rock outfit formed in the mid-80's and disbanded by the time its second record was released.
Members of Squirrel Bait went on to play in a number of influential local rock bands that share a modest, low-budget and intuitive approach to music-making but whose styles range from country to blues to lounge jazz to noise-rock.
They include Bastro, Love Jones, Gastro del Sol, Big Wheel, Starbilly and Louisville's most revered guitar contortionists, Slint.
Two others, Palace Songs and King Kong, will perform in the rock tour Lollapalooza.


Mutual Funds; How 'Stock Picks' Fared Over a Year
HOW much difference does a year make?
For most of the mutual fund managers spotlighted in the accompanying "Manager's Profile" during the second quarter last year (when the feature started), it has been a very good year, at least in terms of the stocks they picked.


Under Reeves, Giants Are Definitely Sporting a New Look
It was mid-June and Giants Coach Dan Reeves had just told quarterback Phil Simms that his services were no longer needed.
They spoke for about 15 minutes and when the conversation was over Simms, outraged and angry, stormed out of Reeves' office.
On his way out he passed by his friend and possible successor, Dave Brown, who said hello.
No response from Simms.
He was too angry to talk.
The cutting of Simms and that scene could easily stand as a symbol for what the Giants have been through in the off season and where they are going.
Free agency and a new salary-cap system have thrown the team into a tailspin and this Giants team, which will start training camp on Sunday, will be drastically different from the one that was only one step away from the conference title game last season.


Two Stars Share Brilliance And Little Else
Player by player, the coach announced Italy's lineup in a hushed hotel ballroom this morning, but all the names were superfluous except for one.
Roberto Baggio.
A few days ago, his name meant emotional rescue in the World Cup.
Now it was a gloomy password, signifying injury and uncertainty.
"There is still some question mark," Coach Arrigo Sacchi said, referring to Baggio's strained hamstring.
"We will try in practice today and we will make a final decision tomorrow."


If You're Thinking of Living In/New Providence; A Commuter's Delight, With 2 Stations
WITH the luxury of two train stations in just 3.6 square miles, the borough of New Providence in Union County, N.J., is the quintessential bedroom community.
During the day, most of its adult population empties out -- some commuting to Manhattan and others going to their jobs just across the borough line to Bell Laboratories in Berkeley Heights.
Perhaps because of the attraction of the easy commute to Manhattan, housing prices did not decline much during the slump of the last five years.
The houses are on winding tree-lined streets that follow the contours of the lower ridges of the Watchung Mountains.


A University, a Garden, a Quarrel
There are few enough places in New York where one can be both in this city and out of it.
The New York Botanical Garden is one of them.
So it is distressing that Fordham University is building a 480-foot radio tower at its Rose Hill campus in the Bronx, directly across the street from the garden.
The tower is for Fordham's 47-year-old radio station, WFUV-FM, a public station that carries unique programming and serves six ethnic communities.
WFUV previously transmitted from a relatively discreet antenna atop Keating Hall.
Construction of the new tower was mandated by Federal Communications Commission guidelines designed to reduce public exposure to radio frequencies.
If it is not up by December, WFUV-FM will lose its license.


Show of Agreeable Images: Landscapes in Many Forms
HERE's the situation at A. J. Lederman Fine Art: First, there was a recent landscape show titled "Lush"; then came the current landscape show, "Lovely," and finally there will be a third landscape display, "Longing," in September.
The artists in the present show are Sal Kadoche, Scott Kahn, Dima Karabcheivsky, Robert Kogge, Barbara Kulicke and Allan Rubin.
But A. J. Lederman and her curator, Suzanne Montgomery, are not conspiring on behalf of artists whose names begin with K. Indeed, they seem to have nothing in mind beyond drawing attention to agreeable images, most of them landscapes, painted by reputations in progress.


Soccer Hype
To the Sports Editor:
I'm puzzled that a sport like (men's) soccer can command so many front-page headlines day after day, week after week, when a month ago few people knew the name of even one American player and when the response to professional soccer in the United States was a collective yawn.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
WORLD WAR II  IKE &amp; MONTY  Generals at War. By Norman Gelb. Morrow, $25.


A Doctor of the Old School
The photocopied form letter came in the mail a few weeks ago.
The salutation to "Sid and Evelyn," written with a strong, flowing hand, made even more amazing what followed:
"Please be advised that because of my advanced age of 95 1/2 years, I am discontinuing the practice of medicine on July 28, 1994. I shall not be able to attend you professionally after that date. . ."


POSTINGS: From Paving to Lights and Trees; Creating a Downtown Brooklyn 'Visual Identity'
"Brooklyn, you are the universe."
The words were those of the late novelist Bernard Malamud, who spent his childhood there, but they could describe the feelings of many Brooklyn residents, past and present.


The New Ball Game
To the Editor:
During half-time of the United States-Brazil soccer game, I channel-hopped with my television remote to a baseball game, and watched for a minute or so before switching back to the soccer game.
There was an injury timeout and I switched back to the baseball game.
The same batter was still at bat.
The players and the fans were waiting for some action.
I switched back to the soccer game, where there was nothing but action.


A First for China and Purchase Corps
AT 11 A.M. on a recent morning, the temperature in Manhattan was pushing 100.
Inside the brick-and-mirror-walled dance studio in SoHo, a petite blond woman was also putting on the heat.
"Run, run, run, PUSH, PUSH, PUSH!" she shouted to 10 dancers moving across the floor.
The instructor, Carol Fried of the Martha Graham Dance Company, spared no sympathy for the dancers' glistening backs and dripping foreheads.
The group, known as the Purchase Dance Corps, was preparing for its debut in China, and Ms.
Fried had only three days to perfect the piece they were rehearsing.


SUNDAY, July 17, 1994; Street, Not Stock, Market
Calvin Klein advertises underwear on the street, but you can't buy it there.
What if you need underwear quick?
There's a pushcart called "Intimately Yours" selling women's underwear in the Port Authority Bus Terminal (south building).
It's owned by Ports-of-Call, a business that leases carts to vendors, and is evidence that, yes, New York is becoming a third-world city and that there's profit in the change.


Witch Hunt in Prairie Center
A MAP OF THE WORLD By Jane Hamilton. 390 pp. New York: Doubleday. $22.


All Across America, Plunging Into Summer: THE WEST; CALIFORNIA: RAGING WATERS
The blissful sense of unreality that Southern Californians embrace is captured in the swoop and splash of water slides in the middle of a desert.
The heat on the edge of the San Gabriel Valley can soar above 100 degrees; the smog can burn the throat; the freeways that link the area to the hard realities of the outside world can be torture.
But at Raging Waters the water is deliciously cool, and the soaring, spinning, vertiginous slides with their mists and sound effects are a world of their own.
This 11-year-old park, with 20 attractions spread across 50 acres, bills itself as the largest water theme park west of the Mississippi.
Some 750,000 visitors are expected this year, placing Raging Waters on the map of Southern California getaways that include Disneyland, Magic Mountain and Universal Studios.
The long lines that snake their way to some of the water slides are mostly in the shade, and move quickly.


Martha Atwater, Thomas Wallack
Martha Carr Atwater, a daughter of Julian and Patricia Atwater of Rochester, was married there yesterday to Thomas Peter Wallack, a son of Robert and Honorine Wallack of Woodbridge, Conn.
The Rev.
Winifred Collin performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
The bride, a Princeton University graduate, is the manager of television program development at Scholastic Productions in New York.
Her father is a senior partner in Nixon, Hargrave, Devans &amp; Doyle, a Rochester law firm.


The World; North Korea: What We DO Know
With the abrupt departure from this world of Kim Il Sung a week ago, it suddenly seemed important that North Korea remains the last of those unknown lands on the edge of the flat earth that medieval mapmakers marked, "Here Be Dragons."
Has North Korea really developed a nuclear weapon?
Is its whole nuclear program a gigantic bluff?
And how do its people really feel about their new leader, Kim Jong Il, the son of Kim Il Sung?


Squatters Brace As City Focuses On East 13th St.
In a move that could force a showdown between the city and squatters in the East Village, five dilapidated buildings on East 13th Street have been approved for conversion to low-income housing.
The buildings, all between Avenues A and B, are Nos. 535, 537, 539, 541 and 545, said Cassandra Vernon, a spokeswoman for the Department of Housing Preservation and Development.
The City Council approved the project last month, but Ms.
Vernon said there was "no specific time frame" for it.
She would not say how the agency would deal with the squatters, but added that it was "illegal and unfair to squat."


Rome, on Two Wheels and a Prayer
ROME reveals itself in many ways, and the way it most likes to be seen -- at least by foreign visitors -- is through rose-tinted glasses that filter out all but the sweep of palazzos and piazzas, frescoes and friezes.
Try seeing Rome through motorcycle goggles, though, and you'll find another city altogether: out there, beyond the Forum and the Campidoglio, it's a war zone -- with no prisoners, no mercy and no truce.
To the uninitiated it might appear that the traffic is just chaos -- a snarling, honking beast whose only aim is to prevent any pedestrian from ever crossing the street.
That, of course, is one of its prime functions.
But within this apparent mayhem, there are actually rules -- or at least battle lines -- that only the foolhardy ignore.
And rule one is: motorcyclists have no friends.
Not even among other motorcyclists.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-10  KOREAN HEIR IS A MYSTERY  Very little is known about the apparent heir to power in North Korea, but the stakes are high for the rest of the world because he is taking over a rogue regime that may already have nuclear weapons.  1  South Korea believes the north's succession plan is still on track.  10


INSIDE
Forced Labor in Mandalay
Burmese are protesting the use of forced labor by the Myanmar Government to restore tourist attractions in the city of Mandalay.
Page 3.
Less Bellicose in Belarus
The winner of the Belarus presidential election, who won by attacking the Government, is toning down his remarks as he faces reality.
Page 8.
Fireball on Jupiter
A piece of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 hit the planet Jupiter, astronomers say, causing a fireball 1,200 miles wide and a fiery plume.
Page 12.


Play It by Ear
If you grow up near corn you are forever after affected by it, unspeakably moved by acres of straight, leafy rows, reassured by order and predictability.
You know the difference between good corn and bad early in life and have the confidence that comes from such discernment.
If you're like me, you're a down-to-earth Midwesterner, but your practicality is not without a capacity for wonder.
After all, you probably heard corn grow.
And while the rustling sound is easily explained -- the stalk expands like a telescope -- to a child hiding out in a cornfield late at night, it's tantamount to seeing a flying saucer.


Caroline Tulenko, William Brown
Caroline Derkhiem Tulenko, a daughter of Karelei and Dr.
John Tulenko of New York, was married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass., to William McElwain Brown, a son of Marilyn and Dr.
William Brown of Jensen Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Michael Corrigan officiated at the Episcopal ceremony at the Memorial Church at Harvard University.
The bride, 26, is the director of public relations, in Boston, for Giorgio Armani, the fashion designer.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her parents work in New York, where her father is a plastic surgeon and her mother is a vice president of Stribling &amp; Associates, a real estate brokerage.


Hey, Kids, Let's Put On A Show
STEVE MARTIN IS COMING.
Joel Grey and Tony Goldwyn.
Peter Gallagher, Jon Robin Baitz, Beth Henley, John Patrick Shanley and Dana Ivey.
Fresh from the success of "Pterodactyls" and "The Food Chain," the playwright Nicky Silver's coming, too.
The list reads like a Who's Who in theater.
For 10 summers, the New York Stage and Film Company has been presenting plays 90 miles north of Broadway with the kind of people who can pick whatever projects they want.
Instead of lunch at Spago, they wait in line in the cafeteria.
Nobody starts out aching to produce plays in Poughkeepsie.


The Sun Is Shining, and So Are the Golfers, at Turnberry
Every 17 years or so, the sun shines for two days in a row on the bleak Scottish coastline.
It has happened again.
Today, on a day mailed in from somewhere in Southern California, golfers in shirt sleeves attacked the Ailsa Course as if it were Indian Wells Country Club and this were the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic instead of the 123d British Open.
All that was missing was a car floating on a platform in the Firth of Clyde.
But this is not all bad.
If all the forecasts hold true, there will be a shootout in the sun again at Turnberry, just as in 1977 when Tom Watson and Jack Nicklaus burned across this seaside links and into golf history.


Federal Law Requires New Faucets and Toilets
PART of the National Energy Policy Act of 1992 governs household water fixtures, including toilets, shower heads and bath and kitchen faucets.
All have to have water-saving designs.
There is no need to remove existing fixtures, but if you plan to remodel or add new devices you have to meet the law.
The act also requires that fixtures be manufactured to comply.
But ask questions and read labels to avoid buying out-of-date merchandise.


Corrections
An article on July 3 about living in Oyster Bay, L.I., misidentified a restaurant.
It is the Canterbury Ales Oyster Bar &amp; Grill.


A Genealogy Source For African-Americans
To the Editor:
Thank you for your article on family history and genealogy ("Saving the Memory of Self," July 10).
The stories of Doris Striggles Porter, Antonio Young and Richard B. Dickenson point to the diversity and richness of African-American heritage.
Research provides us with clearer insight into the lives of descendants of Africans who survived the middle passage.
While following the movements of our ancestors over time and through the complex routes of slavery, we note the variation of culture and ethnicity of our ancestors.
It is wonderfully exciting to see our genealogies as mainstream news.
Congratulations on a job well done.


Women In Gaza See Gains
Sitting on the beach in pants and sunglasses, her hair uncovered, the Muslim woman broke into a smile as she described how the simple act of choosing for herself what to wear had given her a new sense of freedom.
Since Israel's withdrawal from Gaza in May and the arrival of the Palestinian police, the woman, Zahira Abu Kweik, has taken off the head scarf once imposed on local women by Islamic fundamentalists.


Barbara A. Carey, Mark E. Vermylen
Barbara Ann Carey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Paul Carey of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Mark Edward Vermylen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul A. Vermylen of Saddle River, N.J.
Msgr.
Daniel A. Peake performed the ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection.
Mrs.
Vermylen is a meeting planner at Prudential Securities in New York.
She graduated from Hartwick College.
Her father is the chairman of Carey Limousine of New York.


The Care and Feeding of the Butterfly
THEY'RE silent, they're beautiful, they're butterflies.
When these creatures visit the garden, pause, if you can, to watch as they flit from flower to flower to sip the nectar.
Experts, the lepidopterists, estimate that there may be 18,000 species or more in the world, each with its unique markings.
No wonder butterflies can be a source of ceaseless fascination.


Cruise Passengers Spared From Erie Tolls
Tolls have been imposed on boats passing through the Erie Canal from the Hudson River to Lake Erie for the first time since 1882, but this year, at least, the fees should have little effect on passengers aboard cruise ships or excursion vessels using the 35 locks on the 169-year-old waterway.
The New York State Thruway Authority, which operates the canal, reinstated tolls when the canal reopened in May after being closed for the winter.
Cruise vessels are being charged a seasonal fee of $10 for each passenger that a ship can carry, but several cruise lines said that this year they will absorb the fees rather than pass them on to passengers.
The Thruway Authority said the tolls would be used for canal maintenance.


Miss Beattie, Mr. Frelinghuysen
Lisa Christina Beattie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard I. Beattie of New York, was married yesterday to Peter Hood Ballantine Frelinghuysen 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Frelinghuysen of New York.
The Rev.
Robert L. Ficks 3d performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's Church in Washington, Conn.
The bride, 28, is to become a clerk later this month for Judge Harry Edwards of the United States Court of Appeals for the Washington, D.C., circuit.
In 1995, she is to become a clerk for Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg of the United States Supreme Court.
The bride graduated from Stanford University, from which she also received her law degree.
She was the president of the Stanford Law Review.
Her father is a partner and the chairman of the executive committee at Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, the law firm in New York.
He is also the chairman of the Fund for New York City Public Education.
Her mother, Diana L. Beattie, owns a fund raising and special events company in New York.


Robyn Goldstein and Christian Klein
Robyn Lisa Goldstein and Christian Klein, entertainment lawyers in New York, were married on Tuesday.
Judge Theodore R. Kupferman of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court officiated at the New York apartment of Morton Gilbert, a friend of the couple.
Mrs.
Klein graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Villanova University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Goldstein of St.
James, L.I., where her father is a financial adviser and her mother, Arline S. Goldstein, is a painter.


Would Walt Disney Support This Park?
To the Editor:
In 1962 my industrial design company was awarded the contract for the design of the gas industry exhibit at the 1964-65 New York World's Fair.
This was particularly flattering as our major competition for the contract was Walt Disney.


For a Troubled Building, a New Twist
DONALD J. TRUMP likes to boast that Trump Palace on Third Avenue is a fast-moving condominium.
This is not a distinction he seeks for his next project, Trump International Tower and Hotel
Trump International Tower is what most New Yorkers know today as the old Gulf and Western Building on Columbus Circle.
They also know that the 579-foot skyscraper twists perceptibly in high winds.


POP MUSIC: Striving to Be Rock's Next Seattle; Chicago -- Cutting-Edge Rock And Sharp Elbows
In the cantankerous Chicago music scene, the one thing everyone agrees on these days is the big increase in the number of alternative-rock fans out in the clubs.
At tony Metro on the North Side; at Lincoln Park's sweaty but friendly Lounge Ax; at upstart Thurston's and over in hip Wicker Park, at clubs like the Czar Bar and the Empty Bottle, young people are coming out like never before.
The Wicker Park scene has grown so rapidly that Metro is opening a sister bar, the Double Door.
When Billboard described Chicago as "Rock's New Cutting Edge Capital" last summer, the town had the artists, if not a unifying sound, to back it up: the psychedelic Smashing Pumpkins, the hyper-intellectual Liz Phair, the industrial rockers Ministry and the retro jokesters Urge Overkill.


Stephen L. Karp; Public Relations Executive, 44
Stephen L. Karp, a retired public relations executive with the firm of Rogers &amp; Cowan, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Barry Lewis.


Officer in Standoff Subdued With Dart Gun
A highly agitated police officer held dozens of other officers at bay during a two-hour standoff at his garden apartment in Queens yesterday morning, firing shotgun blasts out of the window before finally being stunned by electrified darts and subdued, the police said.
The officer, who the police said had a history of domestic disputes with his girlfriend, had driven to a nearby motel shortly after dawn, fired shotgun blasts at two strangers, then drove off in his own car.
Several miles away his car broke down, and he stole a car from a woman at gunpoint, then drove back to his apartment and called 911.


Miss Carney And Mr. Pilc
Mary Elizabeth Carney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Carney of Matinecock, L.I., was married yesterday to Roger John Pilc, a son of Elaine Pilc of Holmdel, N.J., and Dr.
Randolph Pilc of Toms River, N.J.
Msgr.
Charles A. Ribaudo officiated at the Chapel of St.
Dominic in Oyster Bay, L.I.
Mrs.
Pilc, a certified public accountant, is an account manager at Computer Associates, a software distributor in Islandia, L.I.
She graduated cum laude from Boston College.
Her father is the vice chairman at the Porta Systems Corporation, a manufacturer of telecommunications equipment in Syosset, L.I.


War Stories
To the Editor:
Glenn LaFantasie's very interesting essay "Romance vs. Reality at Gettysburg: A Reconnaissance Report on the Books" (June 12) failed to note the most original and thought-provoking book in the field, Kent Gramm's "Gettysburg: A Meditation on War and Values," which was published earlier this year.
Mr.
Gramm not only provides new interpretations of the battle but wrestles earnestly with its meanings.


Calling the Signals at I.B.M.
To the Editor:
As a former I.B.M. marketing representative, I am delighted that Lou Gerstner is zeroing in on fixing what really went wrong at I.B.M. ("On the Road With Chairman Lou," June 26).
What toppled I.B.M. was not lack of strategic vision, but a failure to execute and follow through on strategy.


TALKING ABOUT THE MEDIA CIRCUS
Since Lesley Stahl professes to be a journalist rather than a polemicist, I was startled to read her blithe reference to "we in the feminist movement."


TO THE MOON: 25 Years After Apollo; 25 Years Later, Moon Race in Eclipse
Two American astronauts landed and walked on the moon 25 years ago, taking the first human footsteps on another world.
Bundled in oxygen cocoons, they hopped in low-gravity slow motion over the lifeless surface as in a dream that had to be seen in those grainy television images to be believed.
Their achievement was a spectacular American triumph in the cold war with the Soviet Union, culminating an eight-year, $25 billion mobilization of technology and talent, bringing together multitudes of scientists, engineers and technicians.


Opening Night in Edinburgh
A performance by the Scottish Opera of Beethoven's "Fidelio" on Aug. 15 will open a new theater for the Edinburgh Festival, taking place this year from Aug. 14 to Sept. 3.
The 1,900-seat Edinburgh Festival Theater, which festival officials say has the largest stage in Britain, will serve as a venue for the festival's opera, theater and dance productions.


SUNDAY, July 17, 1994; Seen the Movie? Read the Poem
Booksellers love it when the film version of an old classic comes out.
They change the cover art and put notices on the book that blare out news of the movie.
Usually, this is done for a novel or nonfiction narrative.
Now in stores, however, is "Tell Me the Truth About Love," a small book, pamphlet size really, of W. H. Auden poems, with a sticker on it proudly announcing, "Includes the poem featured in 'Four Weddings and a Funeral.' "


All Across America, Plunging Into Summer: THE SOUTH; TEXAS: SCHLITTERBAHN WATER PARK
It's easy to imagine the Comanches or the German settlers relaxing in New Braunfels, under the trees along the lazy Comal River 30 miles north of San Antonio, where generations have come to escape the relentless heat of a south Texas summer.
It's unlikely, though, that the early settlers plunged into the river after practicing their surfer spins under a high-tech banzai curl, or riding an aquatic roller coaster.
Unlike many other water parks that were created amid a giant parking lot, the 65-acre Schlitterbahn -- the name translates loosely to "slippery road" -- blends the best in hydro-engineering with the natural beauty of a real, flowing river that cuts through gentle hills.


Can a New Law Curtail Protests Over Abortions?
SIX years after the first abortion protest here, demonstrators continue to pray and scream outside the Women's Medical Pavilion here, a modest stucco building where 2,000 pregnancies are terminated each year.
Since the first demonstration in 1988, the clinic has become a frequent protest site for groups like Operation Rescue and the Lambs of Christ -- straining the tempers of the local police and the budget of this riverside village, where officials have been forced to allot an extra $60,000 a year to patrol the site and cover court expenses.
Most recently, the police arrested 21 of 40 demonstrators on June 28 for attaching bicycle locks to the gates and a door outside the clinic and for lying down in front of the entrances and driveway.
A lawyer for those arrested, John Broderick, described his clients as "members of an elite itinerant protest group," the Lambs of Christ, and he said they were "only trying to save the unborn children."


Tracy Wenzell, William Davlin
Frances Tracy Wenzell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan T. Wenzell of East Jewett, N.Y., was married yesterday to William Emery Barber Davlin, a son of Mrs.
E.
Mandell de Windt of Hobe Sound, Fla., and Andrew Davlin Jr. of Pauma Valley, Calif.
The Rev.
Herbert G. Draesel Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at All Soul's Church in Onteora Park, N.Y.
Mrs.
Davlin, who is 26 and known as Tracy, is an assistant vice president at Lehman Brothers, the New York investment bank.
Her father retired as an executive vice president of Paine Webber in New York.


Look Again at Taiwan
If buying $8 billion worth of American products entitles China to flout President Clinton's human rights requirements and still win renewal of its trade privileges, buying twice that amount should entitle Taiwan to a little diplomatic respect.
Taiwan has one of Asia's most developed economies, best armed militaries and most vibrant democracies.
Yet Taiwan's President is not allowed to stay overnight on American soil, Taiwanese officials are not allowed to meet their U.S. counterparts in government buildings and Taiwan's diplomatic offices in this country cannot use any name that would identify the country they represent.


New Series Brings New Competition
Major league baseball isn't the only sport ready to inflict serious damage to itself this summer.
Indy-car racing may soon cudgel itself, too.
In this case, it isn't a labor-management dispute (thanks mostly to the fact that one of the most dangerous sports has no union to look out for its athletes).
It's a management-management dispute.
The Indianapolis Motor Speedway is about to give us what it thinks we need most: another Indy-car series.


The Nation; Our New Participatory Tabloid Videocracy
KATHLEEN HALL JAMIESON, dean of the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Pennsylvania, has a modest proposal for teaching Americans about the legislative process.
She suggests a murder in the Capitol during budget reconciliation time.
When the trial gets under way -- televised, of course -- millions of people will tune in and, while waiting to hear the lurid details of the killing, will learn how a bill becomes a law.
Americans have always followed spectacular crime, from the Lindbergh baby kidnapping to the Charles Manson murders, but never before, it seems, with such passion or such patience.
The last year has seemed like one long televised crime spree, stretching from Lyle and Erik Menendez to Lorena and John Bobbitt to Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan and most recently -- and most sensationally -- to O. J. Simpson.
While people may be watching out of voyeurism, they've stayed tuned through the procedural wrangling, jury instructions and legalistic jousting over the admissibility of evidence.


July 10-16: Lean, Hungry Skies; United's Employees, After 7-Year Fight, Buy Their Own Airline
For seven years, "Come fly the friendly skies" has been the signature of United Airlines commercials.
Last week, that and a lot else changed at the nation's largest air carrier.
After a seven-year string of failed buyout attempts, employees gained majority control of United's parent company, the UAL Corporation, by trading $4.9 billion worth of wage and work-rule concessions over the next six years for 55 percent of the company's stock.


Wall Street; Unknowns Keep Kemper Trading at a Discount
FOR a done deal, it doesn't look so done.
Stock of Kemper Corporation, the insurance and mutual fund company, closed Friday at $59.50 per share, well below the $67 shareholders are expecting when Kemper is sold to Conseco Inc. for $56 a share in cash and $11 in Conseco stock.
Kemper's investment bankers at Morgan Stanley vow the deal will get done and Conseco insists it could sell holdings in other insurance companies to pay down debt it is assuming in the deal.
But traders say the 11 percent discount is justified.
Besides the cost of investing in a deal that could take six months to complete, and many other takeover deals vying for their dollars, they note that there is also the risk that Conseco's offer could unravel if it fails to raise $2 billion from outside lenders.


A Weekend of Victoriana
LAST summer, Christopher Beach, director of the Performing Arts Center of Purchase College here, introduced the first production in what he promised would be a 10-year festival devoted to the major works of Gilbert and Sullivan.
This summer, Mr.
Beach has multiplied the fun by clustering a whole weekend of events around the first performances next Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M. of "H.M.S. Pinafore," a full-scale production staged from scratch by the Performing Arts Center.
"Pinafore," which also brings back many cast members from last year's "Evening of Gilbert and Sullivan," will be presented again July 29 and 30, both at 8 P.M.


Man and Son Die in Fire
A boy who was to have celebrated his third birthday yesterday died, along with his father, when an early-morning fire trapped them in their apartment in Brooklyn, officials said.
The child's mother and two young girls were critically injured.


All Across America, Plunging Into Summer: THE EAST; VIRGINIA: WATER COUNTRY USA
The warning at the entrance of the Malibu Pipeline, one of the newest attractions at Water Country USA, alerts visitors that the ride is not for expectant mothers, heart patients or guests with a history of joint dislocations, back or neck injuries.
Undeterred, my 8-year-old twin sons and I took our inner tubes and waited our turn to plunge down the pitch-black tube, twisting and turning for 468 feet, until we crashed through a waterfall and smacked into a pool of water 54 feet from the top.
Jonathan and Daniel agreed that the Pipeline was "very fun." But one of the nice things about Water Country is that it offers a variety of ways for children and adults to enjoy themselves.
The young and the reckless coexist peaceably with the faint of heart.
One of the most popular features of the 40-acre park is a giant wave pool abutted by a tiered sun deck and equipped with a wave machine that produces four-foot waves every 11 minutes.


MANHATTAN MINUTE
SHAPING THE FLATIRON: What, exactly, is the Flatiron district?
Wedged in between Chelsea, Union Square, Gramercy and Murray Hill, it can get lost in the shuffle.
Now some 40 local businesses have announced the formation of the Flatiron District Business Association to put Flatiron on the map.
They define the district as from 14th to 23d Streets and from Seventh Avenue to Park Avenue South, much of which is rebounding.
"Flatiron has its own special uptown-downtown character and history," says Claudia Strauss, president. . . .
AND FARTHER NORTH: Jane R. Crotty, loser of two cliffhanger City Council elections, becomes the director of the 23d Street Association.
A top priority: sprucing up Madison Square Park. . . .
ART'S SAKE: Look soon for a new Maya Lin sculpture in the ceiling of the Long Island Rail Road main concourse at Penn Station.
It is an abstract moving timepiece.
Ms.
Lin designed the Viet Nam memorial in Washington. . . .
NEW FACE: After ousting Superintendent William A. Ubinas in a battle that left blood all over Lower East Side politics, School Board 1 plans to name a replacement: Dori Collazo-Baker, principal of P.S. 127 in the Bronx.
The official vote: Wednesday night, 7 P.M., P.S. 142. . . .
MADONNA CHEERS: Despite Body Worship's pledge to alter its window display on East Seventh Street, the slave-master mannequin display remained its sexually graphic self, at least through Friday morning. . . .
GETTING THERE: Upgrading will shut the Roosevelt Island tram until around Aug. 23.
Special buses are running from 59th and Second Avenue and 546 Main Street and Motorgate. . . .
A NEW HOME: The YIVO Institute for Jewish Research finds a permanent site at 15 West 16th Street.
Moving date: Two years.


Senator Dole's Boss Pays His Health Bills
To the Editor:
About two weeks ago, Senator Robert Dole, the minority leader, came out of a Senate Finance Committee meeting where senators were debating health care reform.
He was approached by a group of demonstrators -- many were physically handicapped.
They asked Senator Dole to back President Clinton's proposal of employer mandates since all members of Congress themselves have employer-mandated health care paid by all taxpayers.
Mr.
Dole replied: "No mandates. You're out of luck."
Being from Kansas and a taxpayer, I find this statement egregious.
It shows how unwilling Senator Dole is to give the American people what he himself enjoys and does not have to worry about, employer-mandated health care.
Almost all of the media have ignored this selfish statement by the Senator.
I have only seen his remarks in The Wall Street Journal of June 23.
JEREMY L. PELOFSKY  Washington, July 11, 1994


A Taekwondo Medal
Triathlon and taekwondo can expect to be included as medal sports by the turn of the century and boxing will remain an Olympic sport, the International Olympic Committee's president, JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH, has said.
Samaranch also said that Salt Lake City is a strong candidate for the 2002 Winter Games.
He made his comments Friday at a so-called town meeting at the United States Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs.
Samaranch said he expected triathlon and taekwondo to be included as medal sports for the first time at the Summer Olympic Games in Sydney, Australia, in the year 2000.


A Real Pub With a Moose-Antler Chair
VISITORS to Norfolk can't miss the large brick building that dominates the tiny commercial center of town.
A brief glance inside reveals the casual, tavern-like atmosphere of The Pub, Norfolk's major public gathering place for meals.
Yet despite the stained glass, vintage photos of old Norfolk buildings on the knotty pine and brick walls, and a chair at one table the back and seat of which are made of bleached moose antlers, The Pub is much more promising than one might expect.
First off, an aficionado of specialty beers will delight in the list of 125 brews, including many foreign beers.
It is, possibly. the largest, most unusual beer list in the state.
Then the short menu makes its own statement.
While it features such typical pub grub as burgers (like the tasty Station Place burger, with bacon and cheese), hot dogs and steak, that's just the beginning.
A printed list of specials reveals dishes like grilled swordfish, lightly cooked and moistened with orange-lime and lemon-dill butter.


Fostering Young Excellence
A cruise around lower Manhattan to benefit Support Network, July 6.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 17, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
2
4
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
3
5
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
4
22
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A small boy learns a deadly secret.
5
4
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers and dope smugglers.
6
8
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer pursues his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
7
3
HONOR AMONG THIEVES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Saddam Hussein plots to steal the Declaration of Independence.
8
4
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $6.50.) A model young woman is abducted.
9
7
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Vintage, $12.) The adventures of a 16-year-old Texas vaquero in the Mexico of 1950.
10
2
STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Warner, $6.50.) The problems of a Florida Congressman.
11
9
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A former naval officer versus a woman who heads a terrorist conspiracy.
12
5
DARK APPRENTICE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) A "Star Wars" novel.
13
3
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Bantam, $6.50.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
14
7
HILL TOWNS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Americans on holiday in Italy learn a lot about themselves.
15*
13
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
16*
11
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for murder.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
27
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
9
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) Mood-changing medications.
3
558
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
4
11
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
5*
27
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
6*
1
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
7
8
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Business innovation.
8
5
THE LONGEST DAY, by Cornelius Ryan. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $11.) The Allied assault on Normandy, June 6, 1944.
9*
74
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
10
10
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A young woman's mental illness.
11
7
FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated in Vietnam.
12
37
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
13*
144
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
14*
17
A WOMAN NAMED JACKIE, by C. David Heymann. (Signet, $5.99.) A biography of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
15
59
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
16*
13
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
17*
15
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
174
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
7
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
3
8
MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $11.) Ways to teach children to save money.
4
36
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 2, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Placed Mike Magnante, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Jose DeJesus, pitcher, from Omaha of the American Association.


Strategic Alliances in the Garden (With Bugs Yet)
MY ladybugs were patrolling the potato patch last week, feasting on the yellow eggs and soft-bodied larvae of Colorado potato beetles.
Earlier in the season, when it was cool and moist, they found plenty of aphids to eat.
So I didn't get too carried away with my favorite aphid-control method, which is to squish the creepy little blobs with my fingers.
These tiny, soft-bodied plant lice, as they are affectionately called, weaken plants by sucking juices from their leaves and stems, but they can easily be washed off with a hard spray of water from the hose or simply rubbed off with the fingers.
The fatty acids of insecticidal soap will also penetrate their thin skins and kill them.


Lucia F. Gill, Peter R. Case
Lucia Franklin Gill, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Franklin Gill of Newton, Mass., was married yesterday to Peter Rockefeller Case, a son of Laura R. Chasin of Cambridge, Mass., and James H. Case of White Plains.
The Rev.
Rosanna Kazanjian, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the bride's parents' house in South Penobscot, Me.
The bride, 30, will be known as Lucia Gill Case.
She is to begin teaching history in the fall at the Moses Brown School in Providence, R.I.
She and her husband, 33, graduated from Brown University and received master's degrees in education from Harvard University.
Her father, a retired psychoanalyst, is a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry at the Harvard Medical School in Boston.
Her mother, Erna Gill, is the director of professional issues for the Massachusetts Chapter of the National Association of Social Workers in Boston.


SUNDAY, July 17, 1994; Who Owns 'Internet'?
Names are tricky.
Xerox and Jell-O fight a never-ending battle to protect their valuable trademarks.
Cellophane lost the fight.
So imagine what a plum it would be to have "Internet" in your company or product name.
Then go to the end of the line.
The Patent and Trademark Office approved two "Internet" trademarks in 1989 and 1990 for a banking company.
Now it has suspended action on the many other "Internet" applications because a legal challenge has been made to the granting of any trademark at all using "Internet," according to the Internet Letter, based in Washington


TALKING ABOUT THE MEDIA CIRCUS
I see far too much time being spent on television and in newspapers on less and less important events.
I feel I am being condescended to.
You should run an article about what we, the great unwashed, think of the news media.
AMY L. CONNOR Sunnyvale, Calif.


'SPEED TRIBES'
I found most curious the characterization of the degenerate subcultures that have arisen in Japan as "Western." Such radical examples of human degradation are quite at variance with anything that passes for the historically defining manifestations of the Western ethos: the Greek and Roman classics, the Old and New Testaments and such august conceptions as the Renaissance idea of the dignity of man and the democratic ideal of the duties and the rights of man.
VANNI CAPPELLI Bronxville, N.Y.


To Skate or Not to Skate: A Debate on Wheels
In-line skates used to be such simple things: you put them on and rolled away into the sunset -- at least on the manufacturers' drawing boards.
But as in-line skates progressed from idea to reality and from specialized athletic passion to commonplace urban accessory, the emergence of a semipermanent, wheel-soled population has produced a range of passionately debated issues, from how to discuss them ("Don't call them Rollerblades," the experts shriek) to how to classify them (Vehicles? Pedestrians' accessories?) to how to keep their users, and the public, safe.


Q and A
When Dog Is Not a Best Friend Q I own an apartment in a Manhattan co-op.
Each floor has only five apartments, with a small carpeted hall area by the elevator.
The owners of one of the apartments on my floor have three or four dogs that urinate in the hall (and the elevator and the lobby) on an almost daily basis.


It's a Jackhammer Lullaby Off Broadway
It was bad enough, said Ted Lambert, to have the giant saws screaming as they sliced the pavement into squares and the jackhammers roaring in behind to smash the pieces.
But did the hard hats really have to yell all night, too?


Son of Kim Is Still Viewed As His Most Likely Successor
After a hastily called meeting of South Korea's top officials, Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hong Koo said today that he believed that Kim Jong Il was still on track to succeed his father as the Communist leader of North Korea.
The sudden postponement of the funeral for President Kim Il Sung, who died eight days ago, set off speculation that the delay was caused by a struggle over succession.
But no strong evidence of such a struggle emerged today, and no unusual military moves were reported.


'Judy Was a Genius'
To the Editor:
Judy Garland was about keeping style and fun in one's life while under fire, something we gays in the 1960's understood.
She was about pulling yourself together and having a hell of a time when everything looked bleak, as it often did.
She was wounded and she knew it, and so were we.
But that didn't stop her, and it didn't stop us.


New Train Line Trims Two Trips in France
Train riders in France no longer need to pass through Paris to get from Lille in the north of the country to Lyons in the east-central region or Marseilles in the far south.
The French National Railroads recently completed the North TGV line, which includes a spur that bypasses Paris on the east and connects with the Southeast TGV line just south of Coubert.
The new service shaves two hours from the previous five-hour trip between Lille and Lyons, if one estimates an hour for the change of stations in Paris that used to be necessary.


A Spill, a Scare, a Sigh: Krone's Injury Is Minor
Seven weeks after she returned from a nine-month absence forced by a shattered right ankle, Julie Krone was spilled from a horse at Belmont Park yesterday and suffered a badly bruised left leg below the knee.
For a time after the spill, it appeared that the 31-year-old jockey had fractured the tibia bone in the leg and that injury might again threaten her career.
But X-rays at North Shore Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., showed that the leg was bruised but not broken, and her doctor predicted that she might miss several days of riding.


Data Bank/July 17, 1994
Data Bank/July 17, 1994
Producer Prices
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
0.0
-0.1
-0.1
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.2
0.1
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
0.6
-0.4
-1.0
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.1
0.2
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
83.9
83.6
83.7
Consumer Borrowing
May
April
March
Annual rate of growth
15.1
14.9
12.6
Business Inventories
Monthly percent change
1.1
0.6
-0.1
Weekly Jobless Claims
July 8
July 1
June 24
In thousands
363
344
353


Cooking For the 'Dead'
MAGNUMS of Cristal Champagne?
Bowls of M &amp; M's with the brown ones plucked out?
Nope.
When the Grateful Dead tour these days, they demand Nabisco Cream of Rice cereal.
That was the word given to chefs at the New England Culinary Institute, which provides the staff for the kitchens at the Inn at Essex in Essex, Vt., where the band stayed while performing last Wednesday in nearby Swanton.


Nancy Wolfe and Eric Huckaby
ERIC HUCKABY, 31, Governor Mario M. Cuomo's Deputy Director for Black Affairs, has been called the Pied Piper of ice hockey in New York City.
He is a founder and the head coach of the North Park Hockey Association, a Little League-style ice hockey program for boys and girls at Lasker Skating Rink in Central Park.
"When the program started seven years ago, there were not even enough participants to fill out a team," he said.
"Today, there are 200 kids involved." His home answering machine doubles as a hot line for the program, and there are pictures of children all over the doors and refrigerator of his Upper West Side apartment.


The 60's, Going On 90's
A WOMAN'S LIFE The Story of an Ordinary American  and Her Extraordinary Generation.
By Susan Cheever. 254 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $20.


'As You Like It': Full of Sweetly Teasing Laughter
IT'S only make-believe.
Since most of "As You Like It" takes place in the idyllic Forest of Arden, Shakespeare's pastoral romance invites reinvention.
After all, the setting is not the thing.
Besides, the plot is propelled by one duke's banishment of another, his usurping younger brother.
In the words of Isaac Asimov's study of Shakespeare in historical perspective: "Who these dukes might be, and over what region they might rule, Shakespeare does not say and, certainly, does not care."


An Artist's Long Interest in Matisse
In matters of critical taste there is no disputing, but in matters of personal fact the artist should set the record straight.
In her review of my exhibition "The Matisse Papers" and Kevin Larkin's "Somnambulist"  [ "The Urban Ethos as Depicted in Various Media," May 29 ] , Helen A. Harrison states that my imagery "has very little to do with Matisse."
As a published text by Raymond Todd makes clear, 20 of the paintings were based on a photograph of Matisse, and all others were painted with an imaginary Matisse in mind.
When she denigrates the motive as "a means of linking Mr. Josyph's name with one of the giants of modern art," she is forgetting her own review  [ "Ceramics Highlight Exhibition," Jan. 1, 1989 ]  of my painting "Matisse's Bottle," evidence that the motive has recurred in my work for many years.
Mr.
Todd's publication "Josyph &amp; Larking: X-Men of Art," from which the writer borrows copiously (despite the carp that it doesn't illuminate the work), states that I am currently writing a book and directing a film about Matisse.
To characterize affectionate and admiring acts of homage as a form of self-promotion is to demonstrate that critics can stray as far as they please from the facts of an artist's work.


Carolyn Purcell, Charles Reichenbach
Carolyn Elizabeth Purcell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Purcell of Oldwick, N.J., was married yesterday to Charles Hugh Reichenbach, a son of Linda Reichenbach of Watertown, N.Y., and John C. Reichenbach Jr. of Upper St.
Clair, Pa.
The Rev.
James Scott performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of the Mountain Church in Schooleys Mountain, N.J.
The bride, 25, graduated from Colgate University and is a third-year student at the Seton Hall Law School in Newark.
Her father retired as the general counsel and a senior vice president of the Connell Company, a food wholesaling and equipment-leasing concern in Westfield, N.J.


Just a Walleyed Optimist
A few weeks ago, my 3-year-old son and I caught a 32-inch, 10-pound striped bass.
We were fishing, with a young friend, on a spit of land that juts out into the Hudson River a couple of miles below the Tappan Zee Bridge.
I put a bloodworm on a hook and cast it out in the water with an ounce-and-a-half sinker.
Fifteen minutes later, we were hauling in Moby Dick.
Everyone on the pier came by to congratulate us, admire the fish, take our picture and measure and weigh the prize.
We brought the fish home to clean and cook.
Daniel, the 3-year-old, danced around it with a stick in classic "Lord of the Flies" fashion.
Filleted, marinated briefly in soy sauce and cooked on the grill, the bass had the delicious flavor of really fresh fish, with the added piquance of the Hudson's PCB's.
My son ate it with as much gusto as he displayed in describing the killing that produced the banquet.
"It was still alive! My daddy killed it with his knife!" I felt like Hawkeye, La Longue Carabine, Fishslayer -- raising up a young'un to live by his wits and a well-honed blade.


Crime Overseas
To the Editor: My husband and I spent a week in Spain in April.
We had read about crime in Spain, and thought we were well prepared, being savvy New Yorkers, but we were not able to avoid becoming victims.
Despite many precautions, we were robbed twice.
We did not carry passports, only copies, and we locked our passports, drivers' licenses, extra credit cards, travelers checks and money in the hotel safe whenever we were not in transit from city to city.
I carried one credit card and money in a small pouch attached to my lingerie straps, and my husband one credit card and money in a wallet in his front jeans pocket.


TALKING ABOUT THE MEDIA CIRCUS
You should take another shot at analyzing the news media.
This time you had a gaggle of liberal pundits.
Next time you should invite those from the other side of the aisle.
Here's my lineup: John Sununu, George Will or William Safire, Roger Ailes, Peggy Noonan, Pat Buchanan and Mona Charen.
DORRANCE SMITH Arlington, Va.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
97.83
98.05
107.55
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5534
1.5614
1.7170
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3772
1.3894
1.2773
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5617
1.5495
1.4855
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$386.00
$384.25
$391.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Ideas &amp; Trends; Talk Often and Be a Soft Touch
PRESIDENT CLINTON is a big man, with a famously big brain, who runs an enormous country.
Sufficiently riled, he could tell his army to rout any tinpot dictator who dared to smart off, and he obviously knows enough about practically everything to argue any enemy into intellectual submission.
He has enough heft, and probably enough reach, to deck most Republicans with one punch, not to mention upstart foreign heads of state -- although maybe not Yeltsin.
All right, probably Yeltsin, because he's older, but definitely not Helmut Kohl.
But he likes Kohl, so that doesn't count.
The point is, this is one mighty powerful leader.
It raises a question: Why doesn't that intimidate anybody any more?


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Replacement of Strikers: Vote to cut off debate and begin consideration of a bill intended to keep employers from permanently replacing workers striking over wages and benefits.
Failed, with 53 in favor and 48 opposed (seven votes short of the 60 needed), July 13.


POP MUSIC: Striving to Be Rock's Next Seattle; Chicago -- Cutting-Edge Rock And Sharp Elbows
In the cantankerous Chicago music scene, the one thing everyone agrees on these days is the big increase in the number of alternative-rock fans out in the clubs.
At tony Metro on the North Side; at Lincoln Park's sweaty but friendly Lounge Ax; at upstart Thurston's and over in hip Wicker Park, at clubs like the Czar Bar and the Empty Bottle, young people are coming out like never before.
The Wicker Park scene has grown so rapidly that Metro is opening a sister bar, the Double Door.
When Billboard described Chicago as "Rock's New Cutting Edge Capital" last summer, the town had the artists, if not a unifying sound, to back it up: the psychedelic Smashing Pumpkins, the hyper-intellectual Liz Phair, the industrial rockers Ministry and the retro jokesters Urge Overkill.


Senator Dole's Boss Pays His Health Bills; Count Me With Him
To the Editor:
In "It's Called Diplomacy, Senator" (editorial, July 12), you pull yourself to full schoolmarmish height to chastise the uncouth Senator Dole for his failure to apprehend the necessity of praising tyrants like Kim Il Sung.
Kim Il Sung had on his hands the blood not only of scores of thousands of Americans but also of hundreds of thousands of Koreans.
He was arguably the world's most repressive dictator.
You say that the need to lament Kim Il Sung's passing "seems obvious to nearly everyone but Mr. Dole." Well, count me with Mr.
Dole.
I think all lovers of human rights should take a few moments to celebrate.
JOSHUA MURAVCHIK  Washington, July 12, 1994 The writer is resident scholar, American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.


Striving to Be Rock's Next Seattle
FOR THE CYNICAL, ALL POLITICS is local, and the local perspective is a recipe for disaster: ignorance, Nimby selfishness, isolationism, tribal and racial strife.
Yet popular culture, especially popular music, has a way of turning real-world troubles inside-out, and it is not pop's cynics but its idealists who have come to believe that all of the best music is local, made by hometown bands for hometown fans.
It is pop's job to carry that music -- or at least its most accessible efforts -- from the periphery to the broader public.
Starting on Tuesday, bands from all over the United States converge on New York City, hoping to be heard by taste makers and music moguls in town for the New Music Seminar.
It's a five-day suspension of the new rules in rock, which decree that a regional following is better than a glimmer of national attention.
Lately, those music moguls have been spending much of their time racking up frequent-flyer miles on the way to cities and towns that never expected to be on the rock-and-roll map.


The Education of Lincoln Kirstein
MOSAIC Memoirs.
By Lincoln Kirstein.
Illustrated. 270 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


Despite Awareness of Risks, More in U.S. Are Getting Fat
American adults may be more aware of the need to exercise and count calories than they once were, but more of them than ever are overweight.
The number of overweight adults, which had remained stable at about a fourth of the adult population from 1960 through 1980, suddenly jumped to a third of all adults between 1980 and 1991, according to a recent study by the National Center for Health Statistics in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.


Save the Business, Keep It in Brooklyn
AS chief executive of a sprawling computer plant in the unlikely setting of Bedford-Stuyvesant, Wesley D. Ratcliff has received a wealth of mail from civic boosters in the South, the Middle West and elsewhere, suggesting that he move his company out of Brooklyn.
"Those letters are in the trash," he said with a sweep of the hand.
"You could say I owe my soul to this place."


The Executive Life; Ardently and Artfully, Hollywood Works Out
AS Southern California bakes in the summertime sun, John Silva heads north to Oregon for the snow.
The manager of Bonnie Raitt, the Beastie Boys and Nirvana for Gold Mountain Management, Mr.
Silva has become hooked on an unconventional mode of exercise: snowboarding.
But while he may not have many business companions "surfing" on the slopes in July, the 34-year-old Mr.
Silva is not alone among entertainment executives in the creative fanaticism with which he pursues his exercise regimen.
In keeping with the breakneck pace of Hollywood, it has become perfectly acceptable to return business calls while breathlessly walking a treadmill, or to squeeze extra seconds out of the day for power yoga or Chinese kickboxing.
The workout passion arises, most Hollywood executives say, more to relieve stress and to burn off restaurant calories than to maintain a glamorous silhouette.


The Coliseum Deal, After the Collapse
Over nine years of Mortimer B. Zuckerman's effort to develop the New York Coliseum site, prospective tenants and partners came and went, plans were drawn and revised.


Corrections
An article on July 3 about the making of the Merchant-Ivory film "Jefferson in Paris" misstated Thomas Jefferson's function in Paris.
The Continental Congress sent Jefferson to Paris in 1784 to assist Benjamin Franklin, the minister to France.
The next year, the Continental Congress appointed Jefferson to replace Franklin as minister.
Jefferson did not serve as Ambassador to France, nor was he appointed by George Washington, who did not become President until 1789.


All Across America, Plunging Into Summer: THE MIDWEST; WISCONSIN: NOAH'S ARK WATER PARK
Noah's Ark bills itself as the largest water park in the country.
Its 40 slides and other watery delights are tucked neatly onto 65 acres off Highway 12 in the heart of Wisconsin Dells, an hour's drive from Madison.
Wide concrete walkways lead from one cluster of rides to another, with concession stands and picnic pavilions scattered throughout the park.
The name is a reference to the park's cheerful animal motif, including daily "water animal" shows featuring various cartoon-like characters.
Another of the park's best features is the highly visible lifeguard squad, 240 trained college students whose mission is to keep fun seekers out of trouble.
We pulled up in the parking lot at 9:30 A.M. on a scorching Monday in June -- my husband, Jamie, and I, our daughter, Anna, and our neighbors' two children, Anne and Eileen.
Weekdays are the best time to visit, because crowds can be fierce.
We began by stopping at each cluster of rides and pavilions as we came to it, but by the end of our nine-hour day we were giddily crisscrossing the park.
Fortunately we had remembered to bring sunscreen.There's not much shade at the park, and the combination of sun, water and concrete practically guarantees a burn.


In Mexico City, Building And Rebuilding
EVEN before a guerrilla uprising in the southern state of Chiapas changed the world's view of Mexico, the nation's capital was trying hard to counter its image as a chaotic, traffic-clogged city.
Last October, two months before the revolt began, the international developers George Soros and the Reichmann family announced plans to build a luxurious office-hotel-residential complex in an area near Alameda Park, which was heavily damaged by the 1985 earthquake.
The project, now being designed by 10 international architects, represents just the kind of development Mexico wants to attract.
The fighting in Chiapas ceased in January and, as Mexico has returned to a tentative calm, Mexico City has slowly resumed its image building.
Some of the most dramatic changes visitors will encounter are results of a series of ambitious renovation plans that are gradually transforming Mexico City's historic center.


Peggy Jacobs and Steven Learner
Peggy Jacobs, the daughter of Rosalind G. Jacobs of New York and the late Melvin Jacobs, is to be married today to Steven Learner, a son of Judith L. Sollott of Beverly Hills, Calif., and Dr.
Leonard R. Learner of Rowayton, Conn.
Rabbi Richard Chapin is to perform the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
The bride is an independent marketing and advertising specialist in New York.
She graduated from Brown University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father was the chairman and chief executive of Saks Fifth Avenue.
Her mother, a former vice president and fashion director at R. H. Macy &amp; Company, is the merchandising and marketing adviser at Corporate Property Investors, a real estate investment company in New York.


White House Delays Rebuke In Copter Case
Seven weeks after the White House said he would be reassigned for his role in the misuse of a Marine Corps helicopter, the head of the White House military office has not been disciplined and remains on the job, Administration officials said on Friday.
They said that the White House had found it difficult to find a successor to the official, Alphonso Maldon Jr., and that some thought had been given to letting him stay in his post.


The Care and Feeding of the Butterfly
THEY'RE silent, they're beautiful, they're butterflies.
When these creatures visit the garden, pause, if you can, to watch as they flit from flower to flower to sip the nectar.
Experts, the lepidopterists, estimate that there may be 18,000 species or more in the world, each with its unique markings.
No wonder butterflies can be a source of ceaseless fascination.


Ruth Oxenberg, Robert Schumer
Ruth Price Oxenberg, the daughter of Cynthia and Dr.
Elliot Oxenberg of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Adam Schumer, the son of the late Dr.
Florence Schumer and Leo Schumer.
Acting Justice Rena K. Uviller of State Supreme Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony at the couple's home in Livingston, N.Y.
Ms.
Oxenberg, 33, who is keeping her name, is an associate producer at the ABC News program "Turning Point." She graduated from Middlebury College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father, now retired, was a dentist in New York.
Dr.
Schumer, 40, is an assistant clinical professor of ophthalmology at Mount Sinai School of Medicine and has a practice in New York.
He graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received his medical degree from the University of Miami.
He also received a Ph.D. in experimental psychology from Stanford University.
The bridegroom's mother was a clinical psychologist and textbook author in New York.
His father wrote music for commercials and owned Leo's Place, a bar and restaurant in Ocean Beach, L.I.


Growing Up Gay in the Heart of the Bronx
DOUGLAS SADOWNICK lopes down the Grand Concourse, his eyes darting back and forth under an unruly mop of hair.
A long strand of turquoise chunks peeks out from the top of his T-shirt.
A pair of black hoop earrings hangs from his ears, one in the upper corner of the right ear, the other in the lobe of the left.
It is hard to imagine anyone looking less at home among the dilapidated buildings and extended families sprawled across the sidewalks of this mainly Hispanic area of the South Bronx.
But Highbridge was once Mr.
Sadownick's home, the neighborhood where he grew up and where he realized he was gay.


High And Dry
THE sights and sounds of a busy seaport were once common to most New Yorkers.
Now most of the sea trade is along the narrow Kill Van Kull to the Arthur Kill and into Newark Bay to the Port Authority piers in New Jersey.
But while dozens of ship repair yards have closed in the city since World War II, a few remain, among them the Caddell Dry Dock and Ship Repair Company on Staten Island.
The company, a family operation since 1903, now owned by the founder's grandson, John B. Caddell, has 225 crew members who repair up to 50 vessels a month -- tugs that weigh as much as 800 tons, barges up to 500 feet long, even the 3,500-ton behemoths of the Staten Island Ferry.


Stirring Up an Emotional Stew
WHEN MAGUY MARIN'S "Waterzooi" has its United States premiere at the American Dance Festival in Durham, N. C., on Thursday, the audience will see an atypical ballet from this innovative French choreographer.
The 80-minute work, using 13 dancers, is self-contained; it is stripped of the decor, sound system and elaborate stagecraft that made some of Ms.
Marin's earlier productions so visually spectacular.
"Cendrillon," Ms.
Marin's version of Cinderella, which was presented at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in 1987, is set in a giant doll's house inhabited by dancers wearing painted doll-like masks.
Cinderella goes off to the ball not in a pumpkin coach but in a toy car.
Indeed, Ms.
Marin has become known for bringing a modern, if somewhat macabre, twist to fairy tales.
In "Cendrillon," cruelty gets equal billing with compassion.
Her "Coppelia" is set in a housing project.


Alison C. Malin, Scott E. Zoellner
Alison Campbell Malin, an associate at the law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, was married yesterday to Scott Edwin Zoellner, an associate at the bank Credit Suisse.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Charles Minifie performed the ceremony at Calvary Episcopal Church in Summit, N.J.
Mrs.
Zoellner, 29, graduated cum laude from Duke University and received her law degree from the University of Texas.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Malin of Summit.
Her father is a general partner in the Tiedemann Investment Group, private investment managers in New York.
Mr.
Zoellner, 30, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul S. Zoellner of Sanibel Island, Fla.
His father is an independent advertising and marketing consultant on Sanibel Island.


Reality Check
Victorian farmhouse and its surrounding gardens sprawl on our living room floor.
The pop-up book is a vision I've brought home for my daughter's birthday, and when, like the mind's eye opening, its two dimensions blossom into three, she and I marvel at the same detail.
It's the clothesline of real string suspended from the porch to the oak tree, from which dangle two tiny cardboard, generic garments -- one shirt and one pair of pants.
Through them we can connect with all the unseen clothes inside the paper house and with the unseen paper people who wear them, as well as with all the other duos in the universe: left-and-right, salt-and-pepper, mother-and-child.
Like a clipped, cryptic line in a nursery rhyme, the two-inch clothesline says more to my daughter and me than a longer one might, encumbered by the unedited prose of pillowcases and mismatched socks.


No Respect for 'the Graffiti Kings'
The code of honor of the Graffiti Hall of Fame has been violated.
Since the late 1970's, the long concrete wall ringing a group of outdoor basketball courts at 106th Street and Park Avenue has been considered the shrine of shrines to the work of New York's leading graffiti muralists.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LENSWOMEN AT WORK
Two photographers who work in unusual ways are exhibiting at Her Sister's Gallery in Litchfield through Aug. 14.
Carrie Coco does color photomontages of subjects and/or forms that seemingly have little connection with each other, but when blended into her prints float together quite serendipitously.
Sometimes the juxtaposition produces a comical effect.


Anyone for Pasuckquakkohowog?
Pasuckquakkohowog: "They gather to play ball with the foot." That is how Native Americans described the game they played with a stuffed deerskin.
They were not the first, by far, but the simplicity of their game helps explain why soccer is today the world's most popular sport.
Anyone and any number can play.
All you need is a ball and an open field -- or a street, or a beach.
It is, for the most part, a civil game.
The rules are simple.
The skills and stamina are demanding, and the artistry of the stars is wondrous.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL Ward Sparks Knicks  Charlie Ward's 3-pointer with one second left lifted the Knicks past the Milwaukee Bucks, 115-112, in the Doral Arrowwood Summer League for National Basketball Association rookies, free agents and selected veterans yesterday in White Plains.
Ward scored the final 7 points for the Knicks to finish with 18.
Fellow first-round draft pick Monty Williams had 17 and Torgeir Bryn 16 points and 10 rebounds for the Knicks (2-1).
The 0-3 Nets got 21 points from Rex Walters but lost to the Philadelphia 76ers, 98-94.
Six-year Continental Basketball Association veteran Chris Childs had 17 points and 10 assists for New Jersey. (AP)


THE REVOLT OF THE BLACK BOURGEOISIE
In "The Revolt of the Black Bourgeoisie" (June 26), Leonce Gaiter says things that desperately need saying about the extent to which the press, politicians and the public accept the ghetto image as the personification of black America.
I only wish he had also addressed the thoroughly racist notion promoted by misguided black leaders that the culture to which American blacks belong is an African one.
Culture is not carried in the genes.
It should be apparent that blacks born and raised in the United States are as certainly the inheritors of Western civilization as are whites.


Curtis L. Sykes; Lawyer, 43
Curtis L. Sykes, a lawyer with the firm of Cadwalader Wickersham &amp; Taft, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
Mr.
Sykes, who lived in Manhattan, was 43.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Richard Daniels.


Corrections
An article on July 3 about the novelist George Sand misstated her relationship to the Marechal de Saxe.
He was her great-grandfather, not her grandfather.


Tour Thins Out a Bit as Rominger Quits
Two weeks to the day that he started the Tour de France as a co-favorite, Tony Rominger coasted to the side of the road today, surrendered his rider's number and dropped out of the race.
Although the official explanation by his Mapei-Clas team was gastroenteritis, the unofficial and more widely believed cause was total loss of morale.


Ex-Rangers Coach Meets With Red Wings
One day after declaring himself a free agent in the National Hockey League marketplace, Mike Keenan met with representatives from the Red Wings organization in downtown Detroit to discuss what is believed to be the joint position of general manager and coach.
Keenan confirmed today that he and his lawyer, Rob Campbell, sat down with Mike and Marian Ilitch, the owners of the Red Wings, and Jay Belfield, the team's chief legal counsel, this afternoon at the Ilitch's corporate headquarters.
Although rumored to be headed to Detroit, Keenan did not appear pleased with the result of the meeting and called a deal "most definitely not done." He did acknowledge, however, that a second meeting has been planned for early next week.


In the Region/Connecticut; Preserving a Heritage Of Victorian Homes
THE old adage that one person can make a difference is exemplified in Renee Kahn, a Stamford artist, teacher, wife and mother whose low-key persistence for the last 20 years has preserved much of Stamford's Victorian architecture.
Noted for the integrity and common sense that she brings to preservation, she cares most about being able to turn significant old mansions and rowhouses into handsome units for low- and middle-income people.


The Care and Feeding of the Butterfly
THEY'RE silent, they're beautiful, they're butterflies.
When these creatures visit the garden, pause, if you can, to watch as they flit from flower to flower to sip the nectar.
Experts, the lepidopterists, estimate that there may be 18,000 species or more in the world, each with its unique markings.
No wonder butterflies can be a source of ceaseless fascination.


For Johnny Maestro, the Music Never Stopped
THERE was a time when he was the present, not the past.
When the words he sang were fresh to the ear, not etched into memory banks like Social Security numbers.
There was a time when Johnny Maestro was a big-time rock-and-roll star.
He rode in limousines, and girls screamed.
Ed Sullivan mispronounced his name. (It's MY-stroh. Sullivan said MAY-stroh.) With groups, first the Crests, and then the Brooklyn Bridge, he made gold records and suffered writer's cramp signing autographs.


'Macbeth' Opens Shakespeare Festival
ON the sprawling grounds of the Boscobel Restoration, the Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival is wrapped in grandeur.
In its midst, the current "Macbeth" is oddly picayune and skin-deep.
In this instance, the performing space has been much compressed.
The audience is seated on four instead of three sides of the playing area, theater-in-the-round fashion.
That means the tent, which customarily has one open-air side in back of the actors, is now closed all around, except for the passageways that allows entrances and exits. .


July 10-16: Brief Encounter; Surprise Bid Thwarts Merger of CBS and QVC
Perhaps it was one of those matches that was not meant to be.
On the last day of last month, Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of CBS, and Barry Diller, chairman of the home shopping network QVC, announced that their companies were planning to merge.
News of the impending deal prompted showers of congratulations from Wall Street analysts, who lauded the union as favorable for both sides.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Trade deficit (with services), May, billions
-$8.4
-$8.8
Wednesday
Housing starts, June, mils., ann. rate
1.51
1.47
Housing permits, June, mils., ann. rate
1.36
1.33
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
363
355
Friday
Treasury statement, June, $ billions
-32.1
15.0
This Week's Developments
Wednesday
Two- and 5-year Treasury note auction announcement
*4*Greenspan to testify in the Senate
Thursday
Bundesbank council meeting
*4*Philadelphia Fed business survey


Ideas &amp; Trends; Farmers Find a New Scientific Intimacy With the Land
"The farm is an infinite form" -- Wendell Berry in "From the Crest"
What Wendell Berry, who farms the Kentucky hillside with a horse and plow, celebrates in his poetry is being proven more dramatically than ever before by American farmers.
Although down to fewer than two million, they are being driven by the electronics revolution, biotechnology and global markets to reshape their enterprises at a pace their grandparents could never have imagined.


Julia L. Gibson, Maurice Howard
Julia Louise Gibson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James O. Gibson of Washington, was married there yesterday to Maurice Glen Howard, the son of Pearl Melvin Howard of Buffalo.
The Rev.
Edith B. Sloan, a minister of the Unity Church, performed the nondenominational ceremony at Tregaron, one of the campuses of the Washington International School.
The bride, 25, will be known as Julia Gibson-Howard.
She expects to graduate later this year from the University of North Carolina at Pembroke.
Her father is a senior associate at the Urban Institute in Washington and was a director at the Rockefeller Foundation in New York.
Her mother, Kathryn DeFrantz Gibson, is a writer in Washington.


Unlicensed And Lethal: The Driver Who Kills
Day after day and by the thousands, illegal drivers, their licenses suspended or simply nonexistent, get behind the wheels of cars in New York City.
And recently, the damage they wind up doing has become a highlighted chapter in the city's daily catalogue of catastrophe.
Last week, a 66-year-old Bronx woman was struck and killed by a driver whose license had been suspended six times.
That came a week after a 21-month-old girl was killed by a car driven by an illegal driver who was pulling out of a parking spot, also in the Bronx.
And on May 1, three members of a Brooklyn family were killed when a man with 26 license suspensions plowed into them in Howard Beach, Queens.


Lee M. Hunter, Lawrence Politi
Lee Marquez Hunter, a daughter of Garrett and Lynn Hunter of East Greenwich, R.I., was married yesterday to Lawrence George Politi, a son of George and Noa Politi of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Ralph R. Hogan officiated at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in Narragansett, R.I.
Mrs.
Politi and her husband, both 30, graduated from Tulane University.
She is a vice president at Smith Barney, the New York securities brokerage.
Her father is the president of the Business Development Company of Rhode Island, a finance company in Providence, R.I.
Her mother is a tax consultant, in Providence, with Ernst &amp; Young, the accounting firm.


POP MUSIC: Striving to Be Rock's Next Seattle; Miami -- A Little of This, A Little of That
As befits a city that is a jumble of cultures and languages, Miami has not one music scene, but several -- and each seems largely oblivious to the others.
So while teen-agers suffering from suburban anomie flock to hard-core bands like Collapsing Lungs and Marilyn Manson, hip young Cubans have made the roots singer Albita Rodriguez, who arrived here less than a year ago, the toast of Spanish-speaking Miami.
But Haitians gravitate to groups like Koleksyon Kazak, and black rap fans are still looking for the successors to 2 Live Crew.
Some of the most interesting new music in Miami, though, comes from performers who have a foot in more than one camp.
The Cuban-American singer and songwriter Nil Lara, who has made the Stephen Talkhouse club in Miami Beach his home base, is a prime example: here is someone as familiar with Led Zeppelin as with Beny More, who artfully blends rock and Latin elements into music both muscular and intelligent.
Mary Karlzen, whose first record on Atlantic will soon be released, is a more familiar hybrid, writing and singing elegant pop songs filtered through a strong country sensibility.


Sasha Levy, Gregory Griffin
Alexandra Mary Bruce Levy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael S. Levy of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to Lieut.
Gregory Carlton Griffin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlton W. Griffin Jr. of Windham, N.H.
Judge Paul J. Del Nero, who is retired from the Rhode Island District Court in Newport, performed the ceremony at Berry Hill, the home of the bride's family in Newport.


Serious Troubles Are Found In Federal Vaccine Program
Federal auditors say a new Government program to distribute free vaccine to millions of children is plagued by serious problems, is behind schedule and will probably not increase immunization levels.
Moreover, the auditors express doubt about a fundamental premise of the program: that the cost of vaccine is a major reason preschool children have not received the shots they need for protection against diseases like measles, mumps and polio.


Deals and Discounts
EUROPE PACKAGES Packages to Eastern Europe starting at $999, including air fare from New York, are offered by Delta Dream Vacations.
A six-day Best Buy Budapest program at the Hotel Korona is $999 through August.
An 11-day tour, From Budapest to Prague, available through October, includes Hungary, Poland and the Czech Republic starting at $1,899, with sightseeing, daily buffet breakfast and five meals.
A nine-day tour priced from $1,699, Dresden to Prague by River Ship, includes a three-night cruise on the Elbe River and four nights in Prague.
Departures are Thursdays until Oct. 13.
All prices are for each of two people sharing a room.
The packages are operated by General Tours.
For information and reservations: (800) 221-6666.
HOTELS FOR SENIORS More than 130 Holiday Inn hotels in Europe, the Middle East and Africa are offering a rate of $99 or less for members of the American Association of Retired Persons.
The offer is good until the end of the year.
The rate includes breakfast for two, value-added taxes and service charges, and is guaranteed by the company against currency fluctuations.
It is not available during special events and cannot be used in combination with other offers or discounts.
Participating properties include hotels in major European cities, including London, Paris, Rome and Amsterdam.
More than two dozen hotels in South Africa are also taking part.
A.A.R.P. members must present membership cards on check-in, and it is recommended that they reserve rooms in advance, noting their A.A.R.P. membership.
Information: (800) 465-4329.


Henrich Battles Bulimia
A former gymnast, CHRISTY HENRICH, was improving yesterday in her battle against two eating disorders, but she remained hospitalized in critical condition, her brother said.
Henrich was in the intensive-care unit of the Medical Center of Independence, Mo., suffering from anorexia nervosa and bulimia.
"She's doing better today than yesterday," said her brother, PAUL HENRICH.


IN SHORT: FICTION
ARGENTINE NOVEL  NOBODY NOTHING NEVER  By Juan Jose Saer. Serpent's Tail, $14.99.


A Midsummer Night's Twirl
Lincoln Center Fountain Plaza, July 6.


TALKING ABOUT THE MEDIA CIRCUS
Your panelists overlook the purpose of the news media in a democracy: to provide information for a self-governing people to make decisions about matters that affect their lives.
ALEXANDER GREENFELD Washington


The 'Moncton Miracle': Bilingual Phone Chat
THE big blow to this community came in 1988 when the government-owned Canadian National Railways, closed its Moncton repair yard in a cost-cutting drive, idling 2,000 workers.
Many of the jobless spoke both English and French, like Louis Melanson, who was hired by the railroad after high school and labored at the Moncton yard for nine years, mostly behind his welder's blowtorch.


All Across America, Plunging Into Summer
TWISTING and turning through a pitch-black tunnel or falling breathless through the air for a few endless seconds may be the familiar themes of our worst nightmares, but an 8-to- 14-year-old these days is more likely to recognize these sensations as the radical thrills produced by such water slides as the Laser's Edge, the Dragon's Tail and the Cliff -- three of the many adrenergic attractions of water parks.
The first water slide, according to the World Waterpark Association, was built in 1971, when Dick Croul of Placerville, Calif., dug out a five-acre lake and shaped the pile of surplus dirt into a 350-foot Gunite-covered slide.
Since that initial, rough attempt, water slides and the parks that contain them have become increasingly elaborate.
In 1976 one of the first fiberglass slides appeared at Disney World's River Country.
A year later Wet 'n Wild, considered the country's first full-scale water park -- and still billed as the most popular, with more than a million visitors a year -- opened in Orlando, Fla.
Today, there are close to 500 water parks around the country, about 95 of them serving at least 100,000 thrill-seekers a year.
Visitors to some of the most extensive and well-known parks -- including the 10 described below -- will find pirate ships, spidery spacecraft, yellow submarines and island refuges added to an already substantial assortment of wave pools, rivers, tunnels, waterfalls and 300-foot runs with 60-foot drops.


Fresh Air Fund Mixes Nature With Careers
When Leandra Rodriguez arrived at the Sharpe Reservation in Dutchess County two weeks ago, she could hardly believe her eyes.
Along with the mountains, trees and fresh air, there was now a library for conducting research, cameras for taking pictures and computers to do what the 14-year-old loves to do most -- write.
"It's great," said Leandra, who has been coming to the 3,000-acre reservation for the last three summers to attend the Fresh Air Fund's Career Awareness Camp.
"Everything is new and now we have everything to ourselves."


Archive Yields Rich Details of Era When Chinese Were Barred
Out of a mountain of files stored in Federal Government buildings for the last century, a thorny but seldom discussed period in American immigration history has slowly come to light in the last two years.
The period was 1882 to 1943, when the Chinese Exclusion Acts barred all but four categories of Chinese immigrants from entering the United States.
The policy, which grew out of fear and protectionism, normally gets only the briefest mention in American history courses.
Teachers, students, merchants and short-term visitors were welcome; laborers, in particular, were not.


Italy's Dispute Over Scandal Splits Cabinet
The confrontation between Italy's corruption-fighting magistrates and Prime Minister edged toward a crisis tonight when the Interior Minister said he was ready to resign over a Government decree that has allowed suspects to walk free from prison.
In making the offer on television, Interior Minister Roberto Maroni said the text of the decree, issued on Wednesday, differed from a document that had been approved earlier by the Cabinet.
He also insisted he had been assured that the decree would not lead to the freeing of suspects in corruption investigations.


Martinez's Pitching Gives Indians an Edge on White Sox
Indians 2, White Sox 0
Dennis Martinez won his eighth straight decision, pitching a four-hitter, and the Cleveland Indians moved a game ahead in the American League Central by beating the White Sox, 2-0, last night at Chicago.


Two Festivals, Three String Quartets
THREE top-notch string quartets are in performing action this week as the Norfolk and Music Mountain Festivals continue apace.
Today the Allegri String Quartet brings Janacek and Beethoven to its 3 o'clock concert at the Mountain plus, with the guest artist Pamela Mia Paul, the Brahms C Minor Piano Quartet.
Next Sunday at that same hour, the Lark Quartet presents Schubert's "Death and the Maiden," the "Allegro Piacevole," written in 1936 by the Chicago-based composer and conductor Edward Collins and with the guest pianist Emma Tahmisian, the Dohnanyi C Minor Quintet.
Two notes of interest: the Schubert was played by the Gordon Quartet during the inaugural Music Mountain season 65 years ago, and Edward Collins was a friend and colleague of the festival's founding first violinist, Jacques Gordon.
For reservations or driving directions, call 496-2596.


A Name That Got Away, An Odd Receiving Line
DOWNTOWN -- Last Wednesday, the artist formerly known as Prince, who last year began to insist on being referred to by an unpronounceable glyph-like symbol, was giving a concert at the Palladium, formerly the hottest club in New York and formerly the Academy of Music.
In the Mike Todd Room, named after a former husband of Elizabeth Taylor, V.I.P.'s including Russell Simmons and Nicholas Cage (formerly known as Nicholas Coppola) waited for the show, a benefit for the Dance Theater of Harlem, to begin.
"Is Prince going on at midnight?" Bruce Lynn, a publicity agent for the Palladium, asked Karen Lee, who works for the artist formerly known as Prince.


No Headline
"The proportion of the population that is obese is incredible. If this was about tuberculosis it would be called an epidemic." DR.
F.
XAVIER PI-SUNYER.  [ 18:3. ]


Even the Healthiest Rotations Can Take a Turn for the Worse
With an abundance of pitching deficiencies afflicting the major leagues, the staffs of the Atlanta Braves and the Chicago White Sox were considered an exception to the epidemic before the season began.
Those staffs indeed have the lowest earned run averages in their leagues, but a closer look at their starting rotations shows that those teams, too, have suffered the spreading disease.


Geneva
Geneva, arguably Europe's most cosmopolitan city -- fully one-third of its 174,300 residents are foreigners -- is celebrating the tricentennial of Voltaire's birth.
The French writer and philosopher spent the last 23 years of his long life in or near Geneva, as one of the many intellectuals who found refuge in what was then a nominally independent republic.
A series of cultural events pays tribute to him this summer.
But Geneva's luminous months aren't all devoted to Voltaire.
On Aug. 13, during the Fetes de Geneve (which run from Aug. 11 to 14), fireworks will light up Lake Geneva and the Jet d'Eau, the 475-foot landmark plume of water rising from it.


Where the Beat Goes On . . . and On
IT is 1 A.M., and everyone is looking mighty hip sipping $7 margaritas in little plastic cups. (If the drinks were poured into normal glasses, there would be nothing left for the bartender, who tipped the blender to her lips after serving one couple.)
Filling the room are young men in black boots and carefully selected, slightly torn black football jerseys. (Probably none of them played football. They look more like varsity soccer types. But World Cup T-shirts are out.) With them are young women wearing gym shoes or clogs with dresses in delicate floral patterns or tiny cutoffs.
No one is speaking.
Instead, they are dancing in wordless ecstasy, or they are sitting or slouching on straight-back chairs and checking out each other's shoes.


Ellen M. Kunes, David Freeman
Ellen M. Kunes, a daughter of Ruth A. Kunes of Lawrenceville, N.J., and the late Irving Kunes, was married last evening to David Wroe Freeman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
W.
Freeman 3d of Pine Bluff, Ark.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Roger Ross at Wave Hill in the Bronx.
The bride, 35, is the life style editor at McCall's magazine in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of New Hampshire, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father was a certified public accountant and a transportation analyst for the New Jersey Department of Transportation in Trenton.
Her mother retired as a social worker at the Children's Home Society of New Jersey, in Trenton.
The bridegroom, 35, is the editor of Health Confidential, a newsletter in New York.
He graduated cum laude from Yale University.
His mother is a columnist at The Pine Bluff Commercial, a daily newspaper.
His father retired as its publisher.


Out of the Shadows, a Less-Funky Future for Astor Place?
The first shadow fell last year, when District 65 of the auto workers' union, at 13-25 Astor Place, went bankrupt and auctioned off its largely vacant building.
Five months ago, Conran's closed.
About a month ago, Cooper Square Books departed.
And at the end of June, after 15 years of serving coffee regular, the Astor Riviera Cafe closed.
But various business people and real estate brokers around the area say the host of darkened doors are just the prelude to a new dawn for Astor Place, the idiosyncratic and historic wedge that divides the Bowery into Third and Fourth Avenues and separates the bustle of Broadway from the East Village's hardscrabble chic.
Perhaps it will be a dawn that diminishes the area's still faintly industrial feel, in favor of the aroma of Seattle-style coffee houses.


Bon Voyage, Bon Appetit
WATER'S EDGE * (718) 482-0033; East River at 44th Drive, Long Island City; $$$; all major credit cards


Vancouver
To the Editor: I am surprised and disappointed that in his review "Vancouver's Diverse Dining" (May 29) Bryan Miller omitted my favorite restaurant in the world: the Teahouse Restaurant at Ferguson Point in Stanley Park.
This beautiful restaurant, with itswhite linen, lovely china and fireplaces, is on a bluff overlooking English Bay and the mountains north and west of the city.
The cuisine is varied and excellent, the staff efficient and friendly, the view spectacular.


[ ENCOUNTER ] ; Whose Vision Is It, Anyway?
Nochlin turned up for their meeting in a West Side apartment wearing red socks patterned with black Scotties.
Mugler reacted with mock horror.
The photographer taking their picture told him not to wrinkle his brow.
"I'm supposed to be the aging intellectual," Nochlin joked.
They went on to talk about images of women, about femininity as an enterprise, about the uses of fashion, which Mugler calls "a trick and a game." If fashion is in fact "a trick and a game," what does the game tell us about the women who play it?
MUGLER: So many things.
A lot, I think.
NOCHLIN: Well, that's if you think there's such a thing as women.
I'm more inclined to agree with somebody like Joan Riviere, who was a student of Freud and said that femininity is a condition of disguise.
I mean, there may be women, but femininity you dress up for.
You learn how to be feminine -- it's not something natural, ever.
So I would say that the great designer of clothing is always providing additional disguises to create new forms of the feminine.
And I would say that clothes tell you something about the choice of the woman who's wearing them, but they don't tell you anything about the quote-unquote real woman, because I don't think there is a real woman.
There's a real person, but I don't think it's a woman.
MUGLER: Very true.
There is only the person who chooses to play the feminine role, to experience different aspects of femininity.
And do you feel, Thierry, that you're furnishing women with disguises that they can pick and choose and use?
MUGLER: Completely.
Completely.
It's like directing your own everyday movie.
Baudelaire said, "La femme est naturelle, c'est-a-dire abominable." "Woman is natural -- that is, abominable." Do you agree?
MUGLER: No, because -- well, the body is beautiful.
It's as simple as that.
And for a fashion designer, it's the base.
I mean, I think a pair of breasts is so gorgeous and I just can't resist when they're pushed up like this -- you know?
It's so seductive.
It's very sexual.
NOCHLIN: How do you get them so round?
MUGLER: Well, the minute you push them up and together, they go round.
And then we pad them underneath and on the side, just to make them a little more perfect.
NOCHLIN: I see.
Linda, do you agree with Baudelaire?
NOCHLIN: You know, Baudelaire's an old pal of mine, in a certain sense.
And when he said that about women, he was being his usual perverse self.
Understandably.
He was so sick of everyone talking about Jean-Jacques Rousseau and "the natural" and how wonderful "the natural" was.
So he took absolutely the opposite tack -- that nature was an abomination.
Everything, then, is natural that is not manipulated, that is not changed by man.
To him, a woman without makeup was disgusting.
When she was natural, you could see all her -- her ooziness.
MUGLER: Because the makeup was not as good as now!
NOCHLIN: Well, he liked kohl around the eyes.
Kohl, rouge -- of course it wasn't as good, and he was speaking mainly about prostitutes and courtesans.
MUGLER: But at that time he was right, because all the bourgeois women, they were so boring.
That's why the courtesans, they were so fabulous.
NOCHLIN: They looked fabulous.
MUGLER: They were free and beautiful.
NOCHLIN: Right.
And I think Baudelaire was speaking to a certain point.
I mean, he also loved the dandy -- he didn't like natural men any more than natural women.
So he was really talking as an urban man who wanted things to be infinitely civilized and yet, in a way, infinitely wild at the same time.
He loved savages.
He felt that savages who put on war paint and feathers and beads were as marvelous as women with makeup.
When he talked about having to manipulate nature and change nature and alter nature and disguise nature, he didn't just mean civilization, he also meant what to him was the opposite of civilization.
He meant primitive men and women who made themselves into wonderful fetish objects.
And so -- I mean, as far as fashion is concerned -- I agree with him.
I don't think there can be, quote unquote natural fashion.
MUGLER: Exactly.
We have to be frank.
You know, nudity is great.
The body is beautiful.
But the minute that you put on clothes, this is an act of civilization.
So I don't believe in natural fashion, either.
Let's go for it!
The corset.
The push-up bra.
Everything!
If we do it, let's do the whole number.
Linda, it sounds to me as if your theory is not so much that the woman is natural but that the person is natural and the woman artificial.
MUGLER: Not only the woman but the whole mythology of femininity.
NOCHLIN: Exactly.
But I would also tie it in to certain postmodernist ideas about the self -- that there is no self, even.
That the self is a condition of disguise and that we can move back and forth in terms of sexualities, in terms of social being, in terms of all kinds of senses of who we are.
And I think fashion helps us wonderfully in this.
That's why, in a sense, I would say that fashion is the postmodern art, because it helps to destabilize the self in such a wonderful way.
MUGLER: For me, it's different.
I don't really agree about fashion.
I don't like it when it gets carried away with itself, when anything is possible.
We're seeing that a lot now, you know -- designers amusing themselves, fashion for its own sake.
Thierry, you've used drag queens and transsexuals as models for your shows.
Does that mean that the image that your clothes project -- the pushed-up breasts, the cinched waist -- is in fact there for anyone to step into?
That the requirements for looking like a woman aren't inherent to women?
MUGLER: What I was saying in my choice of models is that this game of femininity, if you choose to play it -- well, why not a transsexual?
Because they are the maximum.
NOCHLIN: Beyond the maximum.
MUGLER: No one wants to be more feminine than a transsexual.
So the game is open to everyone, not just women?
MUGLER: Yes!
Of course.
And so is the other side of it -- being masculine.
That's why I like very masculine women, as well.
Thierry, when you see these women you've dressed on the runway being so forthright about their sexuality, who do you think is in control?
Are they, or is it the men who respond to them?
MUGLER: They are -- the women are in control.
NOCHLIN: But they're also humorous about their sexuality.
This is not a case of women humbling themselves before some mass-produced stereotype.
These are women who appropriate their own sexuality, in a manner that's not exaggerated but -- MUGLER: Grandiose.
NOCHLIN: Yes.
Grandiose.
MUGLER: And generous.
NOCHLIN: Grandiosity and generosity, at the same time.
That I find politically extremely interesting, because it shakes up our ideas of femininity altogether.
It's so extreme -- MUGLER: Thank you!
NOCHLIN: It's so extreme that these women aren't sex objects, they're sex subjects.
Also, we know that this is a kind of artifice -- it's a performance.
MUGLER: It's not artifice; it's a help -- a trick.
Because what we're showing exists already; we didn't invent it.
We're just presenting it in another way, in a better package.
NOCHLIN: Right.
But it's not a cute little secretary looking like this every day in the office so she'll get a raise.
I mean, what you're doing is on a completely different scale.
This is like some archetype.
MUGLER: And you put yourself in it sometimes, when you feel like it.
NOCHLIN: I think it all comes down to different roles.
When you go to the office, you don't necessarily want to be seen as a sex object.
Or if you're a doctor, you don't want your patients thinking of you in that way.
MUGLER: I would love to have a sex bomb as a doctor.
NOCHLIN: Well, maybe not as your surgeon.
MUGLER: As my surgeon, yes!
I would go into the operation feeling more secure.
Do you think there's any disparity between the way men want to see women and the way women want to be seen?
MUGLER: Oh, enormous!
I think men have a more abstract way of looking at women -- more abstract and more sexual.
And women -- women want to be seen more as human beings.
But you know, there's just as big a difference in the way men are seen.
When women look at men, they always pick a man with a little bit of femininity showing.
And men will like more a macho hero type.
Look at the actors that men like: Sylvester Stallone, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Bruce Willis.
And the women like Jeremy Irons. . . .
NOCHLIN: Mm-hm!
MUGLER: You know?
Women don't like big musclemen.
Not so much.
NOCHLIN: You're right, you're absolutely right.
MUGLER: They like nice skin, blue eyes -- something a little wild.
They like the lost type.
Lost and wild, but thin.
NOCHLIN: Depressed.
MUGLER: And very often with long hair.
NOCHLIN: I like them depressed.
MUGLER: Depressed.
So you see?
There's no agreement on men, either.
For centuries, Woman has been the subject of all kinds of painting and sculpture.
And in our century, Woman has been the subject of fashion, as well.
Men's fashions have remained fairly constant and low-key, by comparison, with none of the sumptuousness and fantasy that you find in men's clothing in the 18th century.
What do you think accounts for this preoccupation with women?
Is it something so simple as the fact that most artists and most fashion designers have been men, or is there some other explanation?
MUGLER: I don't know why, but it's true that woman for centuries became a beautiful, stupid object.
And now it's changing again.
NOCHLIN: Well, you know, there's a theory, by a student of Freud's in the 1930's named Flugel.
He had this theory, that at the end of the 18th century there was what he called "the Great Masculine Renunciation." In the 18th century, men's clothes were even more splendid than women's -- I mean, absolutely gorgeous, in satin and silk.
But with the coming of capitalism and the rise of the bourgeoisie, men adopted a kind of uniform: the black suit.
And they renounced fashion, elegance and beauty.
MUGLER: But the women did, too.
And fashion passed to the courtesan.
NOCHLIN: Yes.
Right.
O.K.
So, in exchange for a certain kind of public power, an economic power, and in order to be able to run the capitalist factory, so to speak, man renounced beauty in order to become the subject --in order to control beauty.
MUGLER: So, it was all about money.
NOCHLIN: Yes.
And I think gay culture has certainly brought back the idea that men can be spectacular and beautiful.
And so did the dandy culture, in the 19th century.
But that was more about nuances of cut, the right kind of cloth -- very subtle kinds of things.
Whereas the task of being gorgeous was thrust onto women, who were less powerful -- women of leisure, that is, who had time to adorn themselves.
MUGLER: It's also feminism that has changed the whole thing.
I think now it's the turn of the man to be the sexual object.
It's coming.
NOCHLIN: To me, they always have been, the darlings.
But I agree.
You're absolutely right.
I mean, look at that commercial, when all these secretaries rush to the window and watch this gorgeous workman take off his shirt and drink a Diet Coke.
MUGLER: I love that.
That's good.
NOCHLIN: Now, you can't imagine that happening 20 years ago, even 10 years ago.
You know, in the 17th and 18th centuries, it was men's bodies that were the role models.
When you passed the test at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts for the Prix de Rome, for example, you did something called an academie, which was a study of the male nude, not the female nude -- they didn't even let women in to model.
Often they would use male bodies -- male models -- and just add breasts.
And then you think of Winkelmann in the 19th century, who said that the really beautiful body was the male body.
So, I mean, the so-called ideal body type has varied so much historically, and in many cases the women were masculine.
Thierry, as someone who's designing not only clothes but images of women, how much responsibility -- if any -- do you feel toward women and the way they would like to be seen?
MUGLER: Well, when I work, it's on a very concrete level.
I do the fittings, and I think what women will like, and what they won't.
And very often I change something from the way I've drawn it because it turns out to be too high or too stiff, too this or too that.
But besides that, I don't think about responsibility -- I'm not taking it so seriously.
NOCHLIN: I'm always amazed when I hear women talking about being "forced" to wear something.
I mean, they don't have to take it if they don't want it.
I never feel forced to wear anything.
I adore clothes, but I am the least fashionable person in the world.
I don't have that kind of body; I'm 63.
But of course, I'm speaking from a point of great privilege.
I'm a sort of successful person in my field, and because I'm in the arts, I can look any way I want.
I can go to a formal dinner party in a muumuu and it doesn't matter.
But I can't imagine not being interested in clothing.
I guess if you're an intellectual woman, you're not supposed to talk about how much pleasure you get out of clothing.
But I have to admit, as an art critic and historian, there are times when I get much more pleasure out of looking at clothes and touching clothes than I do out of looking at some of the ridiculous art that I'm forced to confront.
I mean, I find fashion an art form, and what I love about it is that it's an art form that can be part of your body.
MUGLER: It's the only art that walks down the street.
NOCHLIN: And the body is the central focus.
Not only does an outfit shape your body but it also makes you move a certain way -- it choreographs you.
MUGLER: For me, the real elegance is when you sense somebody happy in their body, and in their clothes.
Even when the clothes are constraining -- like a corset or a bustier.
The notion that there can be pleasure in wearing something constraining goes against so much of what fashion these days purports to be about -- comfort and freedom of movement.
MUGLER: But it depends on the context.
I mean, if you're going for a walk in the forest, you don't want to wear a corset.
But this idea that fashion should be comfortable, it's very conformiste.
Fashion is nothing; fashion doesn't exist.
Who cares about trends and all that stuff?
The only thing that matters is these little tricks that are at our disposal, to help us have more fun or a better life.
I won't ask you to define good taste, but I wonder what you think is its antithesis?
Vulgarity?
MUGLER: Oh, no!
Vulgarity's fun!
I would say that the opposite of good taste is bourgeois chic, a kind of obligation to conform.
NOCHLIN: Everyone wearing the same thing.
MUGLER: If someone now goes to the Oscars wearing a tiara and a fabulous dress, people say, "Oh, she's so tacky," because you have to wear a chemise de nuit and no jewel now to be in.
You have to look discreet and poor and beige and gray.
NOCHLIN: Right.
Understated.
Safe taste is, to me, bad taste.
MUGLER: That's it.
The opposite of good taste is safe.


SUNDAY, July 17, 1994; Suicide Pill for Data
CD-ROM disks may be the ideal form for holding 300,000 pages of information, but you can't tear them into small bits and swallow them.
What are spies to do when they get caught with the neat, multimedia plans for the target of their sabotage?
Tecval Memories, a Swiss company, has developed a CD caddy that will obliterate all of the data in two-tenths of a second.
Zap!


Manager's Profile
Anthony Orphanos  Fund: Warburg Pincus Growth and Income; $280 million in assets.
Manager since 1992. (Sponsor: Warburg Pincus Counsellors, New York.)


Bruce R. Ellig and Janice L. Reals
Janice Lynn Reals, a senior vice president at the Ambac Indemnity Corporation, a bond insurance company, was married in Tuxedo Park, N.Y., yesterday to Bruce Robert Ellig, a corporate vice president of personnel at Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceutical company.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Forrest Church performed the Unitarian ceremony at the summer home of Paul and Heidi Steiger, friends of the couple.
Mrs.
Ellig graduated from the University of Iowa and received a master's degree in organizational development from Rider College.
She is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Otto P. Astolfi.
Mr.
Ellig graduated from the University of Wisconsin, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and also received an M.B.A.
He is the son of Lucille Ellig of Manitowoc, Wis., and the late Robert Ellig.
The bridegroom's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bride's.


Albanians Seek Strength in Unity
For years, the Albanian immigrants who settled in Belmont and Pelham Parkway were an intensely cloistered group, rarely interacting with their neighbors and never mobilizing as a political force.
But two bias attacks in 1992 began to change that.
In both incidents, the young victims said their white, teen-age attackers had called themselves "the Albanian Boys." Faced with citywide scrutiny, the Albanians in the Bronx began to take on a more outspoken role.


For Child Safety, at Least, 'I'll Take Manhattan'
To the Editor:
Having raised children in both the city and the country, I would like to add a few comments to "Parenthood: Rethinking the Big-City Bargain" (Coping, July 10).
It's true that in the city one worries about muggers, serial killers, and virus-borne exotic diseases.
However, in the country there is one very large and inescapable worry.
It's called the car.
And even if your teen-ager doesn't drive, you can guarantee he or she will be riding in someone else's car -- for years.
The majority of teen-age deaths come in auto accidents.
Many more teen-agers are maimed or crippled.


Theater's Lively Summer Season
IN Madison and in Pemberton, you can brush up your Shakespeare, Ostrovsky and Wilde.
Switching realms, "Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh!" is on the way to the Forum in Metuchen -- yet again.
Between such extremes, the summer theatergoer can come upon popular revivals, new plays and even a musical tryout.
Even when the state's major playhouses are off, something is happening in the New Jersey professional theater, and it isn't just summer stock.
Not when an enterprising company in Summit comes up with a new take on what was called the "crime of the century," the kidnapping and death of Charles and Anne Lindbergh's baby in 1932 -- which happened in Hopewell -- and when an emerging company in Montclair, producing the work of a New Jersey playwright, is announcing itself as the state's newest professional nonprofit theater.


Hats Off To Ignorance
An excellent example of the lack of leadership in the teaching of our youths appeared front and center in "Youths Who Commit Bias Crimes Confront Their Hate and 'Hot Buttons' "  [ June 12 ] , a picture that shows a young man sitting in class with his baseball cap on.
And this was a court-mandated course for convicted bias offenders!


CRIME
Every cop in Los Angeles dreams of a second career as a movie star.
The ones who do their 20 years in New York all want to be novelists.
I'll go for that -- so long as they write with Ed Dee's drop-dead style and authenticity.
"Mob grief was our specialty," brags Anthony Ryan, who works for the Organized Crime Control Bureau in Mr.
Dee's punchy first novel, 14 PECK SLIP (Warner, $19.95).
Ryan and his hot-dog partner, Joe Gregory, are staking out the Fulton Fish Market one filthy winter night in 1982 when they spot a barrel going into the East River.
Recognizing a mob burial when they see one, they call for the boys in the wet suits.
The divers bring up the wrong barrel but an interesting barrel just the same, because it holds the remains of Jinx Mulgrew, a bent cop who disappeared in 1972 before he could spill his guts about police corruption to the Knapp Commission.
Ryan and Gregory jump all over this case, which spooks Jinx's crooked pals on the force as much as his old mob associates.


All Across America, Plunging Into Summer: THE WEST; UTAH: SEVEN PEAKS WATER PARK
All eyes were fixed on the maze of twisting tubes and steep slides sprouting from a 100-foot tower, as we pulled into the parking lot of Seven Peaks Water Park in Provo, Utah.
Suddenly a body dropped out of a large pipe near the top of the tower and landed in a steep flume.
It looked like a mummy, arms crossing its chest, as it streaked down the nearly vertical chute.
Where the slide leveled out, a fan of water sprayed over the sides and a young man popped up, punched the air with satisfaction and trotted back to the tower for more.
Fortunately, saner activities can also be found at this scenic park nestled at the base of the Wasatch Mountains.
A pleasant day could be spent just lounging in one of the Seven Peaks' hot tubs and gazing up at the spectacular brownish-red mountains skirted with green trees and bushes.


POP MUSIC: Striving to Be Rock's Next Seattle; Louisville, Ky. -- Here Today, Gone Tomorrow
Unlike the Ohio River, which borders this small, ethnically diverse city, Louisville's rock scene is a fast, narrow and winding stream emanating from a single source.
That source is the band Squirrel Bait, an idiosyncratic hard-core rock outfit formed in the mid-80's and disbanded by the time its second record was released.
Members of Squirrel Bait went on to play in a number of influential local rock bands that share a modest, low-budget and intuitive approach to music-making but whose styles range from country to blues to lounge jazz to noise-rock.
They include Bastro, Love Jones, Gastro del Sol, Big Wheel, Starbilly and Louisville's most revered guitar contortionists, Slint.
Two others, Palace Songs and King Kong, will perform in the rock tour Lollapalooza.


BEST SELLERS: July 17, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
2
2
20
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
3
4
THE CROSSING, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) A young American comes of age in Mexico's sierra.
4
4
14
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
5
10
4
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
6
6
101
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
7*
9
12
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
8
5
3
THE WATERWORKS, by E.L.
Doctorow. (Random House, $23.) Life in the New York City of 1871 as witnessed by a jaded newspaperman.
9
7
10
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves.
10
13
2
DOWNTOWN, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $24.) A woman learns about life and the ways of men in Atlanta during the 1960's.
11
8
139
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.) Verse and pictures.
12
10
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A young doctor stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
13*
11
4
Q-SQUARED, by Peter David. (Pocket, $22.) All creation is at stake when an old enemy asks for help from "Star Trek"'s Captain Picard.
14
12
5
MISTRESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $19.95.) A former schoolteacher tries to unmask a blackmailer.
15
1
A MAP OF THE WORLD, by Jane Hamilton. (Doubleday, $22.) When a dairy farmer's wife makes a fatal mistake one morning, her life falls apart.
16*
1
BLACK BETTY, by Walter Mosley. (Norton, $19.95.) The private eye Easy Rawlins in pursuit of a troublemaking woman in 1961 Los Angeles.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the White House during the first year of the Clinton Administration.
2
2
62
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
3
30
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
4
4
6
D-DAY, JUNE 6, 1944, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) An account of the Allied invasion of Normandy 50 years ago.
5
6
19
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
5
9
STANDING FIRM, by Dan Quayle. (HarperCollins/Zondervan, $25.) The former Vice President recalls his life, especially during the Bush years.
7
14
4
ALL MY OCTOBERS, by Mickey Mantle with Mickey Herskowitz. (HarperCollins, $23.) The legendary Yankee recalls the 12 World Series in which he played.
8
12
3
DAVE BARRY IS NOT MAKING THIS UP, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $20.) A collection of humor pieces by the Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist.
9
8
5
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
10*
10
11
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the country singer.
11*
9
27
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
12
7
9
BEYOND PEACE, by Richard Nixon. (Random House, $23.) An agenda of foreign and domestic policies for the United States to pursue in the post-cold war era.
13
1
MOON SHOT, by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton with Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict. (Turner, $21.95.) How Americans reached the moon in July 1969.
14*
13
13
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
15
11
7
THE HALDEMAN DIARIES, by H.R.
Haldeman. (Putnam, $27.50.) Notes made by the man who was Richard Nixon's chief of staff from 1969 to 1973.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
12
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
60
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
12
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of designs.
4
4
26
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 2, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BIRD ARTIST, by Howard Norman. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) An adulterous affair and a murder propel this tragic novel of a hamlet in Newfoundland, where everybody knows everybody and the weather is unspeakable.
CALLED OUT, by A.G.
Mojtabai. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) An abstract, intelligent novel, ostensibly about a jet crash in a small town, that renders the reactions of the witnesses to a random disaster in beautiful, somber prose.
LAST GO ROUND, by Ken Kesey with Ken Babbs. (Viking, $21.95.) It's circa 1911 in this ructious neo-dime western, a novel that dares to be as phony as the real thing, its prairie-flat characters ornamented with episodic plot, inflated atmosphere and impossible prowess.
MOSES SUPPOSES, by Ellen Currie. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) A welcome first collection of Ms.
Currie's short stories, new and old; in relationships gone wrong, in everyday objects, she discerns hints of large meanings and glimmers of submerged mysteries.
A NEW WORLD: An Epic of Colonial America From the Founding of Jamestown to the Fall of Quebec, by Arthur Quinn. (Faber &amp; Faber, $35.) A Hobbesian history in which the hopes of utopian colonists are crushed by man and nature. 9 HIGHLAND ROAD, by Michael Winerip. (Pantheon, $25.) An unobtrusive, nonjudgmental illumination of two years in the lives of the mentally ill in a group home on Long Island, by a reporter for The New York Times.
ROOMMATES: My Grandfather's Story, by Max Apple. (Warner, $19.95.) An enthralling novelistic memoir of the infinitely durable Herman (Rocky) Goodstein, who at 93 accompanied Mr.
Apple to college and proved, in the long run, to be worth all the trouble he caused.
THE SHADOW OF THE PANTHER: Huey Newton and the Price of Black Power in America, by Hugh Pearson. (Addison-Wesley, $24.) A deromanticized portrait of the celebrated Black Panther Party leader of the 1960's and 70's, with attention both to Newton's brilliance at legitimate organizing and his reliance on criminal brutality.
THE WAGES OF GUILT: Memories of War in Germany and Japan, by Ian Buruma. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) An examination, by an impressively informed and empathetic journalist, of the ways in which the cataclysms of our century have shaped national identity.
A WHOLE NEW LIFE, by Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $20.) The record of a distinguished writer, struck with an agonizing and paralyzing cancer at 51, who learned in the hardest possible way who he was and who he had to become.
WOMEN'S WORK.
The First 20,000 Years: Women, Cloth, and Society in Early Times, by Elizabeth Wayland Barber. (Norton, $23.) A fascinating history and prehistory of the making of textiles, a craft, exclusive to women (including queens and goddesses), that preceded and made possible civilization itself.


The New Ball Game
To the Editor:
World Cup soccer is disproportionately defensive.
To add more offense, reduce the number of players on the field and liberalize the substitution rules.
JOHN M. MCCONNELL  Cornwall, N.Y., July 11, 1994


Striving to Be Rock's Next Seattle
FOR THE CYNICAL, ALL POLITICS is local, and the local perspective is a recipe for disaster: ignorance, Nimby selfishness, isolationism, tribal and racial strife.
Yet popular culture, especially popular music, has a way of turning real-world troubles inside-out, and it is not pop's cynics but its idealists who have come to believe that all of the best music is local, made by hometown bands for hometown fans.
It is pop's job to carry that music -- or at least its most accessible efforts -- from the periphery to the broader public.
Starting on Tuesday, bands from all over the United States converge on New York City, hoping to be heard by taste makers and music moguls in town for the New Music Seminar.
It's a five-day suspension of the new rules in rock, which decree that a regional following is better than a glimmer of national attention.
Lately, those music moguls have been spending much of their time racking up frequent-flyer miles on the way to cities and towns that never expected to be on the rock-and-roll map.


July 10-16; More Than a Summit Handshake
The surprise summit to be held in Washington on July 25 between Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and King Hussein of Jordan will mostly lift the veils from contacts between the two countries that have gone on secretly for decades.
But it does not make the meeting any less important.


A New Voice In the Pulpit On Fifth Avenue
Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church's last permanent minister was a magnetic but polarizing preacher who quit in 1992 and formed a competing church.
Recovering from those troubles, Fifth Avenue now has a resounding new voice in its pulpit.
Preaching there last month, the Rev.
Thomas K. Tewell won a virtually unanimous vote as the new senior minister.
Fifth Avenue, whose 2,200 members and $3.5 million budget make it the city's largest Presbyterian church, is nearly two centuries old.
For four years in the late 1980's and early 90's, its fortunes soared and then plunged under the Rev.
R.
Maurice Boyd, whose spellbinding preaching, praised even by his critics, drew hundreds of new members.


The Executive Computer; Moving to Microsoft's Chicago: If Not Why, When?
NEXT year, when you think of Chicago, you may not be thinking about Uno's deep-dish pizza, Mrs.
O'Leary's destructive cow or Wrigley's bumbling Cubs.
By that point, the Microsoft Corporation may have succeeded in convincing you that Chicago, the code name for the coming new version of Windows, is a software product you can't live without.
Just last month, Microsoft kicked off a massive testing cycle aimed at hammering out the bugs, adding additional features here and there and making critical compatibility tweaks, all with the hope that it might deliver a finished product to customers before the end of the year.
The software company then plans to spend more money convincing PC users that they need Chicago, or Windows 4.0, than it has spent on any product introduction in its history, although it declines to offer specific dollar figures.


Business Diary: July 10-15
COMPANIES Macy's?
Federated?
Bloomingdale's?
It's All for One Now  At this rate, life will soon be elegantly simple.
To shop, you'll just head for a single 20-square-block store sprawled across Midtown.
Its name?
Macy's-Federated-A&amp;S-Bloomingdale's-Stern's-Etc.-Etc.
Or, perhaps, simply Department Store Inc.
Last week Macy's and Federated finished their long mating dance, as Macy's stopped battling to stay independent and agreed to a merger, giving birth to the nation's largest department-store company.
Macy's bondholders do fairly well as the chain emerges from bankruptcy, but retail workers will probably lose out.
New York-area department-store jobs have slid to 24,000 from 57,000 just 15 years ago, and more layoffs will certainly follow now.
But you can't have jobs without stores: if, by joining forces, they're "better able to pay their bills," as Samuel Ehrenhalt of the Bureau of Labor Statistics put it, "it will be better for everyone." For shoppers, that remains to be seen.


Jersey City Man Is Arrested In Fatal Slashing of Three
Eighteen hours after Jersey City police officers peered through the window of a house and saw a woman lying in a pool of blood, a man was arrested yesterday and charged with murdering three members of his girlfriend's family.
The suspect, William Menter, 26, went looking for his girlfriend, Latisha Roberts, on Saturday night, a day after the two had fought, the police said.
Failing to find her, investigators contend, he slashed the throats of her mother, her sister, her niece and her nephew.
The boy survived.


SMOKING
Cigarette smoking is on the rise nationally for the first time since the mid-1960s.
That doesn't appear to be the case in this area.
State health officials credit stringent restrictions against smoking and ever-growing public awareness of its dangers; they are now concentrating on dissuading teenagers from smoking.
Unless the tax rate is increased, state excise tax revenues from tobacco products continue to fall each year.
New York, New Jersey and Connecticut have fewer deaths from smoking than most states, according to a report on deaths attributable to smoking, released last month by the Centers for Disease Control.
Still, according to the study, nearly one death in five in the three states in 1990 came from smoking.


Kurt Josten, 82, Headed the Museum of Science at Oxford
Kurt Josten, a German-born scholar and a former curator of the Museum of the History of Science at Oxford, England, died on July 10 near Dusseldorf, Germany, in the town of Neuss, where he lived.
He was 82.
Dr.
Josten was naturalized British citizen who was born Conrad Hermann Josten and was also known as C. H. Josten.
He held the curator's post from 1950 until he retired in 1964.


Courier Rescues U.S. After Sampras Defeat
Jim Courier had come here playing second fiddle on the United States Davis Cup team to top-ranked Pete Sampras.
He left today as top dog after beating Jacco Eltingh, 6-3, 6-4, 4-6, 6-1, in the fifth and decisive match for a 3-2 victory against the Dutch on another sweltering day.


Microsoft's Future Barely Limited
Rather than reining in the Microsoft Corporation, the consent decree that the Justice Department announced over the weekend with Microsoft, the world's largest software publisher, frees the company to define the computer industry's ground rules through the rest of the decade.
The agreement leaves untouched what many computer industry executives say is Microsoft's principal advantage -- that it develops both the basic operating-system software that makes personal computers run, known as MS-DOS, and applications software, like word-processing programs or spreadsheets, that perform specific tasks.


Bridge
The first discard by a defender often carries a message aimed at his partner, but an attentive declarer can also pick up a useful clue.
An example is the diagramed deal played in a duplicate game at the Bridge Deck in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Sitting South was Chuck Lamprey of White Plains, a bridge teacher who has won many major titles.
He bid briskly to six hearts, a contract that appears to depend primarily on solving the problem of the diamond queen.
When West led a trump and the dummy appeared, he asked himself why no one had bid spades.
If either opponent held a seven-card suit he would surely have taken pre-emptive action on the first round, so a 6-5 division was a virtual certainty.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None


New Player in the Welfare Game
The struggle over welfare reform has been, until now, a two-way contest between President Clinton's proposal for time-limited benefits and far harsher measures offered by conservative Democrats and Republicans.
That raised the alarming possibility that Mr.
Clinton's plan would be dragged to the right in order to survive.
But the political dynamic changed last week when Representative Robert Matsui of California proposed a liberal alternative.
The plan, which builds sensibly on the existing welfare system, is an enviable model for reform.
It also provides a needed counterweight to the tug from Mr.
Clinton's right.


The Flag Says the Job's Done


Market Place; Nagging liquidity questions put a damper on T.W.A.'s stock.
DONALD F. CRAIB Jr., the chairman of Trans World Airlines, has made good on several predictions he made when he took over in January, save for a crucial one: the company has had to seek additional capital, despite Mr.
Craib's statement that it would not need to do so.
And it is the specter of a liquidity crisis at the nation's seventh-largest airline, raised recently in reports by the Standard &amp; Poor's and Duff &amp; Phelps credit rating agencies, that has weighed heavily on the airline's stock price in recent weeks.
T.W.A. has missed out on the modest rebound of several airline stocks recently, and many industry analysts are skeptical about its future.


Pressure Growing At Disney
The announcement late Saturday that Michael D. Eisner, the chairman of the Walt Disney Company, had undergone emergency quadruple heart-bypass surgery stunned Hollywood and the financial world, and raised questions about the management of one of the world's most successful -- and, up to now, stable -- entertainment companies.
Mr.
Eisner, who is 52, underwent the three-hour surgery at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles earlier on Saturday.
His surgeon, Dr.
Alfredo Trento, said, "The operation was a normal bypass procedure without any complications." Dr.
Trento said he expected Mr.
Eisner to leave the hospital in several days.
Disney officials said Mr.
Eisner was expected to return to work in several weeks.


Armenian-Azeri War Lacks Liberators
To the Editor:
"Blood in a Faraway War Seems to Flow Unseen" (The Week in Review, July 10) seriously misstates events in the war between ethnic Armenians and Azeris over Nagorno-Karabakh, an Armenian enclave within the Republic of Azerbaijan.
You write that ethnic Armenians "call it liberated Nagorno-Karabakh."


New Horror Tale: Invasion of the Discarded Pit Bulls
Pit bulls, the dogs notorious for their viciousness, are posing an increasing problem in the inner cities of the New York City region.
Officials say the dogs are roaming neighborhoods in Bridgeport, Stamford and other Connecticut cities in growing numbers after being discarded by street gangs and drug dealers, who use them for protection or match them in dog fights to pick up bets.
The problem is also plaguing cities in New York and New Jersey.


Christopher Heads for Mideast
Secretary of State Warren Christopher set off on a weeklong trip to the Middle East today that will complete the details of the meeting in Washington next week between the leaders of Israel and Jordan -- and highlight the absence of concrete progress between Israel and Syria.
Mr.
Christopher has no intention of trying to use the meeting between Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and King Hussein of Jordan at the White House on July 25 to pressure President Hafez al-Assad of Syria to make concessions of his own, senior Administration officials traveling with Mr.
Christopher said.


Coalition Pays Taxes
To the Editor:
In Anna Quindlen's July 6 tirade about the Christian Coalition's driving the Republican Party, she states that "the Christian Coalition wants to have it both ways, keeping the tax-exempt status of a religious organization, while behaving like a political one." The Christian Coalition is not a tax-exempt religious organization.
This is stated at the bottom of all of its literature requesting donations.
CAROL JEANNE JOHANNES  Rochester, July 7, 1994


In U.S., Crime Strikes Youth At High Rate
While youngsters 12 to 17 years old account for less than 10 percent of the American population, they are assaulted, robbed and raped at a higher rate than any other age group, constituting 23 percent of the victims of such crimes, according to a Justice Department study made public today.
The study, done by the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention in the department, found that in 1992 people 12 to 17 years old were victims of 1.55 million violent crimes, an increase of 23 percent since 1987.
According to the study, 1 juvenile in 13 was a victim of violent crime.
By comparison, the rate for people 35 years old and above was 1 in 72.
The office did not look at homicide rates.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Charles Allen Jr., an investment banker, misidentified a survivor, Terry Kramer, in some copies.
She is his daughter, not his sister.


A Team Electrifies A Country
After 120 minutes of nail-biting anxiety, the world's largest soccer nation exploded in an off-season Carnaval tonight, as horn-blaring caravans streaked through streets, celebrants danced the samba behind booming drum corps and delirious fans waded fully clothed into the warm waters of the South Atlantic.
From Amazon villages to sophisticated coastal metropolises, joyous crowds blocked traffic, children exploded firecrackers, women in string bikinis gyrated to samba steps and everyone chanted over and over: "Brasil -- tetracampeao," or Brazil -- four-time world champion.


A 4th World Cup for Brazil
"Making soccer history" was the theme United States organizers chose for the 15th World Cup, and yesterday Brazil played along, becoming the first nation to win the World Cup four times and the first to win it in a penalty-kick shootout.
Brazil defeated Italy, also a three-time champion, in that one-on-one tie breaker after a scoreless tie in regulation time and 30 minutes of overtime.
As 94,194 people sat on the edge of their Rose Bowl seats in Pasadena, Calif., and some 2 billion television viewers worldwide grew white-knuckled, Brazil converted three penalty shots to Italy's two.
Italy's star, Roberto Baggio, missed his team's final shot, sending it over the crossbar.


Everybody in the Pool, as Long as You Abide by the Rules


Robert M. Williams, Brigadier General, 79
Brig.
Gen.
Robert M. Williams, a retired Army lawyer, died on Tuesday at his home on Hilton Head Island, S.C.
He was 79.
The cause was heart disease, said his daughter Karen Williams.


Ship Is Focus Of Inquiry Into Disease
Nearly a third of the passengers who went to a Hudson River pier on Saturday planning to take a luxury cruise to Bermuda canceled their trips after Federal investigators warned them that three passengers on a previous cruise had been hospitalized with Legionnaires' disease.
Health officials said yesterday there did not appear to be enough risk to quarantine the vessel, the Horizon, which is operated by Celebrity Cruises, and the ship sailed out of New York Harbor late Saturday.
But two investigators from the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention were along, trying to determine the source of the disease.


The Royal's 'Mayerling' Gets Two New Casts
"Mayerling," Kenneth MacMillan's three-act ballet about lust and death among the Hapsburgs, has some choreographic highs and lows.
But as the Royal Ballet displayed with two superb new casts, this 1978 costume drama, designed with dazzle by Nicholas Georgiadis, is also a showcase for the danced acting in which the British company is unsurpassed.
The season, which draws to a close with performances of "The Sleeping Beauty" at the Metropolitan Opera House tonight and tomorrow night, has shown off one of the most tightly knit ensembles in the dance world.


Corrections
An article in some copies yesterday about a Brooklyn fire that killed a man and his son misstated their last name.
They were Cleveland and Nashaun McCord, not McCloud.


Credit Robert Moses for Lower East Side's Hamilton Fish Pool
To the Editor:
While the architects Carrere and Hastings deserve credit for designing Hamilton Fish Park in 1898 (news article, July 10), your attribution of the pool to them doesn't hold water.


Aristide's Stand on Invasion Is Seen as Reflecting Distrust of U.S.
It has become a predictable refrain.
Each time the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, is confronted with questions about military intervention in his country, he replies with a wince that Haiti's Constitution bars him from calling for such an action.
But as the Clinton Administration builds its case for the use of force in removing the military leaders who overthrew Father Aristide, the exiled President's position has come under increased scrutiny.
And as this has happened, many experts have said that Haitian law alone cannot explain Father Aristide's coyness.


A British Perspective On Two Blues Legends
The Search for Robert Johnson  Bravo, tonight at 8 Produced and directed by Chris Hunt;  Caz Gorham, associate producer.
The South Bank Show John Lee Hooker  Bravo, Friday night at 8  Produced and directed by Tony Knox.
Bravo is having a "Summer Blues Festival" this week, the lineup going from past to present and including names like Leadbelly, Ray Charles and Eric Clapton.
Two outstanding entries are devoted to the blues and, reinforcing the impression that Europeans care more about our music than Americans do, both programs were made in Britain.
"The Search for Robert Johnson," tonight at 8, follows the often murky biographical trail of a great country blues artist who was murdered in 1938 at age 27.
"The South Bank Show: John Lee Hooker" traces the extraordinary career of a musician who, now in his 70's, has made more recordings than any other blues artist and who today, still performing, is honored by performers like Mr.
Clapton, the Rolling Stones and Van Morrison.
Each program adds up to a riveting combination of biography and American history.


On Cause of Psychosis There's No Agreement
To the Editor:
Further on the controversy between Dr.
Peter R. Breggin (letter, June 28), against neuroleptics for psychotics, and Dr.
Richard A. Friedman (letter, July 7), for neuroleptics for psychotics: I think Dr.
Breggin's discovery "that nearly all the street people would rather endure the risks of homelessness -- including starvation and physical abuse -- than subject themselves to psychiatric drug treatment" cannot be ignored.


Bitter Reminder of a Lethal World War II Tragedy
Just six weeks after the Normandy invasion and three days before United States forces landed on Guam to retake the island from the Japanese, World War II brought its deadly havoc home to an ammunition base here with a huge explosion that killed 320 people and wounded 390 others.
The explosion at the United States Naval Magazine at Port Chicago, 25 miles northeast of San Francisco, had the force of 5,000 tons of TNT, enough to be felt as far away as Nevada and to vaporize the bodies of those closest to the blast.
It also sank two ships that were being loaded and destroyed a train, a 1,200-foot pier and most of the ammunition depot.
Of the 320 killed, 202 were black sailors working as stevedores.


Reaux in Free Concert
The soprano Angelina Reaux is to sing a free concert of songs by Ricky Ian Gordon today at 12:30 P.M. in Bryant Park, Avenue of the Americas near 42d Street.
With the composer at the piano, she will offer five new pieces and other songs.
Mr.
Gordon used words by Langston Hughes, Edna St.
Vincent Millay, Delmore Schwartz, Frank O'Hara, Dorothy Parker and others for the works that will be performed.
Rain date: Wednesday at the same time.


Nigerian Rulers Said to Reach An Accord With Opposition
Nigeria's military leaders have reached an understanding with democracy advocates under which the imprisoned opposition leader, Moshood Abiola, would be released, the Government said today.
But the agreement, reached late Saturday night with officials of the Nigerian Labor Congress, would mean in effect that Mr.
Abiola and his supporters would have to cease demands for democracy, a prospect that seems unlikely given the increasingly bold pro-democracy movement here.
Under the plan, the military Government would allow Mr.
Abiola's "unconditional" release if he and other political detainees agreed not to resort to further "disturbances of the peace," according to a statement issued after the meeting.


Taylor Looks At a TV Deal
Is the former Giants linebacker Lawrence Taylor headed from the golf course to the television booth?
Several people familiar with the situation said Taylor is close to joining HBO Sports as a football analyst and is intensifying talks with Fox to become an analyst for that network, too.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Three Federal agencies are investigating accusations that General Electric managers compromised the safety of military and commercial aircraft.
At issue is whether the company ignored warnings that it was not properly grounding jet engines to protect against electrical interference, jeopardizing safety and violating the terms of its contract.
The case is the latest blow in what has been a bruising year for G.E.'s image as corporate America's role model for management and performance.  [ Page A1. ]


Women in Prison Don't Get Equal Treatment; Crackdown to Backfire
To the Editor:
So precinct-level New York City police officers are going to be redeployed to crack down on prostitutes and clients, and the Public Morals Squad is to crack down on inside sex work businesses: brothels, escort services and illegal massage parlors (news article, July 6).
And Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani guarantees that no corruption will take place.
And we will all feel safer.


Underdog Festival Reveals Universe Beyond Rock
The image of this summer of rock festivals and stadium tours is a T-shirted teen-ager dancing in the sun.
World of Music, Arts and Dance (Womad), which brought nine hours of rock, rap, reggae and world music to the Jones Beach Theater on Saturday afternoon, changed the soundtrack behind the image.
Suburban rock fans were dancing to speedy, tangy music by Ashkabad, from Turkmenistan, and clapping along with Mustapha Tettey Addy's drummers from Ghana.
Womad was doing its job.
Womad is an underdog festival.
It doesn't have a legendary trademark like Woodstock; it doesn't have a cool reputation like Lollapalooza.
With Peter Gabriel, Arrested Development, Midnight Oil, Live, Lucky Dube and the Levellers as its headliners, it falls between alternative-rock cachet and mainstream bankability.
Its bands tend to offer positive ideas rather than raw anger or despair, while its purpose -- to introduce listeners to music from around the world while presenting enough rock to fill arenas -- has both a quaint do-gooder air and some built-in discrepancies.


Abroad at Home; Where Power Lies
When Robert B. Fiske Jr., the independent counsel on Whitewater, reported that there was nothing to the horror stories about the death of Vincent Foster, that Mr.
Foster had indeed committed suicide, I expected that those who had spread the stories would be called to account.
The Rev.
Pat Robertson, for example, the leader of the Christian coalition, had luridly suggested that Mr.
Foster, deputy White House counsel, was murdered and the crime covered up by the Clinton Administration.
Rush Limbaugh, the talk-show host, broadcast a report that Mr.
Foster died in an Administration "safe house" and his body was then spirited to the park where it was found.


Saatchi Is Dismissed By Paddington
The Paddington Corporation has unexpectedly dismissed Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising of New York, one of its two main agencies, by withdrawing distilled spirits brands from Saatchi with billings estimated at $10 million to $15 million.
Advertising executives, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said Paddington would move the brands to Mullen Advertising of Wenham, Mass.
Paddington said on Friday that it would name a replacement agency this week.
Anthony P. Foglio, president and chief executive of Paddington, in Fort Lee, N.J., said in a statement that the company wanted to "continue to challenge our thinking," adding that the new agency would "offer a more intensified focus on both established and emerging brands."


Debt Offerings Scheduled for This Week
The Treasury's financings this week are confined to today's weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.25 percent, and the rate on the six-month bill was 4.68 percent.


How Low the Dollar?; U.S. Wants Currency to Reach Own Level To Help Economy and Clinton's Re-election
The Clinton Administration keeps insisting that its decision to let the dollar reach its own level is the right one, even though currency traders plainly do not: the dollar has sunk by one-sixth against the German mark this year and reached a postwar low against the Japanese yen.
Strikingly, though, President Clinton is winning points from economists who are more concerned about jobs and corporate profits than the number of yen or marks that a dollar will buy next Tuesday.
The White House's "rhetoric has been a heck of a lot worse than its policy," said Peter Kenen, an economist at Princeton University.


Two Days Later, Keenan Is Back: As Coach of the Blues
Mike Keenan, who abruptly quit as coach of the Rangers only Friday night, completed a stunning weekend of job-shopping and job-hopping last night when he joined the St.
Louis Blues as coach and general manager.
"This has come around very quickly," Keenan said.
"I'm very fortunate to have this opportunity." Asked if he planned to fulfill the five years of his new contract, Keenan replied: "I hope so. I hope I'm here longer than that."


The German Special Relationship
Germany marked the passing of an era last Tuesday with the departure of U.S. troops from Berlin and the formal end of four-power occupation.
President Clinton and Chancellor Helmut Kohl stood side by side at the Brandenburg Gate, where the Berlin wall once divided and disfigured the city.
Germany's highest court that very day confirmed that the country's Constitution poses no impediment to involving German troops in military operations abroad.
That is reassuring for those who believe Germany needs to carry its weight in securing Europe.
But the issues of America's troop presence and Germany's military role have obscured the changed relationship between the two countries.
Once Germany was militarily dependent on NATO and deferred to American wishes; now the two cooperate as equals with common interests.


Portrait of a Fund-Raiser: Seeking G.O.P. Friends
When Rudolph W. Giuliani first ran for mayor in 1989, William W. Koeppel raised money from everyone he knew.
He even asked his tenants and contractors in his buildings for donations, amassing more than $100,000 for the campaign.
The young real-estate executive wanted to be sure he was the top fund-raiser at a dinner for Mr.
Giuliani where President Bush was to speak, political associates said.
The winner of the fund-raising contest would introduce the President.


Kate H. Klein, 78, Political Volunteer
Kate Hitschman Klein, who for 25 years helped guide New Yorkers with problems through the labyrinth of municipal government at City Hall, died on Friday at the New York University Medical Center.
Mrs.
Klein, who lived in Manhattan, was 78.
The cause was cancer, her sister, Eva Mevorah, said.
Mrs.
Klein was appointed by Mayor John V. Lindsay as the head of his newly founded Mayor's Volunteer Action Center in City Hall, and she continued under three successive mayors as head of what was renamed by Mayor Abraham D. Beame as the Mayor's Action Center.
Originally a volunteer organization, the group evolved into a question-answering, problem-solving body of professionals from several dozen ethnic backgrounds that answered inquiries and complaints.
The staff members, who collectively spoke more than a dozen languages, directed New Yorkers to particular agencies that might help with problems.
Mrs.
Klein retired in 1991.
Mrs. Klein was born in Vienna and immigrated to New York shortly before World War II.
Mrs. Klein is survived by her sister, of Manhattan.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A DREAM GROWING CLOSE TO REALITY
Randalls and Wards Islands -- once home to a potter's field and a poor house and now linked by landfill -- are a place of failed dreams.
Now there is a new dream afloat, one that would see the shaggy islands become the city's recreational center for everyone from world-class sprinters to bar league softball players to children from Harlem.
The dream is that the thousands who annually find their way to the islands -- oddly obscure despite being at the city's geographic center -- will swell to millions, including busloads of poor children.
Another hope, more softly articulated, is that new stadiums, field houses and refurbished ball fields will become a foundation for enticing the Olympics to New York in the next century.
B3.


Jean Borotra Is Dead at 95; One of Tennis's '4 Musketeers'
Jean Borotra, the remarkably robust Frenchman whose dashing manner and attacking tennis game earned him the memorable sobriquet, "the Bounding Basque," died yesterday in Arbonne, France.
He was 95.
Borotra's family, which did not give a cause of death, said he died at his home, in southern France


North Korea Said to Dip Into Rice Reserves to Bar Unrest
Reports are circulating here that North Korea's Government, fearing unrest, is dipping into military rice reserves to relieve the hunger of people who have flocked to the capital to mourn the nation's late leader, Kim Il Sung.
Like many reports from the secretive Communist country, this one is difficult to verify.
But it reflects what analysts say will be the reality facing Kim Il Sung's son and expected successor, Kim Jong Il: The way to his people's hearts will not be through his father's revolutionary slogans but through their stomachs.


Misguided School Reform
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has made no secret of his unhappiness with New York City's school system.
Last week he received a proposal that would largely break up the central Board of Education.
Although he did not fully endorse the plan, the Mayor said he would like to "crush" the board's infamous bureaucracy.
But the plan given the Mayor seems shaped by politics rather than a sensible, coherent approach to improving schools.
If Mr.
Giuliani seriously wants to help city schoolchildren, he will stop the rhetorical excesses and show calm leadership on education reform.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; His Daily News career cut short, Earl Caldwell sees a disturbing racial divide in journalism.
IT has been three months since Earl Caldwell, who was once one of the country's better-known black journalists, either resigned or was dismissed from his job as a columnist at The Daily News.
And even he seems not quite sure how to explain what happened.
"There was a time I had nothing but affection for people in the news business," he said over lunch the other day.
"But everything has become so racial now. It has put people in hard places."


After Davies Doffs Cap, Daniel Wins the Playoff
In an apparent celebratory gesture, Laura Davies tossed her visor into the grandstand overlooking the 18th hole at the Wykagyl Country Club late this afternoon.
The 30-year-old Briton, the leading money winner on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour, had just closed with a par-5 that gave her a final-round 66 and a come-from-behind one-stroke lead over Beth Daniel in the final round of the $650,000 Big Apple Classic.


A Lost Hurrah: Italy's Premier Sees His Aura Fade
Ever since he joined the political fray six months ago, friends and enemies have agreed on one thing about Silvio Berlusconi: With his sound-bite sincerity and his feel-good messages, he was, as the headlines said, a Vendor of Dreams.
Just one week ago, as the Prime Minister, svelte and smiling, played host to Bill Clinton and other leaders at an economic summit meeting in Naples, the tycoon-turned-politician seemed as much on a roll as his nation's team seemed then to be in the World Cup soccer tournament.


Mothers in Prison, Children in Limbo; hen Inmates Are Parents, the Pain of Incarceration Is Spread
Every three months, a 12-year-old from Long Island goes to a secret place in Manhattan to visit her mother.
She tells friends that her mother is in Las Vegas, "dealing with her divorce." In fact, she is in the Bayview Correctional Facility serving a 3 1/2-to-7-year sentence for attempted sale of drugs.
"I don't want the whole world to know, because I don't want anybody to judge me because of what my mother has done," said the girl, who lives with her maternal grandparents and a younger brother and sister.


Mozart's Restyling Of Handel
Was Mozart headed into a neo-Baroque period at his death?
Something of the sort is suggested by such late works as the Requiem, "La Clemenza di Tito" and the F-minor organ fantasia, although proto-Romantic pieces from the same period indicate otherwise.
Mozart's Baroque interests were inspired by Baron Gottfried van Swieten, a knowledgeable music patron who worked to buttress the failing reputations of Bach and Handel late in the 18th century.
Mozart made arrangements of several Handel works for the baron's Baroque concerts; the last of these, "Ode for St. Cecilia's Day," was performed at Avery Fisher Hall on Friday as part of a Baroque-oriented week of Mostly Mozart.
Adapting the "Ode" for Classical forces, Mozart added some inner voices but did not actively re-compose; there is nothing unmistakably Mozartean.
Instead, one hears a rather anonymous, high-gloss "modernization," inferior but not detrimental to Handel's original.
Gerard Schwarz led an enthusiastic, extroverted account, with broad, operatic vocal work by the tenor Gary Lakes and, commandingly, the soprano Christine Brewer (both singing in German, although not the translation printed in the program).
What I missed were the "sharp violins" of John Dryden's poem, the exact, passionate articulation on which this music thrives.
The same lack of clarity bedeviled Handel's Concerto Grosso in B minor (Op. 6, No. 12), first on the program.


Women in Prison Don't Get Equal Treatment
To the Editor:
"Women Doing Crime, Women Doing Time" (The Week in Review, July 3) recognizes that women are being arrested at a higher rate than men (though the number of women incarcerated is still lower), which brings up the issue of disparate treatment within correctional facilities.


Taunts Focus On Incumbent In Virginia
The three challengers to Senator Charles S. Robb ganged up on him at a debate here on Saturday night, taunting him for declining to answer a question.
The Senator parried with low-decibel, technical answers and said he planned to be "consistently boring" during the campaign.
Mr.
Robb, the Democratic nominee in the Virginia Senate race, has a slight lead in the polls over his rivals: the Republican nominee, Oliver L. North; a Democrat running as an independent, former Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder, and another independent, J. Marshall Coleman, who is usually a Republican.
"This is tag-team wrestling, three on one," Mr.
Robb said today.
"I'm perceived as the front-runner, and all these fellas want my job."


For One Shining Moment, Brazil Has the World at Its Feet
Many would have preferred another solution.
Sudden death.
A full replay after a day's rest.
But rules are rules, and so the first World Cup held in the United States condensed itself to the first final ever decided by penalty kicks.
Out of this unforgiving moment came an unimaginable result.
The match ended with Brazil holding aloft its first World Cup trophy in 24 years, having gained a 3-2 edge on penalty kicks after 120 scoreless minutes, but this is a championship destined to be remembered less for how it was won than for how it was lost.


Everyone Needs an Editor. But God?
Painted Paragraphs Inspired Description for Writers and Readers: A Handbook for the Soul By Donald Newlove 171 pages.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $14.95.
Invented Voices Inspired Dialogue for Writers and Readers: A Handbook for the Soul By Donald Newlove 203 pages.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $16.95.
Donald Newlove is not shy in the presence of literature in his entertaining "Painted Paragraphs: Inspired Description for Writers and Readers." This is the second volume, published last fall, of his trilogy on writing, which began with "First Paragraphs: Inspired Openings for Writers and Readers" (1992) and concluded with his just published "Invented Voices: Inspired Dialogue for Writers and Readers."
In "Painted Paragraphs," Mr.
Newlove not only quotes a long passage from an earlier book of his own, "Those Drinking Days: Myself and Other Writers" (1981), he also rewrites passages by the likes of Hemingway, Conrad, Thoreau and the nature writer Henry Beston, removing what he refers to as piffle.
This is not always to the altered work's advantage, even considering Mr.
Newlove's apologies: "O.K., beat me, beat me! But this is the way I read things. I depiffle, whether it's Thoreau or God."


Smith Puts Negative Spin on Rotation
The Mets, a team with relatively little to brag about this season, have laid claim to some pretty impressive pitching of late.
From July 4 through July 16, their starters were 6-1 with a 1.45 earned run average.
They had allowed only 56 hits in 10 games, recorded 55 strikeouts and delivered 9 quality starts in 10 tries.


A Tradition Of 28 Years: Everybody To the Pool
Of course Audree Weil was sitting in the wooden pool chair behind the first lifeguard stand and next to the palm tree.
Since she winters in Puerto Rico, the pool staff planted the palm tree on her behalf several years ago.
On a hot summer day, anyone searching for Ms.
Weil knows that that is where she will be.
Not only is she there day after day -- arriving the moment the doors open -- she is there year after year.
For 28 years, which is exactly how long the pool has existed.
She was watching the clock, getting into the slow rhythms of the day.
In three minutes, it would be 2 P.M.
Every hour, on the hour, from 1 to 5, was the cherished adult swim period.
The five million kids who seemed to crowd the pool the rest of the day were banned for 20 minutes, and only those 18 and over could swim.


CHRONICLE
This year's awards season isn't quite over yet.
RITA GAM, the actress, writer and producer, will receive the United Nations Society of Writers Award of Excellence tomorrow at a reception at the Manhattan home of Hans Janitschek, president of the organization.
She is being honored as host and co-producer of a series on the film industry in various countries, titled "World of Film." The series, five parts so far with more to come, has been shown on PBS and will be repeated starting tomorrow on WNYC.


A United Yemen Fosters Democracy in Mideast
To the Editor:
"The civil war tearing Yemen apart threatens wider troubles," you write in "Yemen: Risky War, Cautious Response" (editorial, July 5).
Yet you fail to mention the true vested interest of the neighboring countries in the region, namely the Saudis and their allies.


THE HEALTH CARE DEBATE: Washington at Work; For Majority Leader, a Quest For a Health Care Consensus
Being majority leader of the House is a fine job when a majority exists behind a bill.
But building a majority is an entirely different experience, a painstaking exercise in ego stroking, family therapy, ideological fire-walking and endless nudging toward compromise among members passionately at odds.
This is one of those moments for Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the man who must build a consensus for a health care bill in the next four weeks.
His task is variously described as "herculean" and "almost undoable" by his colleagues; it is clearly not for the faint of heart or the short of temper.


Magazines Try to Fill a Void in Minority Hiring
The magazine industry prides itself on portraying and influencing all aspects of American society.
But within magazines, the lack of minority journalists is widely considered an embarrassment.
Industry figures on minority hiring do not even exist, and most magazine companies will not disclose their own numbers, saying this is proprietary information.
Publishing executives, however, say the real reason is that the record is too dismal to disclose.


A Lost Hurrah: Italy's Premier Sees His Aura Fade
Ever since he joined the political fray six months ago, friends and enemies have agreed on one thing about Silvio Berlusconi: With his sound-bite sincerity and his feel-good messages, he was, as the headlines said, a Vendor of Dreams.
Just one week ago, as the Prime Minister, svelte and smiling, played host to Bill Clinton and other leaders at an economic summit meeting in Naples, the tycoon-turned-politician seemed as much on a roll as his nation's team seemed then to be in the World Cup soccer tournament.


Comet Pummels Jupiter, Revealing Details
The titanic bombardment of Jupiter by a dying comet rained more mountain-size fragments on the giant planet yesterday, and new pockmarks and blemishes proliferated on its cloud-covered face.
Although astronomers were unsure whether the bombardment would continue as violently as it began on Saturday, astronomers at observatories around the world hoped that each fresh cometary explosion would reveal hitherto concealed details of the planet's structure.


Interpublic-Ammirati Deal Expected Today
The Interpublic Group of Companies is expected to announce today that it will acquire Ammirati &amp; Puris and merge Ammirati's New York office with the troubled New York office of Interpublic's Lintas Worldwide agency, say advertising executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
After the acquisition, the merged New York operation will be known as Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, the executives said last week, and will be headed by Martin Puris, the elegant, aggressive president and chief executive of Ammirati.


New Musical 'Tempest,' Servant of Shakespeare
For the opera composer, "The Tempest" is both enticement and trap.
Its irresistible ingredients include familial betrayal, violence among the upper classes, sweeping fantasy, the power of magic, and above all the musical imagery that Shakespeare gives to speech.
"Set my words," Shakespeare seems to say.
"Turn them into melody and harmony."
But a play is not an opera.
Peter Westergaard's new setting of Shakespeare's last play told us this tonight.
The two art forms run on separate clocks.
Great lines spoken have a swiftness denied them when they are stretched against musical movement.


A Promise on Coverage; a Hint on Abortion
The Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, told the nation's governors today that he would not compromise on the goal of providing health insurance for all Americans, but a Clinton Administration official hinted at an accommodation on the question of insurance coverage for abortion services.
Senator Mitchell, a Maine Democrat, said he was having great difficulty blending health care bills into a form that would guarantee health insurance for all, restrain costs and command the support of a majority in the Senate.


A Bawdy and Comic Thai Troupe
The performers of the Pathumsilp Troupe of Phetburi, Thailand, find work by hanging out their sign in the courtyard of the city temple and waiting for patrons to come by.
It is hard to imagine they are unemployed for long, given the irresistibly goofy humor and quick improvisatory skills the company displayed in a program of Lakhon Chatri, one of Thailand's oldest forms of dance-drama, on Saturday night at the Asia Society.
After three short traditional music and dance introductions, the troupe presented selections from "Phra Apaimani," which tells the story of a prince with a magic flute and his escape from a seductive sea-demon that once kidnapped him and wants him back.
A burst of flute music eventually does in the demon, who dies with all the gurgling pathos of Margaret Hamilton in "The Wizard of Oz." The story then switches to a boy's attempts to save his mermaid mother from a lustful pirate.


A Lost Hurrah: Italy's Premier Sees His Aura Fade
Ever since he joined the political fray six months ago, friends and enemies have agreed on one thing about Silvio Berlusconi: With his sound-bite sincerity and his feel-good messages, he was, as the headlines said, a Vendor of Dreams.
Just one week ago, as the Prime Minister, svelte and smiling, played host to Bill Clinton and other leaders at an economic summit meeting in Naples, the tycoon-turned-politician seemed as much on a roll as his nation's team seemed then to be in the World Cup soccer tournament.


As Giants Start, Attention Turns to the Quarterbacks
When Giants quarterbacks Dave Brown and Kent Graham walked off the field today after the team's first day of workouts, they automatically went to two separate spots on the field.
And, predictably, the horde of reporters split into two groups and followed them.
The questions they fielded were boring, predictable and even silly.
And this was just Day 1.
The big event of the Giants' first day of practice to open the 1994 season was what the quarterbacks had to say.
Quarterback duels often degenerate into total nonsense, and this one is well on its way.
It is important, of course, because as the quarterbacks, go the Giants may go.
And the pressure on these two young players will be great.


Patents; A small company offers a scanning device to make faxes private by encoding their computer bits.
THE convergence of computers and telephones has created a whole new industry for moving information around the globe.
With it come new economic opportunities as well as challenges to social and legal standards.
A good illustration may be in the evolution of the facsimile machine.
When they first appeared, fax machines could send and receive documents on heat-sensitive paper, but not much else.
Now they are programmable, use plain paper and laser printers, and can send one document to multiple places.
There is even a car fax machine.
In spite of these advances, faxes still have a basic handicap -- they are not private.
Anyone can read documents as they emerge.


Trouble at the Prado: Even the Roof Leaks
As chairman of the Prado's board, Jose Antonio Fernandez Ordonez should be cheerfully preparing to celebrate the museum's 175th anniversary this fall.
Instead he appears to be almost in mourning, repeating like a mantra that the Prado's state of health is "lamentable."
His gloom is understandable.
The museum has had four directors in just over three years; its budget has been frozen since 1986; it desperately needs extra space for its collection, and it is short of qualified staff.
Even its roof leaks.
"It's a lamentable tale," Mr.
Fernandez Ordonez said.
"It's good enough for a novel."


Yanks Sweep Seattle With a Thunderclap
For the second time in three days, Seattle Manager Lou Piniella was not available for post-game comment.
That usually means one of two things: Either the Yankees are hitting the ball awfully well or the Mariners and their woeful pitching staff have very little to talk about.
Somewhere in between you will find a team with new self-esteem and another that needs some help.


Undercover at G.E. -- A special report; F.B.I. Inquiry on Jet Engines: New Jolt to Company Image
Dawn was just a streak in the sky when Ian Johnson drove into the lot behind a pizza parlor last winter and waited anxiously for Stephen Kosky, an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
In a ritual repeated each morning, the agent removed the tape from a tiny recorder hidden on Mr.
Johnson's body and replaced it with a fresh one.
An hour later, after returning home for breakfast, Mr.
Johnson, his palms sweaty, would flash his company identification card at the guard at Gate 42 and walk into the General Electric Company's sprawling aircraft engine plant at Evendale, Ohio, a few miles north of here.
There, he secretly recorded dozens of conversations with fellow engineers and supervisors over six months last winter and spring.


On the Space Nostalgia Frontier in Florida
Here on what Floridians call the Space Coast, where Route A1A changes into Astronaut Boulevard, a new spirit of hope has landed at the Moon Hut, home of the moonburger.
Just maybe, said Poppy Holiasmenou, one of the restaurant's owners, all this talk about the 25th anniversary of the first moon walk will be one small step for selling the house specialty, a relic of the space kitsch that once reigned here.


ARAB POLICE CLASH WITH ISRAELI ARMY DURING GAZA RIOT
Israeli forces and the new Palestinian police fired on each other for the first time today as rioting by angry Gazan laborers led to daylong battles with the Israelis.
Two workers were killed and more than 100 other people were wounded.
The intense fighting at the northern lip of the Gaza Strip, the bloodiest since the start of Palestinian self-rule two months ago, evoked some of the nastier days of the Palestinian uprising, which was supposed to be consigned to history in Gaza with the withdrawal of Israeli soldiers from towns and refugee camps.


Executive to Rejoin DDB Needham Shop
John Staffen, a creative executive who left DDB Needham New York only five months ago to join Ogilvy &amp; Mather Toronto as an executive vice president and creative director, will return to DDB Needham New York as one of six executive vice presidents and creative partners.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  MORE DEATH IN RWANDA
Rwandan rebels continued attacking in an area where refugees were fleeing to the border, causing many to be trampled to death.
They also threatened to invade the French "safe haven." A1


A United Yemen Fosters Democracy in Mideast
To the Editor:
"The civil war tearing Yemen apart threatens wider troubles," you write in "Yemen: Risky War, Cautious Response" (editorial, July 5).
Yet you fail to mention the true vested interest of the neighboring countries in the region, namely the Saudis and their allies.


Keenan Takes Job As St. Louis Coach
Two days after he quit as the Rangers' coach, charging them with breaching his contract by not paying him a bonus on time, Mike Keenan signed as coach and general manager of the St.
Louis Blues.


No Headline
"The vast majority of taxpayers have always seen tuberculosis as the disease of the impoverished, the immigrant and the homeless. But La Quinta points out that tuberculosis has come home to roost with a vengeance." -- DR.
RICHARD JACKSON.  [ B6:1. ]


CHRONICLE
In 1963, GEORGE WHITE, then a movie story editor, decided that he had to rescue a farm complex in Waterford, Conn., from being burned down as an exercise for the local fire department.
He founded the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center there, as a place where playwrights, directors and other people in the theater could assemble in the summer to discuss the craft of theater and develop their works.
On Saturday, the center is holding a barbecue celebrating its longevity, and Mr.
White, now the president of the center, pointed out the other day that it has much to celebrate.
"Two Nobel laureates, two Oscar, six Tony and five Pulitzer winners have all been here," he said.


Rioting Evokes Days of Arab Uprising
It was a scene from the past: Sirens blaring, ambulances carrying scores of wounded to hospitals, hundreds of youths throwing stones at Israeli soldiers who shot back with bullets and tear gas at the edge of the Gaza Strip.
Despite the peace accord between the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel, Gaza was seething again today.


DIALOGUE: Arsenals Abroad; Proliferation In Disguise
This week the House takes up a bill that would make it easier for terrorist nations to build nuclear weapons, chemical weapons and the missiles to deliver them.
The fateful debate will focus on the sale of strategic technology -- items like the high-tech furnaces, presses and machine tools that almost gave Saddam Hussein an atomic bomb.
The bill, whose chief sponsor is Representative Sam Gejdenson of Connecticut, would leave U.S. controls no stronger than those of Germany, Switzerland and Italy, the main suppliers of Iraq's nuclear, chemical and missile plants.
The stated goal is to protect American exporters from unfair competition; instead, the bill would end American leadership in export control.


CBS, QVC and Comcast: A Tale of Personalities
The ill-fated plan to merge CBS and QVC Inc. would have involved billions of dollars and the futures of thousands of employees, but the outcome was determined largely by the personalities of its three principal players, executives close to the deal say.
"The deal was put together because of personality and it fell apart because of personality," said one entertainment industry executive.
The needs of Barry Diller, chairman of QVC, and Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of CBS, fueled the original deal, the executive said, and those of Brian L. Roberts, president of the Comcast Corporation, were significantly responsible for defusing it.
Comcast, which already owned 15.6 percent of QVC, effectively ended the merger last week by offering to acquire all of QVC for $2.1 billion.


The Moon Landing: 25 Years After Apollo 11; Wistful Pride and Cynicism Color Americans' Memories of Apollo 11
Twenty-five years after the United States put a man on the moon, Americans still take great pride in that stirring, epochal achievement.
But it is a tempered pride.
Conversations with dozens of Americans find a pensive, even melancholy longing for the heady days of July 1969, when the nation, despite crippling divisions over issues like the Vietnam War and racial equality, somehow still managed to pull together and collectively focus on and attain an awesome goal.


World Economies


Pataki Challenged Directly To Bare Tax Returns Now
Seeking to move his teetering campaign from defense to offense, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's campaign manager called today for Senator George E. Pataki, the Governor's leading Republican rival, to release his tax returns immediately.
Mr.
Pataki, a freshman Senator from Putnam County, has been promising that he would make his financial records available for inspection since he was nominated at the Republican state convention in late May.
But he has yet to do so, saying his lawyers and accountants are still compiling information.


Telmex in Competition, So Far With Just Itself


Buddhist Fans Send Baggio Their Blessings
Hundreds of Bangladeshis crowded into a Buddhist pagoda in Cox's Bazar yesterday to pray for the World Cup fitness of Roberto Baggio, the Italian soccer star who paid for the temple's renovation, local officials said.
Bangladeshi fans were deeply worried by reports that their soccer idol's chances of playing in the final against Brazil were only 50-50 because of a strained hamstring, the officials said in this resort town.


Worth the Wait: Price Wins British Open With 50-Foot Putt on 17
There have been longer putts that won major championships.
There have been more difficult putts, more twisting, turning, breaking putts.
But there may never have been a more dramatic -- or cathartic -- putt than the 50-footer for eagle that Nick Price faced to win the 123d British Open on the Ailsa Course at Turnberry today.
Trailing Jesper Parnevik by a stroke on the penultimate hole, Price stood on the verge of greatness wondering whether he might have once again let this major championship slip away.


A Weary Bugno Leads Way for Dropouts
Looking drawn and stunned, Gianni Bugno sat at a table this morning and tried to explain why he would not be starting the 14th stage of the Tour de France in a few minutes.
No spark, said Bugno, an Italian who finished second in the Tour in 1991 and who won the world road-race championship that same year and the year after.
No spark, the leader of the Polti team repeated wearily, no legs and no ambition.
He had suffered enough since the 81st Tour began on July 2.
He could see no point in continuing for the final week, including four days of climbing in the Alps.


For Cultural Institutions, Art of Collaboration Is Biggest Show in Town
Veronique LeMelle, executive director of the small Jamaica Arts Center in Queens, has grown weary of waiting in dread for each year's budget to emerge from City Hall.
Whether the news is good or bad, the anxiety and uncertainty can be devastating for a small institution such as hers, planning only a few months ahead on the cultural calendar.
In 1991, her innovative combinations of art and social-service programs -- including an H.I.V. risk-reduction program in several Queens shelters for the homeless using quilt-making and theater -- suffered significant cutbacks.
This year, to her amazement, she got a slight increase.


Sports of The Times; When Shea Offered a Reason to Believe
ONE wonders what inspired Charles Dickens to write about the best of times and the worst of times.
Could it have been a day like the one that unfolded at Shea Stadium yesterday, when the 1969 Mets and their miracle collided with the harsh modern-day realities of the current fraternity in Flushing?


James Joll, 76, British Historian; Studied Origins of World War I
James Joll, a British historian of modern Europe who interwove the history of politics and the history of ideas, died on Tuesday at his home in London.
He was 76.
He had cancer of the larynx, said John Golding, a friend.


A Team Electrifies A Country
After 120 minutes of nail-biting anxiety, the world's largest soccer nation exploded in an off-season Carnaval tonight, as horn-blaring caravans streaked through streets, celebrants danced the samba behind booming drum corps and delirious fans waded fully clothed into the warm waters of the South Atlantic.
From Amazon villages to sophisticated coastal metropolises, joyous crowds blocked traffic, children exploded firecrackers, women in string bikinis gyrated to samba steps and everyone chanted over and over: "Brasil -- tetracampeao," or Brazil -- four-time world champion.


INSIDE
The Challenge in North Korea
The biggest job facing the expected successor to power in North Korea will be to rescue the country's plummeting economy, and if he fails, the country could collapse.
Page A3.
Apollo 11, Reconsidered
Many Americans remain proud of the effort that produced the first manned lunar mission 25 years ago, but their pride is tempered by mundane challenges as yet unconquered.
Page A11.
Price Wins British Open
Sinking a 50-foot eagle putt on the 17th hole, Nick Price overcame Jesper Parnevik to win the 123d British Open with a 72-hole total of 268 at Turnberry.
SportsMonday, C1.


A Top Executive Quits Siegel &amp; Gale
A top executive at one corporate identity and consulting company has left to join a rival.
Jim Johnson, executive vice president and general manager at Siegel &amp; Gale of New York, has left that company after almost five years to head Anspach Grossman Portugal Inc. of New York, in the new position of president and chief executive.


Stampede Raises Toll in Rwanda Chaos
A day that began in desperation and chaos turned into one of panic and death as the rebels who control most of Rwanda advanced toward the border with Zaire today, causing terrified refugees to stampede.
At least 30 died.
At midafternoon, rebel mortar shells began exploding in Gisenyi, in northwestern Rwanda, where refugees had jammed the border crossing hoping to escape the civil war.


Contradiction Marks Revival In Real Estate
As the region's real-estate market slowly emerges from a five-year hibernation, buyers and sellers in both New York City and the surrounding areas are finding what seems to be a very selective and at times contradictory recovery.
Long spoiled by years of having the upper hand in most transactions, some buyers are finding that owners cannot be squeezed on prices anymore; others have found a dearth of available homes in good locations.


California School Becomes Notorious For Epidemic of TB
Once known for academic and athletic excellence, La Quinta High School has gained a troubling distinction: it has experienced what state officials say is the worst outbreak of drug-resistant tuberculosis in a high school ever reported in the United States.
Two-hundred-ninety-two of La Quinta's students, or 23 percent, tested positive for TB in September 1993.
Another 84 students, who had not previously been tested or had had negative results the first time, tested positive last month.


Plan Takes Shape for a Randalls Island City Recreation Center
Randalls and Wards Islands -- once home to a potter's field and a poor house and now linked by landfill -- are a place of failed dreams.
Now there is a new dream afloat, one that would see the shaggy islands become the city's recreational center for everyone from world-class sprinters to bar league softball players to children from Harlem.
"Everybody's skeptical," acknowledged Karen Cohen, president of the Randalls Island Sports Federation, which has prodded the city to contribute $20 million and is harnessing big corporations and high-powered consultants to raise and spend far more than that privately.
"But rich, middle class or poor, everybody needs this," she declared.


In Pursuit of Music, With All Guns Firing
This was it: the World Series of classical music, the World Cup of operatic competition, the Olympics of tenordom, the Academy Award for best belters in a leading role.
The three tenors had returned.
Jose Carreras, Placido Domingo and Luciano Pavarotti gave reprises of their most famous roles on Saturday night in Los Angeles, and it was not an occasion for subtlety.
As Zubin Mehta said just before he went on stage to conduct the Los Angeles Philharmonic, there was "a nice chamber music atmosphere" in Dodger Stadium.
That atmosphere was provided by two 4-story waterfalls pouring 600 gallons of water a minute.
A 440-foot-long backdrop, covered with 2,500 cans of paint, created a rain-forest paradise.
Twenty fake Classical pillars were imported from Hungary.
Thirty truckloads of greenery were spread about.
The set was assembled by 600 technicians working for six days.
Some 56,000 people paid up to $1,000 each to be there.
It was hard to avoid the statistics, even when watching the extravaganza on PBS in New York.
An estimated 1.3 billion people sat in front of television screens around the world basking in the intimacy.


For Brazil, A Special Kind of Joy
When they walked into the stadium, they were holding hands like schoolchildren on a first outing.
And with the World Cup hanging by a thread, they were clinging to each other again: One long line of Brazilian players and coaches arm in arm on the sideline and draped in their nation's green and gold flag.
Only when Roberto Baggio's ill-fated penalty kick soared over the crossbar did they break ranks and give themselves over to the ephemeral joys inherent in delivering a championship to a soccer-loving nation.


Brazilians Celebrate on the Streets of Manhattan
Part dance, part drums, all madness, fans celebrating Brazil's victory in the World Cup final brought a slice of Carnaval to West 46th Street moments after Roberto Baggio's final penalty kick sailed high of the crossbar to give the Brazilians their first cup triumph in 24 years.
"I'm too young to remember 1970, but this is the most beautiful day of my life," said Renato Bortolon, 26, a native of Sao Paulo now living in New Jersey.
Wearing a Brazilian team jersey and sambaing with his wife, Jane, to the ubiquitous rhythms, Bortolon concluded: "I even like the coach now."


Interpublic-Ammirati Deal Expected Today
The Interpublic Group of Companies is expected to announce today that it will acquire Ammirati &amp; Puris and merge Ammirati's New York office with the troubled New York office of Interpublic's Lintas Worldwide agency, say advertising executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
After the acquisition, the merged New York operation will be known as Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, the executives said last week, and will be headed by Martin Puris, the elegant, aggressive president and chief executive of Ammirati.


WORLD CUP '94: Sports of The Times; Not a Perfect Solution, But the Best We Have
THERE were boos coming from the paying customers, a rare sign of rancor during this upbeat American World Cup, now history.
The boos were not for the warriors still standing on the grass of the Rose Bowl, and the boos were surely not for warriors like Franco Baresi and Roberto Baggio, bent over from stabbing cramps.
The boos were for the rule.
The rule that transforms an endurance contest into a crap shoot.
The rule that forced Brazil and Italy to take penalty kicks to decide the championship of the most popular sports tournament on the face of the earth.
The rule that led to Brazil beating Italy yesterday, 3-2, in penalty kicks after 120 minutes of scoreless play.


In Oregon, Christian Right Raises Its Sights and Wins
As the struggle intensifies around the country between more traditional Republicans and fellow Republicans on the religious right, the first battle here in Oregon, a state long known for it political tolerance, is already over.
And the fundamentalists have emerged triumphant.
Candidates backed by religious conservatives have defeated more moderate opponents in the Republican primaries for governor and for three seats in the House of Representatives.
They have also posted successes in state legislative races.


A Lost Hurrah: Italy's Premier Sees His Aura Fade
Ever since he joined the political fray six months ago, friends and enemies have agreed on one thing about Silvio Berlusconi: With his sound-bite sincerity and his feel-good messages, he was, as the headlines said, a Vendor of Dreams.
Just one week ago, as the Prime Minister, svelte and smiling, played host to Bill Clinton and other leaders at an economic summit meeting in Naples, the tycoon-turned-politician seemed as much on a roll as his nation's team seemed then to be in the World Cup soccer tournament.


End of Baggio's Heroics Goes Up, Over and Out
He was the man most responsible for Italy's trip to today's World Cup championship game.
He emerged as the savior when Italy was a minute away from elimination against Nigeria in the opening game of the second round.
Roberto Baggio topped that by being Italy's savior in the elimination of Spain in the next game.
But the last thing soccer fans will remember about Baggio and this tournament is that the man with the world's most famous ponytail missed what would be the last shot.


2 Die in Altercation At Cycle Club Event
Two men were killed and three were injured yesterday when a fight broke out at a motorcycle club barbecue in Hackettstown, N.J., the town's first killings in 17 years.
About 150 people were at the Tri-County Motorcycle Club's annual event, which raises money for charity, on the grounds of the Elks Lodge, said John J. O'Reilly, the Warren County prosecutor.
He said the violence began shortly before 4 P.M., after the arrival of eight members of the Pagans, a motorcycle club.


Ready to Set Off Alarms
One inconvenience in having a bullet lodged in your neck is that you may need a note from your doctor to get past the metal detector at an airport.
That, anyway, is what Kim Williams is anticipating.
"I can just picture all the alarms going off and officials making me throw my hands up," she said.


Washington Talk; Bosnia Peace Move May Bring U.S. Commitment
With all eyes here on a possible invasion of Haiti, Tuesday's deadline for the warring parties in Bosnia to accept or reject a new peace plan is sneaking up scarcely noticed -- even though its acceptance would touch off a much larger and more dangerous commitment of American troops.
The Muslim-led Bosnian Government and its Croatian allies have signaled they will accept the plan, which was brokered by diplomats from the United States, France, Britain, Germany and Russia.


World Cup Repeat
A tape of the World Cup soccer championship, which was transmitted live from Pasadena, Calif., yesterday afternoon on ABC, is to be rebroadcast tonight at 8:30 on the cable channel ESPN2.


Sport's Troubles Are Left Behind on Saratoga Vacation
For the 126th summer in a row, New York racing will pack up its troubles in the old kit bag this week and head 180 miles north to Saratoga Springs.
And there, for the next five and a half weeks, it will stage 34 days of elegant racing in the foothills of the Adirondacks, far from the dwindling fields, dwindling attendance and dwindling revenue that bedevil thoroughbred racing back in the city.
This is where stakes races and corn on the cob are served every day, where the best horses in the country take the stage every day, where the 2-year-old prodigies launch their careers -- in fact, where on opening day, the leading juvenile filly Unacceptable and the leading juvenile colt De Niro will both race in stakes that could launch their careers toward championships.


More 'Ethnic Cleansing' by Serbs Is Reported in Bosnia
Armed Serbian nationalists have rousted hundreds of Muslims from their homes in the northeastern Bosnian district of Bijeljina in recent days and have begun driving them across a battlefront to Bosnian Government territory, residents and aid workers said over the weekend.
A Serb from Bijeljina who asked not to be identified for fear of reprisal said that, starting Thursday and possibly even earlier, Muslims had been picked up from Bijeljina's streets and detained outside the town by members of a local Serbian militia known as the Panthers.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Placed Mike Magnante, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Jose DeJesus, pitcher, from Omaha of the American Association.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Placed Brent Gates, infielder, on 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Francisco Matos, infielder, from Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Recalled John Cummings, pitcher, from Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Marc Newfield, outfielder, to Calgary.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Placed Billy Ripken, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Chris James, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 16.
Activated Gary Redus, outfielder, and Doug Strange, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Placed Anthony Young, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 10.
Called up Randy Veres, pitcher, from Iowa of the American Association.
Transferred Jose Guzman, pitcher, from the 15-day to the 60-day disabled list.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Placed Donnie Elliott, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 10.
Called up Bryce Florie, pitcher, from Las Vegas of the Pacific Coast League.
Football  National Football League  CHICAGO BEARS -- Agreed to terms with Jay Leeuwenburg, center, on a one-year contract and Marcus Spears, offensive tackle, on a three-year contract.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:
MONDAY
Alex Brown Inc


DeVito/Verdi Gets A Retailing Account
Britches of Georgetowne, a men's specialty retailer based in Washington, has selected DeVito/Verdi of New York to handle advertising for its casual and tailored clothing divisions and Britches Great Outdoors apparel.
The account, with billings estimated at $5 million, was previously handled in-house.
DeVito/Verdi was awarded the account on Friday after a review of two to three months that began with six agencies and was narrowed to DeVito/Verdi and one other finalist, Mad Dogs and Englishmen of New York.
Campaigns are expected to begin in September.


Young Dominicans Celebrate Their Heritage


Another Work in Progress for Connecticut Park


Singapore Journal; Love It or Hate It, This Is the Forbidding Fruit
In this climate-controlled, hygiene-crazed land, even the air is scrubbed clean.
Whatever the odoriferous riot elsewhere in the steamy climes of Southeast Asia, Singapore as a nation is ruthlessly sweet-smelling.
The air in most public buildings is pumped through banks of hyperefficient air conditioners, filtering and refiltering the air until a visitor might easily forget that this is the tropics.


Chappaquiddick Journal; Dark Anniversary Draws the Curious
From his lemonade stand at the intersection of Chappaquiddick and Dyke Roads, 12-year-old Louis Becker offers tourists directions to the beaches, the wildlife reservations or the Mytoi Preserve, a Japanese garden where a red wooden footbridge crosses a pine-shaded pond.
But most visitors here have another bridge in mind: the Dyke Bridge.
Twenty-five years ago, on the night of July 18, 1969, Senator Edward M. Kennedy drove his Oldsmobile off the bridge into Poucha Pond, and his passenger, Mary Jo Kopechne, drowned.
Senator Kennedy, who did not call for help or report the incident for 10 hours, later pleaded guilty to leaving the scene of an accident.
He received a two-month suspended sentence and his driver's license was revoked for a year.


DIALOGUE: Arsenals Abroad; Export Control For the 1990's
The United States' system for controlling sales of technology abroad was built in the cold war, a time when the U.S. and its allies dominated export markets and controlled critical technologies.
That world no longer exists.
As Congress begins debate this week on a new Export Administration Act to replace the one that expired in June, it has a chance to transform the system from a cold war relic into one that responds to the security needs and economic challenges of the 1990's.
The stakes are high.
The Export Administration Act governs the export of "dual use" goods and technologies -- computers, telecommunications equipment, machine tools, electronics, aerospace products and other commercial items that can also have military applications.
These are our most technologically advanced industries.
They offer high-wage, high-skilled jobs.
Growth in these job-creating sectors depends on exports.
If export controls are poorly conceived, these sectors -- and U.S. competitiveness -- will suffer.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:  APT Investment and Management Co., Denver, an initial public offering of 8.85 million shares.
Salomon Brothers.


CHRONICLE
Former President JIMMY CARTER and his wife, Rosalynn, are spending the week on an American Indian reservation in South Dakota with 1,200 other volunteers to build 30 homes for people without shelter.
"We'll either be sleeping in a pup tent or tepees," Mr.
Carter said Saturday night at the Cheyenne River Sioux Indian Reservation, The Associated Press reported.
The former President has helped Habitat for Humanity build homes for low-income people for 11 years.


Posturing and Principle: Tactics in the 11th Hour
If there is one overriding political imperative during this phase of the health care struggle on Capitol Hill, it is this: Nobody wants to be taken for granted.
Hence the recent flurry of ultimatums, demands and careful conditions for support from the various camps in the Democratic caucus.
The task for the Democratic leadership, as it seeks to develop a consensus bill, is figuring out how much is posturing and how much is nonnegotiable principle.
The task for the various camps is deciding, in the end, what they can settle for, and in a worst case scenario, whether they are willing to vote against a health care bill to further their cause.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
More than 1,300 Internal Revenue Service employees have been investigated since 1989 for possible improper use of system computers to snoop on taxpayers, Government officials said.
In most instances, the violations involved browsing by employees who were interested in the financial standing of friends, neighbors, enemies, celebrities or former spouses.
In about a third of the cases, employees have been subjected to sanctions.  [ Page D1. ]
Several senators are negotiating potentially crucial changes in a sweeping bill to overhaul the nation's telecommunications laws, possibly allowing the regional Bell companies to enter the long-distance business more easily.  [ D1. ]
Democratic governors endorsed President Clinton's proposal to provide health insurance for all Americans but did not support his plan to have employers pay for it.  [ A14. ] Companies
I.B.M.'s 24-hour-a-day customer support line for its personal computers is an essential element of a broader campaign to regain dominance in the personal computer business.  [ D1. ]
Synergen's stock price plunged nearly 50 percent after the company said it was halting human trials of its flagship drug, Antril, for the treatment of sepsis.  [ D1. ]
New York State is investigating whether five mutual funds may have misled investors into thinking they were safe investments when they were high risk.  [ D2. ]
Discovery Zone said it would buy Leaps and Bounds, a chain of children's indoor entertainment and fitness centers, from McDonald's.
The company also said Blockbuster Entertainment would acquire a controlling stake.  [ D3. ]
Makers of Sucrets and Listerine, the nation's leading throat lozenge and mouthwash, will change the packaging that has helped make the products household names for decades.  [ D4. ]
Intel said its second-quarter earnings increased 12 percent, as revenues rose with strong demand for its Pentium chip.  [ D4. ]
Chase Manhattan saw earnings rise 31.8 percent, while those at Nationsbank were up 42.8 percent.  [ D4. ]
In a move creating Canada's largest securities firm, Burns Fry will be acquired by a unit of the Bank of Montreal.  [ D4. ]
Walt Disney said Roy E. Disney, its vice chairman, was "minding the store," along with divisional heads, as its chairman, Michael D. Eisner, recuperated from heart surgery.  [ D16. ] International
Much of the labor-intensive, low-tech Taiwan industries like clothing, shoe and toy manufacturing that spurred the country's economic growth have been displaced by high-tech industries, which constitute a growing percentage of exports.
The idea for a high-technology industrial park that helped spur the shift sprang from the early successes of Silicon Valley.  [ D1. ]  Markets
The stock market, while barely rousing itself, has returned to its mid-June highs, prompting talk that a rally is near.  [ D6. ]
Bonds resumed their rally amid speculation that the Federal Reserve was unlikely to raise interest rates again soon.  [ D5. ]
Crude oil prices tumbled.
Cotton futures and some lumber contracts soared to daily limits on fears of tight supplies.  [ D13. ]
The dollar was mixed against other leading currencies.  [ D13. ] Today's Columns
Three health maintenance organizations in California have fallen out of favor because large clients have won cuts in premiums.
But some analysts say those California H.M.O.'s do not seem to be hurting.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]
As merger partners, Ammirati provides creativity, while Interpublic offers a large network.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D16. ]


Mr. Berlusconi's Betrayal
Only months ago, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi rode to power on public disgust with Italy's bribery-ridden network of politicians and businessmen.
Last Wednesday he outraged the country with a decree that did the accused wrongdoers a huge favor.
Mr.
Berlusconi had asked Italians to trust him as the only person running for high public office who was not tainted by the scandal that followed the "clean hands" anti-corruption investigation -- and they did.
Now, even as he hints at amending the decree, many are having second thoughts.
Italians saw the magistrates who conducted the investigation as the only moral players in Italy's grimy political culture.
Now Mr.
Berlusconi has abruptly cast off his campaign image as a tribune of clean government and seeks to limit their investigations into past political sleaze.


Rio Journal; Brazilians Say Their World Cup Runneth Over
A day after their national team's cliffhanger World Cup victory, Brazilians began turning today from giddy celebration to the more daunting question of whether they can use the world soccer championship to bootstrap the country's battered sense of optimism.
"The victory inaugurates a new phase in Brazil's history: the return of national self-esteem," Teodomiro Braga wrote in Informe JB, a column that usually dwells on national shortcomings: runaway inflation, thieving congressmen and the murders of street children.
"The best in soccer can also win the battle against misery and backwardness."


America the Bountiful
America is the home of a dessert called Death by Chocolate.
It is the home of the quarter-pounder with a side of fries, of pastrami on rye, of chile rellenos and nachos, of barbecue, glazed doughnuts and fettucini Alfredo.
America is a country in which touch-tone will bring the stay-at-home pizza with everything within minutes.
It is the country whose TV ads for broiling T-bones or sizzling fried shrimp could have swayed Saint Jerome.
It is a country whose restaurants sing with "I really shouldn't, but . . ." and "Go ahead, you deserve it."


Intel Profit Up 12% as Demand for Pentium Chip Is Strong
The Intel Corporation reported yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose 12 percent as revenue was pushed up by strong demand for its Pentium microprocessor, which is used in high-performance personal computers.
The results, which were in line with analysts' expectations, were released after the stock market closed.
Earlier, Intel shares fell 87.5 cents, to close at $58.625 in Nasdaq trading, because of uncertainty about the earnings report and an analyst's downgrading of the stock.


For Parched Beijing, A Giant Aqueduct
One of the largest public works projects ever conceived -- an 860-mile aqueduct in northern China -- is being considered by the Communist Party leadership to spare the Beijing area from perpetual drought.
The aqueduct would have to cross 219 rivers and streams, including the Yellow River.
To accomplish this, engineers are prepared to dig either a five-mile-long tunnel under the Yellow River or erect an aqueduct above it supported by 160 huge pylons.


Empty Lawns: Aging in the Suburbs -- A special report.; Elderly Find Hardship in Haven for Young
They moved out to the suburbs in the decades after World War II in record numbers with all the promise and trappings of youth, with bicycles and station wagons, baby strollers and basketball hoops.
They raised families there, had careers and now, in record numbers, they are growing old there.
Across the United States, more older people are living in the suburbs than ever before.
The trend is especially prevalent in the New York area.
For the first time in the region's history, more people over 65 are living in suburbs than in cities, small towns and rural areas combined, an analysis of the 1990 Census shows.


Surgeon General's Son Convicted on Drug Charge


Key Senators Make Effort To Aid Phone-Overhaul Bill
Several senators are negotiating potentially crucial changes in a sweeping bill to overhaul the nation's telecommunications laws, possibly enabling the regional Bell companies to enter the long-distance business more easily
A leader of the effort is Senator Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina and chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, who is circulating modifications to his telecommunications bill.


Europe Ponders Future Outpost on the Moon
A MOVE is afoot in Europe to establish a manned scientific station on the Moon, an initiative that may eventually challenge America's primacy in space exploration.
Officials of the European Space Agency, a consortium of scientists from 14 countries, are seeking some $350 million from member nations to pay for the first in a series of lunar programs that could culminate in a manned Moon station within 25 years.
Dr.
Roger Bonnet, science director of the Paris-based agency, said in an interview that the first European emissary to the Moon, a small, unmanned craft named LEDA (for Lunar European Demonstration Approach) could land on the Moon by 2001.


Merger to Create Big Canadian Brokerage House
In a move to create Canada's largest securities firm, Burns Fry Ltd., one of the country's last remaining independent brokerage houses, agreed today to be acquired by Nesbitt Thomson Inc., a second-tier brokerage firm owned by the Bank of Montreal.
The union, representing a $290 million deal in United States dollars, creates an investment banking powerhouse designed to meet the growing competition of American firms in Canada and to expand in the United States and elsewhere abroad.


A Judge Comes Down Hard On the N.B.A. Players Union
Pro basketball players' quest for unfettered free agency in the National Basketball Association was dealt a major setback yesterday when a Federal judge in Manhattan ruled that the league's salary cap, college draft and right of first refusal do not violate antitrust law.
The union immediately filed a motion of appeal in the 2d Circuit Court of Appeals, where it hopes to have its case heard in early September.


Accounts
*
General Vision Services, New York, to Baldi, Bloom &amp; Whelan Advertising, New York, to handle the eye wear chain's account, previously in-house.
Billings were estimated at $2 million. *
Robert Denton &amp; Co., Auburn Hills, Mich., to Milton Samuels Advertising, New York, to handle advertising, marketing and public relations for brands like El Tesoro tequila and Bush Pilot's whisky, previously handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


Meola to Kick for the Jets
Who says Americans will forget soccer as soon as the World Cup is over?
The Jets, a decidedly American football team, have signed this country's World Cup goalie, Tony Meola of Kearny, N.J.


A.L. Tells Belle to Vanish for 10 Days
Umpire Dave Phillips would like you to stifle all impulses toward laughter as you learn that the Cleveland Indians bat that mysteriously disappeared from the umpires' room at Comiskey Park in Chicago for two days was indeed a corked, high-performance imposter of a regulation instrument.
As a result, Albert Belle, the Indians slugger whose bat was confiscated during Friday night's game against the White Sox in Chicago, was suspended for 10 days.
However, he will be allowed to retain his .349 batting average, which is 59 points above his 1993 average and 79 points above his five-year career average of .270 through last season.
He will also keep his 26 home runs and 78 runs batted in, statistics that rank him among the top five hitters in the league in those departments, as well as in batting average.


NASA's New Ploy: Meld With Moscow
HAVING achieved a host of spectaculars in its 35 years of existence, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has now embarked on a goal so bold, risky and surprising that the venture at times seems to unnerve the most daring of its visionaries.
The agency is merging many of its leading activities with those of the Russian space program, its preeminent foe and rival during the long decades of the cold war.
The East-West partnership involves much more than building an orbital outpost for astronauts, which is to be assembled piecemeal in space between 1997 and 2002.
The two sides are also cooperating in manned space flights, aeronautics research and Earth monitoring, and are talking about joining forces to fire robotic probes toward such distant and mysterious worlds as Pluto.


A Reason to View Rats as Rabbit Relatives
THE evolutionary origins of rodents have long been shrouded in mystery.
While some scientists have linked them to primates, others have insisted that they are related to lagomorphs, the group that includes rabbits and hares.
The latest evidence, a 50-million-year-old fossil from Inner Mongolia, supports the claim that rats and squirrels are genetic cousins of rabbits.
"The discovery revitalizes the study of the earliest rodents and their relatives," said Dr.
Lawrence Flynn, assistant director of the Peabody Museum at Harvard University, who wrote a commentary accompanying the study, which is published in the current issue of the British scientific journal Nature.
"It's taking a small step toward the unraveling of how the modern rodents came to be."


Agency Chief Pledges to Overhaul 'Fraternity' Atmosphere at C.I.A.
The Director of Central Intelligence pledged today to change the Central Intelligence Agency's culture and structure, comparing the nation's spies to "a fraternity" of old boys in which "once you're initiated, you're considered a trusted member for life."
The Director, R. James Woolsey, said the breach of that trust by a spy within the agency was a catalyst for "a comprehensive overhaul of a number of key structures, programs and procedures." The spy, Aldrich H. Ames, betrayed at least 12 secret agents working for the United States; in exchange he received more than $2 million from Moscow.


Owners and Players Stand Still; Clock Runs
To nobody's surprise, including management's, the Players Association yesterday rejected the owners' salary cap proposal, then introduced a series of proposals that the owners' chief labor executive said were not responsive to the owners' needs.
The dual developments left the two sides as far apart as ever and moved major league baseball closer to an August strike that would jeopardize not only the rest of the season but also the playoffs and World Series.


Schools Group to Challenge New Law on Hasidic District
The state school boards association, which persuaded the Supreme Court to abolish a school district that was created specifically to accommodate ultra-Orthodox Jews, announced today that it would return to court to challenge a new state law that was designed to circumvent the court ruling.
Trying to bolster its case, the group said it had discovered that the new law, which allows municipalities that meet certain criteria to establish their own school districts, actually would apply only to the Kiryas Joel Village School District.
Legislative aides denied the claim.


Slumlord's Religion Doesn't Bear on Case
To the Editor:
Your July 6 news article on the crime and drugs at New York slum hotels owned by Tran Dinh Truong calls Mr.
Truong "a practicing Roman Catholic." It is a mystery to me what religion Mr.
Truong is practicing, but it is not Roman Catholicism.


Severe Ancient Droughts: A Warning to California
BEGINNING about 1,100 years ago, what is now California baked in two droughts, the first lasting 220 years and the second 140 years.
Each was much more intense than the mere six-year dry spells that afflict modern California from time to time, new studies of past climates show.
The findings suggest, in fact, that relatively wet periods like the 20th century have been the exception rather than the rule in California for at least the last 3,500 years, and that mega-droughts are likely to recur.
The evidence for the big droughts comes from an analysis of the trunks of trees that grew in the dry beds of lakes, swamps and rivers in and adjacent to the Sierra Nevada, but died when the droughts ended and the water levels rose.
Immersion in water has preserved the trunks over the centuries.


3 Ex-Officers Plead Guilty In F.B.I. Sting
Three grim-faced former detectives of the Mount Vernon Police Department, who were videotaped in May stealing $10,000 in an F.B.I. sting operation, pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal Court in White Plains to charges of theft and conspiracy.
All three men admitted to the judge that they stole the money for their own use and that they undertsood that it was a crime to take the money.


Haitian Refugee Tactic Makes New Problems
To the Editor:
"Needed: Steady Hands on Haiti" (editorial, July 9) states "there can be no mistaking that a policy that diverts black Haitians while welcoming mostly white refugees from other troubled nations reeks of racial discrimination."


Mitterrand Has Surgery for Urinary Block
President Francois Mitterrand, whose prostate cancer was diagnosed two years ago, underwent surgery today to remove a blockage in his urinary tract.
His physician said the operation went "very well."
Mr.
Mitterrand, 77, who is to retire in May after 14 years in office, entered the Cochin Hospital here on Sunday night and is expected to be kept under observation until the weekend.
His hospitalization was announced only after the operation was completed, around noon today.


King and Arum Feud Anew
MICHAEL CARBAJAL has joined forces with promoter DON KING, but the promoter BOB ARUM contends Carbajal still owes him a fight.
"Sneaking away without giving me any warning is morally reprehensible," Arum told The Associated Press by telephone from his office in Las Vegas, adding that he would take the World Boxing Organization light flyweight champion to court if Carbajal failed to defend against PAUL WEIR of Scotland on Sept. 28. (AP)


More Furor For Yankees And the Bronx
The Yankees offered an unequivocal apology, the team official involved issued a categorical denial and Bronx politicians and residents expressed outrage yesterday over a magazine article in which the official reportedly used the terms "monkeys" and "colored boy" in referring to youths in the South Bronx neighborhood around Yankee Stadium.
Bronx officials said the remarks, which New York magazine attributed to Richard Kraft, the team's longtime vice president for community relations, suggested that racism was the real reason for the club's undisguised interest in moving to Manhattan or New Jersey.


Schedule Says It's Minnesota
Federal District Judge JAMES ROSENBAUM ruled yesterday in Minneapolis that the National Basketball Association may release next season's schedule, invalidating last Thursday's ruling by State District Judge BERNETTE JOHNSON of New Orleans forbidding the release until the Minnesota Timberwolves' sale is resolved.
League rules forbid teams from moving after schedules are released.
Legal battles began last month after the N.B.A. rejected Top Rank of Louisiana's $152.5 million bid to move the team to New Orleans. (AP)


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about children whose parents are in prison referred incorrectly in some editions to a woman who now counsels others about substance abuse and AIDS.
The counselor is Frances Franco, a mother who went to prison for selling drugs from her apartment, not Ms.
Franco's daughter.


Debating Death Penalty in Simpson Case
District Attorney Gil Garcetti is facing one of his most politically difficult decisions as he prepares to bring O. J. Simpson to trial: whether to seek the death penalty for one of the best-known, best-loved individuals ever to be charged with murder.
In the next few weeks, Mr.
Garcetti will announce whether he will ask a jury to recommend a death sentence for Mr.
Simpson if it convicts him of first-degree murder in the killings of his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend Ronald L. Goldman.
Under California law, a double-murder conviction can warrant the death penalty.
But most legal experts say, for a number of reasons, that if Mr.
Simpson is convicted he may not be a strong candidate for capital punishment, which in California is by gas or lethal injection, with the choice given to the condemned person.


Corrections
An obituary by The Associated Press on Saturday about Bob Payton, a restaurateur, misstated his birthplace.
It was Troy, N. Y., not Miami.


Review/Fashion; Paris Shows, From Glitzy to Discreet
Gianni Versace has a habit of slipping quietly into town from Milan and introducing his couture collection at least a day before the other designers get started.
His entrance was not quite so low-key this time, but the show itself was modestly presented Sunday night.
The audience consisted of a mere 300 people at the Hotel Ritz.
Luminaries like Sylvester Stallone, Hugh Grant and the singer who used to be called Prince and now identifies himself with a symbol added a frisson to the evening.
They stayed for a small dinner decorated with models wearing dresses from the runway, and hundreds more people were invited to a reception afterward.
The curtain raiser for the fall couture openings turned into a bit of a bash.


En Garde Onstage: A Duel of Batons
At first glance, a competition for conductors seems a bad idea.
Conducting is entirely a cumulative art, whose outstanding practitioners reveal their mastery over the long haul, not in virtuosic instants.
An episode like Leonard Bernstein's famous overnight success with the New York Philharmonic is a glaring exception.
Generally speaking, there are no conducting prodigies, and many talents rise to greatness only in old age.
A night of good conducting is, after all, merely the average of a hundred musicians' efforts, and a great conducting career the average of many thousands of such nights.
So it is very difficult to draw conclusions from a single set of performances, as the distinguished jury of the American Symphony Orchestra's Stokowski Conducting Competition had to do at a finals concert on Friday night at Avery Fisher Hall.
Yet it was not a futile exercise.
One conductor did clearly stand out from two other finalists, although not enough for the jury to award a first prize.
Jan Wagner, originally of Austria and now based in Minnesota, won second prize, and Steven Zike and Sebrina Alfonso shared third prize.
Such overnight ranking is risky, but we undeniably need some new way of detecting podium talent; the old European system, with its long apprenticeships in provincial outposts, no longer provides a dependable hierarchy through which good conductors can surface.


Magnavox Account Is Abruptly Shifted
The Philips Consumer Electronics Company said yesterday that it had withdrawn the creative portion of its Magnavox brand advertising account from D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles of New York only four months after awarding it the assignment.
The assignment was moved, without a review, to Fallon McElligott of Minneapolis.
Billings were estimated at $25 million.
Jon Kasle, a spokesman for Philips in Knoxville, Tenn., confirmed reports this week of the abrupt switch in Advertising Age and Adweek.
He cited "differences in creative philosophy" as the reason, disputing speculation in Adweek that it was related to the recent departure of the executives at Philips who were instrumental in awarding the assignment to D.M.B.&amp; B.


Alarms Tell Whales To Dodge Fish Nets That Snare and Kill
SOME 3,000 to 5,000 humpback whales feed off Newfoundland and Labrador every summer, representing the largest population of humpbacks in the world and a major problem for fishermen, whale researchers at Memorial University here say.
For years, Memorial scientists have been experimenting with ways to keep the animals away from the fishermen's nets.
Net entrapments threaten the lives of scores of whales every year, and a trapped whale can damage thousands of dollars' worth of gear.
The scientists are now reporting success with an alarm system that makes whales aware of the barrier, while not scaring away the fish.


Brazilians Head Back To European 'Roots'
When the last Brazilian team to win the World Cup returned to Brazil from Mexico in the summer of 1970, they were unquestionably going home.
Pele, Rivelino, the playmaker Gerson and all the other stars were born in Brazil, raised in Brazil and earned their livings in Brazil playing for their nation's top clubs.


Market Place; Can health maintenance groups maintain better stock prices?
MOST health maintenance organization stocks headed south in the last few weeks, after news that three large health care purchasers in California had negotiated decreases in the premiums they will pay to health maintenance organizations next year.
What pulled the stocks lower, some analysts said, was the fear that the glory days might be ending for the H.M.O.'s, where profits have regularly exceeded analysts' estimates for several years.
H.M.O. membership is high in California, and the state has long been regarded as a bellwether for managed health care.


Rangers Drop Gloves, Seek a Keenan Investigation
The Mike Keenan Affair became the boardroom equivalent of a gloves-off hockey fight yesterday when the Rangers formally asked Gary Bettman, the commissioner of the National Hockey League, to investigate Keenan's sudden, jolting move from New York to St.
Louis.
In a brief public statement, they requested that the league "prohibit Mr. Keenan from performing any services to any other N.H.L. club" until the matter is resolved.


Q&amp;A
Bitter Orange
Q.
I am told that the distinctive flavor of Earl Grey tea comes from bergamot oil, but what is bergamot?


New Looks for 2 Staples Of the Medicine Cabinet
Is no medicine cabinet safe from the repackagers of corporate America?
Makers of the nation's leading throat lozenge and mouthwash will significantly change the looks that have helped make the products household names for decades.
The maker of Sucrets will announce today that after 62 years, the throat lozenges will no longer come in their traditional metal jacket.
Those tins, familiar to millions of sore-throat sufferers, were often re-used to hold everything from nuts and bolts to buttons and bows.


The Italian Team Runs Out Of Final Rescue Efforts
On the morning after, Coach Arrigo Sacchi had found an apt description of Italy's journey from defeat in the opening game of the World Cup to defeat in the first final to be decided on penalty kicks.
"We came from hell within touching distance of paradise," Sacchi said this morning before the team boarded a chartered flight to Rome.


Israelis and Jordanians Meet, In Public and With Optimism
In an air-conditioned tent straddling their countries' desert border, peace negotiators for Israel and Jordan met publicly today for the first time in their own region and spoke with new optimism about ending the technical state of war that has existed between them for 46 years.
Both sides said their talks had gone well, but added that they would need time to produce a peace treaty, which has eluded the two countries even though they have long cooperated to keep their frontier quiet.
Disagreements remain over a range of issues, including border lines, water rights and the fate of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees.


Corrections
A sports picture caption on Sunday about the British Open referred incorrectly in some editions to the golfer shown swinging a club.
He was Brad Faxon, not Jesper Parnevik.


High-Tech Taiwanese Come Home
By most measures, Wu Tao-yuan had it made.
As head of a research and development lab for I.B.M. in the Silicon Valley, he was at the peak of his profession.
But still, he was itchy.


Goodbye to a Bad Deal
New York City taxpayers and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani are both winners in the collapse of the deal to develop the Coliseum site on Columbus Circle at the corner of Central Park.
The taxpayers benefit because this premier location in the center of Manhattan will not be sold for the distress-sale price cooked up as a boon to the developers by Deputy Mayor John Dyson.
The Mayor benefits by escaping the long-term political liability of a deal that shortchanged the city and reeked of political favoritism.


I.R.S. Staff Is Cited in Snoopings
More than 1,300 employees of the Internal Revenue Service around the country have been investigated since 1989 for possible improper use of I.R.S. computers to snoop on taxpayers, Government officials disclosed today.
In most instances, the violations appear to have involved browsing by curious employees who were interested, for example, in the financial standing of friends, neighbors, enemies, potential in-laws, stockbrokers, celebrities and former spouses.


No Headline
"It is the most extraordinary thing I think I have ever seen in my life. This is 1.2 million people looking desperately for food, for medicine, for care. That's more people than live in the cities of Boston or Denver, or Seattle or Baltimore." -- J. BRIAN ATWOOD, Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development.  [ A1:6. ]


A Plot. A Bomb. A Pariah. A Hero.; The Making of a Tragedy
Fifty years ago tomorrow, Col.
Claus Schenck von Stauffenberg, the chief of staff of the 600,000-man army that guarded Germany's home front, joined Hitler and his military advisers for a conference in the Fuhrer's headquarters, Wolfschanze (Wolf's Lair), in East Prussia.
Count Stauffenberg placed his briefcase beneath the table a few feet from Hitler and left the meeting to take a prearranged telephone call from an aide.
Moments later the briefcase exploded, killing two members of Hitler's staff and badly wounding a half dozen others.
But Hitler, the seat blown out of his trousers, his coat ripped up the back, both eardrums ruptured, survived the blast.
By the end of the day, an impromptu firing squad had executed Count Stauffenberg as Hitler launched a roundup which wiped out virtually every member of a group whose existence the British and Americans had repeatedly ignored, dismissed or denied.


Japan's New Prime Minister Promises a More Open Economy
The Japanese were cynical and angry three weeks ago when a Socialist became Prime Minister by joining forces with his party's longstanding conservative foes and ousting a reform coalition.
But in his first policy address today, Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama sought to reassure a wary public by abandoning the Socialists' opposition to the country's military and vowing to open the economy to a freer flow of goods.
Mr.
Murayama, 70, who came into office with about the lowest public approval rating of any postwar Prime Minister, focused on persuading the public that his Government was interested in more than seizing power and that the Socialists' far-left policies were a thing of the past.


Indian Bureaucrats Try to Unlearn the Habits of Bureaucracy
The teacher sat down and surveyed his class: 17 officials of the Indian Administrative Service, the country's elite bureaucracy, men and women with 12 to 15 years of experience in local and national policy.
The teacher, Naresh Chandra Saxena, director of the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy for Administration, spoke for half an hour on the emerging difficulties for Indian bureaucrats as the Government opens up the economy and slashes the maze of controls that has made India such a bureaucrat's delight and an entrepreneur's nightmare.


5 Mutual Funds in New York Inquiry
The New York State Attorney General is investigating whether five mutual funds may have misled investors into thinking the funds were safe investments when they were high risk.
Looking at mutual funds that invested in mortgage derivatives and posted sharp declines this year, Investigators for Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell identified eight, with $3.6 billion in assets, whose share prices dropped an average of 20 percent in the first six months of the year.


Patterns
Commercial Blur at MTV
Magazines are on a slippery slope as they try to preserve a sense of editorial integrity and still sell clothes.
Art directors like Fabien Baron are designing Calvin Klein ads and the magazine Harper's Bazaar, in which they appear, and photographers like Richard Avedon shoot pristine portraits and Versace campaigns that run within pages of each other in The New Yorker.


3 Partners Leave Anspach Grossman
Days after Anspach Grossman Portugal, the corporate identity and consulting company in New York, said it would bring in a new top executive, three partners said they would leave for a rival, Lippincott &amp; Margulies.
Kenneth J. Roberts, 48, who was a senior partner in charge at Anspach Grossman, will join Lippincott as president and chief executive.
Barry Green, 49, who was a principal and head of marketing, will join in the new position of vice president of marketing.
And James Bell, 36, who was a principal, will join Lippincott as a principal.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the crash of fragments from Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 into Jupiter misstated dimensions of Jupiter and Earth in some copies.
The radiuses -- not the diameters -- of the two planets are 44,308 miles and 3,961 miles respectively.


Polonia Likes Neighborhood
Yankee outfielder Luis Polonia took exception today to a team vice president's reported characterization of young people who play at a park near Yankee Stadium as "monkeys" who create "a continuous maintenance problem."
Asked about the comments that are attributed to Richard Kraft in a New York magazine story, Polonia said: "It's bad when people use those expressions about blacks and Hispanics. We're real people."


Warriors Acquire Pierce For Marciulionis, Houston
The Golden State Warriors acquired guard RICKY PIERCE, the rights to Carlos Rogers and two second-round picks in the 1995 draft from the Seattle SuperSonics for guard SARUNAS MARCIULIONIS and forward BYRON HOUSTON yesterday.
The 6-foot-4-inch Pierce, 34, a two-time Sixth Man Award winner, has averaged 16.4 points per game in 12 National Basketball Association seasons.
Rogers, 23, was the 11th overall pick in the June draft by the Sonics.
The 6-11 forward-center is out of Tennessee State.
Marciulionis has missed 124 games the past two seasons because of a string of injuries.
The 6-5 Lithuanian averaged 14.7 points, 2.8 rebounds and 2.4 assists in five seasons with the Warriors.
The 6-5 Houston averaged 2.8 points, 2.7 rebounds and 12.2 minutes in 71 games last season. (AP)


Corrections
An article on Saturday about fund-raising in the race for New York's governorship misstated the period in which Arthur J. Finkelstein, the prime strategist for State Senator George E. Pataki's campaign, has received $137,236 in fees from the campaign.
It has occurred since January.


Scrubbing an Experiment


Court-Martial Opens in Slaying of Officer
The military's deepest fears of what might happen when enlisted personnel are permitted to mingle with officers exploded last year when an Army sergeant here was charged with murdering a 21-year-old female second lieutenant.
Today, the court-martial of Sgt.
Erwin M. Graves began with testimony that appeared to link him to the killing of Second Lieut.
Lisa N. Bryant through strong but circumstantial evidence, including a pair of earrings, gunshot residue and a powerful .357 Magnum handgun registered to Sergeant Graves that prosecutors believe was the murder weapon.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DUN &amp; BRADSTREET CORP., New York, said it had agreed to buy Pilot Software, Cambridge, Mass., for an undisclosed amount.
GENZYME CORP., Cambridge, Mass., a diagnostics company, said it had acquired Sygena Ltd., a Swiss pharmaceutical concern, for approximately $14.5 million.


Fordham to Seek New Site for Radio Tower
An over-the-fence squabble between two powerful Bronx neighbors cooled a bit yesterday when Fordham University agreed to look for a different place to put its new radio tower than directly across the road from the New York Botanical Garden.
But Fordham fell short of promising that it would move the tower.
"Without an alternative of some sort," said Dr.
Brian J. Byrne, the university's vice president for administration, "we can't say at this point that we won't build at this site."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  SEATTLE MARINERS -- Purchased the contract of George Glinatsis, pitcher, from Jacksonville of the Southern League.
Designated Milt Hill, pitcher, for assignment.
Signed Doug Carroll, outfielder, and Randy Vickers, third baseman.
Assigned Carroll to Bellingham of the Northwest League.
Arizona Fall League  Named Steve Gilbert director of media relations and Herb Clark media relations aide and feature writer.
Football  National Football League  ATLANTA FALCONS -- Signed Lance Zeno, offensive lineman.
DETROIT LIONS -- Agreed to terms with Johnnie Morton, wide receiver, on a four-year contract.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed David Treadwell, placekicker.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Richmond Webb, offensive tackle, to a three-year contract extension.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Mark Jackson and Chris Calloway, wide receivers, Chris Maumalanga, defensive tackle and John Booty, defensive back.
Rescinded the tender offer to Ed McCaffrey, wide receiver.
NEW YORK JETS -- Agreed to terms with Tony Meola, placekicker.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Bernard Williams, offensive tackle, to a five-year contract.
Agreed to terms with Charlie Garner, running back, on a three-year contract.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Released Brad Edwards, safety.
Signed Joe Patton, guard, and Kurt Haws, tight end.
Arena Football League  CLEVELAND THUNDERBOLTS -- Signed Fred Guions, wide receiver and defensive back.
MIAMI HOOTERS -- Waived John Bonds, quarterback.
Suspended Glenn Neely, linemen.
Hockey  International Hockey League  DETROIT VIPERS -- Signed Joe Day, center.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League  HARRISBURG HEAT -- Promoted assistant general manager Gregg Cook to general manager.


Graduating Youths March Triumphantly Across the Brooklyn Bridge


Poison Ivy's Far Too Serious for Spoofing; Allergics Beware
To the Editor:
Re "Poison Ivy Myths: Up in Smoke" (Op-Ed, July 7):


Transportation Alternatives


Poison Ivy's Far Too Serious for Spoofing
To the Editor:
Having read Gary Krist's "Poison Ivy Myths: Up in Smoke," spread across the top of the July 7 Op-Ed page, I was bewildered and read it again and again.
Was this fact, fiction, a creative-writing exercise, a satire on the politicization of America with poison ivy as literary vehicle?


No Headline
The Rev.
Beatrice Blair, associate priest at St.
George's Episcopal Church on East 16th Street, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 64 and lived in the East Village.
The cause was a heart attack, her husband, John Robbins, said.


Astros' Comeback Is One for the Books
Astros 15, Cardinals 12
The Houston Astros matched the biggest comeback in National League history last night, rallying from an 11-run deficit to beat the St.
Louis Cardinals, 15-12, in the Astrodome.


New Targets Lined Up For a Deadpan Deadeye
Michael Moore is not a comedian.
His ulterior motives are far too serious.
But he is what used to be called, when I was growing up in the Bronx, a jokester.
He's the Irish-American smarty whose deadpan delivery masks a genetically subversive heart.
Having memorably skewered a chairman of General Motors in his phenomenally successful documentary "Roger and Me," Mr.
Moore is now taking his astute indictments of corporate America to, of all places, NBC, owned by General Electric.
"TV Nation" has its premiere tonight at 8.
Looking a bit like Margaret Rutherford done up for a part in "L'il Abner," Mr.
Moore gets off to a neat start by standing outside the Rockefeller Center offices of NBC and complaining to passers-by that he hasn't been given an office.
As luck would have it, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, whose inability to resist grandstanding in front of a camera is legendary, stops to commiserate with Mr.
Moore even though he's not sure what's up.
Mr.
Moore mentions "Roger &amp; Me." "Oh," says the reassured politician, "that's famous!"


Scheming in the Interest Of Literacy and a Friend
Mingling old-fashioned innocence and contemporary calculation to charming and purposeful effect is "The Great Brain," the new musical enlivening the summer season at the Promenade Theater, Broadway and 76th Street, under the auspices of the children's theater company Theaterworks/USA.
"The Great Brain," adapted from a semiautobiographical story by John D. Fitzgerald and given a fast-moving book by Michael Slade and sprightly music by David Evans and lyrics by Faye Greenberg, draws a bead on 12-year-old Tom Fitgerald.


Clinton and Haiti: Domestic Issues Complicate Choice
As its showdown with Haiti's military leaders enters its tensest stage, the White House risks being besieged with problems on at least three major fronts.
The confluence will almost certainly make the month ahead the most perilous of President Clinton's term.
With Congress bitterly divided over health care and Congressional hearings on the Whitewater case coming to a crest, his advisers say that Mr.
Clinton probably cannot wait much longer before deciding whether to invade Haiti and roust the Caribbean nation's ruling junta.


A Study Faults Mexican Restaurants
Eating a chile rellenos platter, a staple of most Mexican restaurants, is like eating a stick of butter.
Following its exposes on the amount of fat and salt in Chinese and Italian restaurant food and in movie theater popcorn, the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a Washington-based nutrition-advocacy group, held another news conference today, this time to critique the nutritional value of Mexican food.


Italian Ready to Revise Edict on Jailing Corruption Suspects
Fighting a revolt within his fractured coalition, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi sought tonight to avoid a Government crisis by offering to amend a decree that his adversaries have depicted as a shield for the corrupt.
The edict, issued last week, changed the rules on preventive detention.
It was widely interpreted even by Mr.
Berlusconi's coalition partners as an attempt to free leading members of the disgraced old guard who are being kept in jail while they are investigated for corruption.


Webb Joins High-Pay Ranks
Miami Dolphins tackle RICHMOND WEBB signed a three-year contract extension yesterday that makes him one of the highest paid offensive linemen in the National Football League.
He will earn an average of $2.7 million per season for 1995 through 1997 after receiving a base salary of $645,000 this year, the final one of his current contract.
Webb has played in the Pro Bowl in each of his four seasons. (AP)


METRO DIGEST
HARDSHIP FOR OLD IN HAVEN FOR YOUNG
For the first time, more people over 65 are living in the New York region's suburbs than in its cities, small towns and rural areas combined.
The growth of the suburban elderly population is presenting an array of disturbing new problems for local governments, social service agencies, medical workers, businesses and families, all being forced to deal with the aging in a setting created for the young.
A1.
VALLONE PRESSES FOR A POLICE MONITOR
City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone said that he wants a permanent independent agency to monitor corruption in the New York City Police Department, and Council leaders said that he has the votes to push it through.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY
LOOKING ELSEWHERE FOR A TOWER SITE
An over-the-fence squabble between two powerful Bronx neighbors cooled a bit when Fordham University agreed to look for a different place to put its new radio tower, other than directly across the road from the New York Botanical Garden.
B3.
TRANSIT POLICE VETO PROPOSED CONTRACT
The union for transit police officers rejected a tentative contract that the city and union leadership had announced last week, making it likely that the dispute will go before a state arbitration board.
B3.
ANOTHER LEGIONNAIRES' CASE SUSPECTED
Another traveler on a New York cruise ship to Bermuda has been hospitalized with the symptoms of Legionnaires' disease, and the condition of two of the three of those with confirmed cases has worsened, New Jersey health and hospital officials said.
B2.
REGION
BIKER CLASH LEAVES 2 DEAD
Perhaps 150 motorcycling enthusiasts were gathered in the picnic grove of an Elks Lodge in Hackettstown, N.J., on Sunday afternoon when arguments started near an outdoor beer and liquor stand.
"In rapid succession, it went from fists to knives, and from knives to guns," said the Warren County Prosecutor, John J. O'Reilly.
The violence that erupted between two motorcycle clubs at the charity barbecue left two men dead and three wounded.
B4.
YOUTH'S KILLING ATTRIBUTED TO ROUGH SEX
The youth accused of strangling his 12-year-old classmate at a school for emotionally disturbed children told detectives he put his hands around the boy's neck as the two engaged in rough sexual intercourse, investigators testified during a preliminary court hearing.
B4.
DETECTIVES PLEAD GUILTY IN $10,000 THEFT
Three grim-faced former detectives of the Mount Vernon Police Department, who were videotaped in May stealing $10,000 in an F.B.I. sting operation, pleaded guilty in Federal District Court in White Plains to charges of theft and conspiracy.
B4.
LAW ON HASIDIC DISTRICT CHALLENGED
New York's state school boards association, which persuaded the Supreme Court to abolish a school district that was created specifically to accommodate ultra-Orthodox Jews, announced that it would return to court to challenge a new state law that was designed to circumvent the court ruling.
B2.
Chronicle B5  Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B4


Harris Back on Suspension
DANNY HARRIS, the 1984 Olympic silver medalist in the 400-meter hurdles, must resume his four-year suspension after competing in five events this year without the knowledge of the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
Harris was banned for four years after testing positive for cocaine in February 1992, but was reinstated by U.S.A.
Track &amp; Field in March 1994, after an appeal.
But I.A.A.F. general secretary ISTVAN GYULAI told The Associated Press yesterday that the American body had no right to reinstate Harris.
"He cannot compete anywhere until his four-year suspension is complete," Gyulai said.
Harris, 29, was banned from last Friday night's meet at London, and went to Nice, France, hoping to compete yesterday.
But he was told he must complete his four-year ban. (AP)


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about an increase in the number of overweight Americans misstated the source of quotations by Dr.
F.
Xavier Pi-Sunyer, director of the division of endocrinology, diabetes and nutrition at St.
Luke's Roosevelt Hospital Center and a professor of medicine at Columbia University.
His comments were made in an interview for the article, not in an editorial in The Journal of the American Medical Association.


Bank Regulator Says Clinton Sought Advice on S.&amp; L.
President Clinton asked the nation's top bank regulator over the last New Year's holiday whether he could provide legal advice concerning the President's personal ties to a failed Arkansas savings and loan, according to an interagency memorandum written by the regulator.
The regulator, Eugene A. Ludwig, who is Comptroller of the Currency, checked with Treasury Department and White House lawyers and told Mr.
Clinton that "it would be impermissible for me to discuss the matter with the President or the First Lady," according to the memorandum.


Mets Rally Wasted as Dodgers Win in 10
Todd Worrell was supposed to end up the scapegoat.
He blew a three-run lead for the Dodgers.
He pitched terribly in the ninth inning.
He left Tommy Lasorda, his manager, swallowing hard as he thought about the $3.5 million the Dodgers must pay Worrell to close games for them this year.
He also ended up with the victory, a most improbable victory, last night at Shea Stadium.


Mountain Of History Encounters Challenges
LOOK-OUT MOUNTAIN delivers all that the name promises and more, but few people know it.
Half-hidden and partly eaten by the Dutchess Quarry and Supply Company, the mountain is easy to miss.
And getting to the top means taking a hike past swarms of giant mosquitoes and thickets of poison ivy that reach out and grab you.
No one is supposed to climb Look-Out, anyway.
Those who know about it keep quiet to protect its caves, where artifacts have been found dating back 12,500 years, the earliest known period when humans occupied North America.


No Wonder Big Oil Dislikes Ethanol
To the Editor:
"This Clean Air Looks Dirty" (editorial, July 8), which criticizes the use of ethanol as an additive to gasoline, may be reasonably correct in stating that Archer Daniels Midland is not a disinterested party, but you mistakenly advise that ethanol cannot substantially reduce the use of nonrenewable resources.


Details Sifted in Biker Clash That Left 2 Pagans Dead
Perhaps 150 motorcycling enthusiasts were gathered in the picnic grove of an Elks Lodge on Mountain Avenue in this sleepy western New Jersey town on Sunday afternoon when the arguments started near an outdoor beer and liquor stand.
"In rapid succession it went from fists to knives and from knives to guns," the Warren County Prosecutor, John J. O'Reilly, recounted today.


Poison Ivy's Far Too Serious for Spoofing; Garden Veterans
To the Editor:
Re "Poison Ivy Myths: Up in Smoke" (Op-Ed, July 7):


Venture Is Formed In Media Services
Ferrell Calvillo Communications, a New York agency, and Media That Works, a Cincinnati media services company, said yesterday that they had teamed up to form a strategic partnership to focus on new media opportunities.
Terms were not disclosed.


Bernstein Up Close: The Follicles and Pores
Leonard Bernstein  By Humphrey Burton  Illustrated. 594 pages. Doubleday. $25.


Another on Cruise Reports Possible Legionnaires' Case
Another traveler on a New York cruise ship to Bermuda has been hospitalized with the symptoms of Legionnaires' disease, and the condition of two of the three of those with confirmed cases has worsened, New Jersey health and hospital officials said yesterday.
As word of the outbreak spread, hundreds of worried vacationers called New York and New Jersey health officials yesterday.
The three confirmed victims, and five others hospitalized with symptoms of the potentially fatal disease, were all passengers on the Horizon, a ship operated by Celebrity Cruises that sailed to Bermuda on June 25 and returned to New York on July 2.


Governor Hasn't Changed on Death Penalty
To the Editor:
In March 1982, when I was running for governor of New York for the first time, I made a speech in which I voiced my opposition to the death penalty, and said I favored a public referendum through a statewide vote on a constitutional amendment.


Still Showing Life in the Heart Of America, Drive-In Theaters
For nearly 30 years, the drive-in movie theater has struggled.
Squeezed by multiplexes, videocassettes and urban sprawl, it has at times seemed to teeter on the verge of extinction.
In 1958, there were more than 4,000 drive-in screens in the United States.
Today, there are 837.
But do not mourn its passing quite yet.


Results Plus
TRACK AND FIELD  O'Sullivan's Time a 1994 Best  Sonia O'Sullivan of Ireland produced the fastest women's time of the year at 1,500 meters yesterday at the Nikaia Grand Prix track meet in Nice, France.
The former Villanova runner won in 3 minutes 59.10 seconds.
Kim Batten of the United States established a season's best in the women's 400 hurdles, upsetting the world and Olympic champion, Sally Gunnell of Britain.
Batten ran 53.72, a personal best; Gunnell was second in 53.91.
Sergei Bubka won the pole vault at 19 feet 4 1/4 inches.
Javier Sotomayor of Cuba cleared 7-10 1/2 in the high jump, a 1994 best.
The men's 100 went to American Dennis Mitchell in 10.19. (AP) BASKETBALL  Summer Nets Get First Victory  While David Wesley turned in game highs of 29 points and 14 assists for Boston, Rex Walters scored 23 points and Chris Childs 18 to lead the Nets to their first victory of the Doral Arrowwood Rookie Summer League tournament, 114-109, last night at the Westchester County Center in White Plains.
Dwayne Schintzius added 17 points for New Jersey, which trailed by 94-77 after three quarters.
FIELD HOCKEY  Canadians Defeat Americans  Canada defeated the United States, 1-0, in the women's field hockey World Cup in Dublin yesterday.
The Americans went into the game needing a victory to be virtually assured of a place in the top two of their group and a berth in the semifinals.
In Pool B tomorrow, the United States plays China, while its main rivals, Germany and the Netherlands, play each other.
If Germany wins and the Americans beat China, the United States should be through, along with the Germans.
But if the Netherlands wins, second place will be between Germany and the United States, based on goal differential. (AP)


Giants Flipping Over Quarterbacks
The way the Giants decided which quarterback Dave Brown or Kent Graham -- ran with the first team for today and which one went with the second was determined by a coin toss.
It was a quarter, Brown's quarter, and he lost the toss.
Brown only hopes his luck is better on the field.
So the first day of the quarterback battle officially began with a flip.
The Giants hope eventually it will end with a bang.
As the two went at it on a rain soaked day, George Young, the team's general manager, continued to make news off the field.
In a truly surprising move, the Giants re-signed free agent wide receiver Mark Jackson and rescinded their offer to receiver Ed McCaffrey.
They also signed wide receiver Chris Calloway and fourth-round draft pick Chris Maumalanga, a defensive tackle.


COCA-COLA CO. (KO,N)
Buoyed by emerging-market sales in India, China, the Middle East and Latin America, the second-quarter earnings of the Coca-Cola Company grew 11.8 percent, the company said yesterday.
Profits grew to $758 million, from $678 million in the comparable period a year ago, the company said, and operating revenues grew 10.3 percent, to $4.3 billion, from $3.9 billion a year ago.
And per-share earnings climbed to 59 cents, from 52 cents in the corresponding period a year ago.


Willard Scott, 85; Corporate Lawyer
Willard Philip Scott, a retired New York lawyer who specialized in corporate and financial law, died on Friday in a nursing home in Oklahoma City.
He was 85.
A former resident of Scarsdale, N.Y., he had lived in Oklahoma City since 1968.
He suffered a lengthy illness, his family said.


Executive Changes
ALLEGHENY LUDLUM CORP., Pittsburgh, promoted Arthur H. Aronson, its executive vice president and chief operating officer, to president and chief executive, succeeding Robert P. Bozzone, who is retiring on Aug. 1.
AMERICAN VANGUARD CORP., Los Angeles, appointed Eric G. Wintemute president and chief executive.


WORLD CUP '94: Sports of The Times; What Did Americans Learn From the Cup?
HAS the baseball strike started yet?
I ask this question in all sincerity, emerging from the glorious cocoon of the World Cup.
I never thought I would see the day when the fate of soccer and the fate of baseball would be intertwined, but that day is upon us.
It has always been my position, as a soccer buff, that it would be presumptuous to ask Americans to give up our excellent team sports.
But what if baseball gave up on us?
What if baseball self-destructed with a strike lasting into next year?
This is a very important question to ask during my post-partum depression.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.22
3.13
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.31
4.25
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.71
4.68
3.13
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.18
7.23
5.69
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.50
7.54
6.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.29
8.30
7.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.41
5.70
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sports of The Times; Community Relations, Yankee Style
WHEN you phone Yankee Stadium, you get a message recorded by Phil Rizzuto.
"Hi, fans, thanks for calling," says the only Scooter in baseball's Hall of Fame.
"Your call is important to us and will be answered as soon as possible in the order in which it is received."


CHRONICLE
WHITNEY HOUSTON, troubled by a recurring throat problem, has been ordered by doctors to reschedule eight dates on the West Coast and in Arizona and Texas on her summer concert tour, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The singer canceled a concert on Saturday in Anaheim, Calif., but performed a short medley of songs Sunday at the World Cup soccer finals at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif.
It has not been the best of times for Ms.
Houston.
At a recent concert in Atlanta, she brought her husband, the singer Bobby Brown, on stage to announce she was pregnant with their second child.
Several days later she miscarried.


Dow Edges Ahead 1.62 in Light Trading
After a remarkable two weeks in which the Dow Jones industrial average rose more than 107 points, or 3 percent, the stock market barely roused itself at all yesterday.
The Dow gained just 1.62 points to close at 3,755.43 on light trading volume.
Still, the market, as measured by the Dow and other major leading indexes, has returned to its mid-June highs, prompting talk that the summer rally is around the corner.


Congressional Memo; In Jargon-Filled Talk About Budgets, A Debate of Politics Over Substance
People who have been listening to conservative talk radio recently or watching the House of Representatives on C-Span have heard an earful of exercised talk about expedited recissions and the A to Z budget plan and discharge petitions and lock boxes and closed rules.
These arcane terms may not make sense to the untrained ear, but it often sounds as if grave matters of public policy are at stake.
One side makes it appear as if die-hard deficit hawks are battling the entrenched establishment to force a reduction in Federal spending.
Those on the other side paint themselves as devoted lawmakers holding the line against radicals who would severely weaken the power of Congress to control the purse strings.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  A CEASE-FIRE AND CRISIS
Declaring a victory, the Rwandan Patriotic Front announced a cease-fire, but that was little consolation to relief workers who are trying to contend with 100,000 refugees who have fled to Bukavu, Zaire, and the threat of another 500,000 who are clogging the roads on the way.
A1  Anatomy of Rwanda's deadly civil war.
A6  MIDEAST TALKS COME HOME
Jordan and Israel held public peace talks under a tent on their border for the first time.
No immediate breakthroughs were expected after nearly five decades of uncertainty, but the gesture of negotiators' sitting down, although separated by the border, was a symbolic achievement if not a substantive one.
A1  EXPLOSION HITS ARGENTINE JEWS
At least 17 people were killed and more than 120 wounded when what was believed to be a bomb ripped through the headquarters of Jewish organizations in Buenos Aires.
A3  THREE FRONTS FOR CLINTON
Whitewater, health care and Haiti are the presidential challenges that could make this the toughest stretch of the term.
A4  BOSNIAN OPTS FOR WAR
Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Bosnian Serbs, told his people that war was "more honorable" than accepting the peace plan approved by the other parties in the war.
A7  KEEPING BEIJING IRRIGATED
A plan by China's Communist Party leaders to divert water to Beijing from a huge reservoir to the south would be one of the largest public works projects ever conceived -- if it survives intense debate.
A8  Italy's prime minister offered to compromise.
A3  The compulsory education of an Indian bureaucrat.
A10  A message of reassurance from Japan's prime minister.
A11  Rio Journal: A larger goal is seen in a victory on the playing field.
A4  National A12-17  TRYING TO CHANGE SPIES
The head of the C.I.A. said the case of a spy in the agency was prompting him to change its culture and structure so it would no longer be a "fraternity" of old boys.
A1  CLINTON SOUGHT OFFICIAL'S ADVICE
President Clinton asked the nation's top bank regulator during the 1993 New Year's holiday whether he could advise him about the Clintons' ties to a failed Arkansas savings and loan.A12  LIFE AND DEATH DECISION
The district attorney in Los Angeles is facing a politically difficult decision over whether to seek the death penalty for O. J. Simpson.
A12  Simpson's lawyers reportedly plan to say evidence was planted.
A12  TEACHERS TAKE STAND
The American Federation of Teachers urged the nationwide adoption of a policy of expelling students who take weapons or drugs to school or assault a teacher or student.
A13  BACKING FOR UNIVERSAL COVERAGE
Democratic governors endorsed President Clinton's plan to provide health insurance for all Americans but did not support his plan to have employers pay for that.
A14  SEASON OF ULTIMATUMS
As action on health care nears the brink, ultimatums are coming from all sides, including those who back a Canadian-style system of national insurance that has almost no hope of passing Congress.
A14  Backers of universal health coverage try to regain momentum.
A14  ARMY MURDER CASE BEGINS
A court-martial of a sergeant in the slaying of a young officer last summer that raised questions about Army policy began as military prosecutors laid out the largely circumstantial case against him.
A15  BUDGET REVOLT BEARS FRUIT
After two members of the House began a movement last year to revise how budget cuts are handled, it has gained enough support to force leaders to allow votes on some meaningful spending reduction measures.
A16  MEXICAN FOOD CRITICIZED
A nutrition-advocacy group said food at Mexican restaurants in this country is low in nutritional value.
A16  Metro Digest B1  MONITORING POLICE CORRUPTION
City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone wants a permanent independent agency to monitor police corruption, and some say he has the votes to make it happen.
A1  BEING ELDERLY IN THE SUBURBS
The elderly population continues to grow in the suburbs, a setting that was created for the young and is presenting an array of disturbing new problems.
A1  Business Digest D1  Science Times C1-13  SPECTACULAR SPACE SHOW
Fragments of the dying Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 kicked up fiery explosions and storms on Jupiter yesterday.
The impact of Fragment G outshone the planet itself, leaving astronomers amazed at the brilliance of the display.
A1  California has seen mega-droughts in the past -- and may again.
C1  NASA's new direction brings it into close quarters with Moscow.
C1  Europe considers putting an outpost on the Moon.
C1  Obituaries D17  Fashion Page B6  Arts/Entertainment C15-18  The drive-in survives.
C15  Theater: "The Great Brain." C16  Music: Christie's Mozart.
C15  Books: Bernstein, close but frank.
C18  Television: Michael Moore.
C15  Sports B7-13  WHITHER SOCCER?
The World Cup was a big success, but whether fans in the United States can maintain their new interest in the sport is still to be proved.
A1  Baseball: No progress in player-owner talks.
B7  Hockey: Rangers ask for Keenan investigation.
B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Goodbye to a bad deal.
Mr.
Berlusconi's betrayal.
America the bountiful.
Letters  Russell Baker: Good heavens, Holmes!
It's a gigantic weather!
Donald Koblitz: Germans need their martyrs.
Thomas Fleming: The Hitler assassination plot tragedy.
Chronicle B5  Chess C7  Crossword C18


Vallone Seeks Outside Panel On Corruption
City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone said yesterday that he wants a permanent independent agency to monitor corruption in the New York City Police Department, and Council leaders said he has the votes to push it through.
The Speaker said he would introduce legislation today that would largely echo the recommendation of the Mollen Commission two weeks ago, to create an outside agency with broad investigative powers, including the ability to subpoena witnesses.


CHRONICLE
In Key West, Fla., long the home of Ernest Hemingway, and in Oak Park, Ill., his birthplace, people have been celebrating the writer's birthday -- July 21 -- for a number of years.
So the residents of the Sun Valley, Idaho, area where he spent his final years and is buried decided they, too, ought to mark the occasion.
This week they're celebrating what would have been the writer's 95th birthday with lectures and talks in Ketchum and Hailey, and with a book signing by Michael Reynolds, a Hemingway biographer, complete with a birthday cake at the Sun Valley Mall.


Soothing the Panicky PC User
Louis Finger listens patiently to each anguished caller, usually has an answer that makes the person feel better and never describes any question as stupid, whatever his thoughts.
When he talks about a caller's frustrations he calls them "our problem," never "your problem," even with total strangers -- who are just about the only people he talks to.
Mr.
Finger's manner is like a psychiatrist's; in fact, he has hours of training in "anger diffusion." But the disorders he treats are all electronic; he is a personal computer expert at I.B.M. customer support.


Democratic Governors Avoid Mandates
One day before President Clinton is to address the National Governors' Association, Democratic members of the group today endorsed his goal of health insurance for all Americans but withheld their support for the centerpiece of his proposal, a requirement that employers pay most of the cost.
The Democratic Governors' Association did not say how it would finance health insurance for the 39 million Americans who have no coverage.
Without being specific, the group supported efforts by Congressional leaders to find "an equitable and reliable financing mechanism."


Earth-Size Storm and Fireballs Shake Jupiter as a Comet Dies
A continuing bombardment by fragments of the dying Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 ignited flashes on Jupiter yesterday that outshone the giant planet itself, sending up blazing fireballs and churning the Jovian atmosphere into dark storms, one of them as large as Earth.
The most spectacular of yesterday's impacts was that of Fragment G, which was believed to be the largest of the 21 comet remnants expected to hit Jupiter by Friday.
The impact, at 3:28 A.M.
Eastern time, produced a flash and a fireball so dazzlingly bright that sensitive instruments on large telescopes were unable to measure its intensity.
Briefly the flash exceeded the normal brightness of the entire planet.


Huge Water Project Would Supply Beijing By 860-Mile Aqueduct
One of the largest public works projects ever conceived -- a plan to divert water from the huge reservoir here to Beijing 860 miles north -- has been proposed by China's Communist Party leadership to save the capital from perpetual drought in the next century.
Rivaling even the construction of the 1,500-mile-long Great Wall, in the words of one Government engineer, a huge aqueduct starting here in central China and running north to Beijing and Tianjin seems the only solution to maintaining China's capital as a center for industry, commerce and government.


Making the Okinawan Tradition Rock
The songs of Shoukichi Kina and his band Champloose are perfect examples of traditional music perverted by rock-and-roll.
When the Okinawan group performed its first New York show on Sunday afternoon at the Central Park Summerstage, it demonstrated that corruption can be a good thing.
The band didn't use Western instruments to imitate Western rock, but to further explore the music of its own culture.
Because of this, Mr.
Kina, considered the father of this hybrid Okinawan rock, has become a Bob Marley-like figure in the rest of Japan, where Okinawan music is considered exotic.
The group used a drum set, two electric guitars, a bank of synthesizers and a bass.
The only visual difference between Champloose and other rock bands was the three women in bright, flowing robes who stood at the front of the stage.
They sang in a nasal falsetto that set every dog in the vicinity howling, and they danced and drummed indefatigably throughout the concert.
The women combined Okinawan tradition with the panache of 50's American girl groups.


Baboon Cells Might Repair AIDS-Ravaged Immune Systems
WILL AIDS someday be treated with bone marrow transplanted from baboons or other animals?
Scientists are taking that radical idea seriously, basing their hopes for success on the natural resistance of baboons to H.I.V., the AIDS virus, and on advances in immunology.
The aim is to transfer the disease resistance to H.I.V.-infected people, bridging the species barrier.
Plans are strictly in the experimental phase.
If the experiment works, uninfected baboon cells will join the H.I.V.-infected human marrow and help restore the body's immune function.


Wide Use of Unelected Judges Prompts Voting-Rights Inquiry
To cope with a steadily increasing caseload over the last quarter century, the state has been appointing acting justices to State Supreme Court branches in the five boroughs of New York City.
Some of these justices, like Harold J. Rothwax of Manhattan, are considered among the best on the bench, skillfully handling major trials like the Joel B. Steinberg murder case.


Governor Hasn't Changed on Death Penalty; Time to Exit Gracefully
To the Editor:
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's grandstanding on the death penalty is just his way of grasping at straws in an attempt to get re-elected.


Crusade and a Return From Exile; New York Lawyer Earns His Way Back to the Courtroom
The concept was certainly noble and the cost to the school negligible: a state-financed program to train lawyers to represent battered women.
But in 1991, the Battered Women's Justice Center was still a hard sell to the faculty of the Pace University Law School.
The sticking point: The center's director would be Michael G. Dowd.
A former dean, Steven H. Goldberg, recalled the uproar: "Some said we would send the absolutely wrong message if we put our stamp of approval on someone who had been suspended from the practice of law."


Porter/Novelli Sets Technology Group
Porter/Novelli said yesterday that it had formed a public relations group specializing in national consumer technology by combining its operations in that area with those of its recently acquired high-tech unit, Brodeur &amp; Partners of Waltham, Mass.


Poison Ivy's Far Too Serious for Spoofing; Sufferers Are Angry
To the Editor:
I agree most wholeheartedly with Gary Krist and his defense of the use of poison ivy ("Poison Ivy Myths: Up in Smoke," Op-Ed, July 7).


Rough Sex Led to Boy's Death, Officer Says
The youth accused of strangling his 12-year-old classmate at a school for emotionally disturbed children told detectives he put his hands around the boy's neck as the two engaged in rough sexual intercourse, investigators testified during a preliminary court hearing today.
" 'He was screaming for me to get off him,' " Det.
Arthur Romaine of the Town of Mount Pleasant police said the boy, Brian Edwards, told him during an early morning interview last Tuesday, the day after the killing.
" 'It was getting rough. It was getting pretty physical.' "


Observer; Good Heavens, Holmes! It's a Gigantic Weather!
Louie Allen is dead now who used to do the TV weather on Channel 9, Washington, with nothing but a crayon and a big sheet of drawing paper.
That was back in the 1950's, or maybe 60's, and it's been downhill ever since for TV weather, as well as for men called Louie, which is to say they don't make 'em anymore.
Nowadays instead they make guys who are called Chad and Joel, Sean and Kevin, even Lu-ees.


Ailing Sampras to Take a Rest
PETE SAMPRAS withdrew from the Legg Mason Tennis Classic yesterday because of an injured left ankle and will not return until at least early next month.
Sampras, the world's top-ranked player, was examined by a local orthopedic surgeon, who detected an inflamed ligament. (AP)


Israelis and Jordanians Meet, In Public and With Optimism; CHRISTOPHER SEES PEACE
In an uncharacteristic burst of optimism, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that there were new opportunities for peace between Israel and Syria and declared the decades-long conflict between Israelis and Arabs nearly over.
Mr.
Christopher acknowledged that he could not report any concrete progress with Syria over the Golan Heights.
And senior officials traveling with him noted that President Hafez al-Assad, who has ruled Syria since 1970, is not generally susceptible to outside pressure.


North Koreans Begin a 2-Day Funeral for Kim
The glass coffin containing the body of Kim Il Sung was carried through the streets of North Korea's capital in a motorcade this morning as funeral proceedings began for the self-proclaimed Great Leader who ruled the Communist nation for nearly five decades.
The final ceremonies, which are to last two days, cap a 10-day frenzy of mourning intended not only to say goodbye to the only leader North Korea has ever known, but also to pave the emotional pathway for the assumption of power by his son and chosen successor, Kim Jong Il.
The transition seems to have been unexpectedly smooth, though there is no precedent for a dynastic succession in a Communist country.


By Design; Patent Is Back
First, Calvin Klein showed patent leather penny loafers and Mary Janes in his fall CK collection.
Then, Marc Jacobs put his models into high-heeled patent sandals.
Voila!
Patent leather is back in fashion.
The style promises to come on strong for fall with the arrival in stores next month of Mr.
Klein's shoes, Robert Clergerie's knee-high boots and Manolo Blahnik's stiletto-heeled Mary Janes and boots.


Rwanda Rebels' Victory Attributed to Discipline
After nearly four years of intermittent war, Rwanda's Tutsi-dominated rebel front has routed the larger Hutu-controlled Rwandan Army through a combination of perseverance, superior tactics and a big edge in motivation and discipline.
"The rebels were both better led and better trained," said Frank Smyth, author of "Arming Rwanda: The Arms Trade and Human Rights Abuses in the Rwandan War," a report by Human Rights Watch released in January 1994.
"They were a more highly motivated and disciplined force. It's surprising to me that the army held out as long as it did. They felt they were fighting for their lives. The Presidential Guard were good killers. But overall this was a classic despot army."


No Babygate II for Oilers
The Houston Oilers opened training camp again but the big news around the team had nothing to do with the players or on-field exercises: DAVID WILLIAMS's wife, DEBI, is pregnant again.
This time, there probably won't be any Babygate controversy, however.
Mrs.
Williams isn't due until February, so Williams most likely won't get into trouble again for skipping a game to attend the birth of a child.
Last season, the Oilers incurred considerable negative publicity when they fined the offensive tackle for not getting to a game at New England the day after he was with his wife while she gave birth. (AP)


Transit Police Union Rejects Tentative Contract With City
The union for New York City's transit police officers yesterday rejected a tentative contract that the city and union leadership had announced last week, making it likely that the dispute will go before a state arbitration board.
The move came as the executive committee and member delegates of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, which represents 22,300 officers in the New York City Police Department, approved an almost identical agreement.
The contract will go to the P.B.A.'s full membership for a ratification vote.


Bosnian Serb Denounces Peace Plan
The Bosnian Serb leader invoked visions today of all-out war in Bosnia and beyond as he argued before the self-styled Bosnian Serb Parliament in Pale against Serbian acceptance of a new international peace plan..
But at a meeting here in the Bosnian capital, the Parliament of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government, in federation with the Bosnian Croats, approved the plan after a brief debate.
The proposed settlement, prepared by the United States, Russia, France, Britain and Germany, offers 51 percent of Bosnia to the Muslim-led government, and 49 percent to the Serbs, who currently hold 70 percent.


Yank Hitters Help Salvage Hitchcock's Wild Return
Sterling Hitchcock's erratic control could have ruined the Yankees.
Another off-the-field controversy could have distracted the Yankees.
Neither did.
Suddenly more colorful than cautious, the Yankees continued ignoring any negative karma and continued winning.
On an evening when Hitchcock's audition for a permanent berth in the rotation bombed before the fourth inning ended and on a day when questionable remarks by a team executive about children in the South Bronx had the Yankees scrambling to play spin doctors, the product on the field was reliable enough for them to register a 5-3 victory over the Athletics at the Oakland Coliseum.


Decrescendo In Opera Series At Aix Festival
As recently as 1989 the Aix Festival, the best and most prestigious French summer music festival since its founding in 1948, presented five operas.
That figure had fallen to three by 1993, and when a new production of Mozart's "Zauberflote" opened this year's installment on Friday night, the festival was down to one opera in a two-week period, to be given eight times.
That compares with 40 opera performances not so long ago, and 20 in 1991.
But the Aix Festival, in what Le Monde today called "one of the most troubling periods in its history," remains devoted to high artistic achievement.
Indeed, Louis Erlo, the festival director, has managed a "Zauberflote" that not only surpasses the Handel "Orlando" and Weber "Euryanthe" of last summer, but also recalls the festival's glorious past as a Mozart center and stakes a bold claim for quality over compromise in the face of budgetary adversity.


Israelis Seal Off Gaza After Rioting
Israel sealed off the Gaza Strip today, restricting the movement of one million inhabitants there and the transport of goods to or from the area where Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, now lives.
Israeli officials would not say how long the border would remain closed, only that it would be until "further notice."


Administration Takes to Road for Health Plan
Supporters of government guarantees of health insurance for all Americans, struggling to regain momentum in Congress, today began a week of public events that were intended to make the case that the middle class will suffer if only partial health care reform is enacted.
President Clinton traveled to Miami Beach to speak to a leading Hispanic organizations, and attacked what he portrayed as "Band-Aid" proposals for patching up the nation's health care system.


INSIDE
Blast Hits Argentine Jews
A blast ripped through the headquarters of Jewish groups in Buenos Aires, killing at least 17 people and wounding more than 120.
Page A3.
Clinton Sought S.&amp; L. Advice
The nation's top bank regulator says the President asked him for advice about handling personal ties to an Arkansas savings and loan.
Page A15.
Sneak Peeks at Tax Returns
More than 1,300 I.R.S. employees have been investigated since 1989 for possible abuse of system computers to snoop on taxpayers.
Page D1.
New Yankee Furor in Bronx
Racial remarks attributed to a Yankees official touched off a furor among Bronx politicians and neighbors of Yankee Stadium.
Page B1.


EXODUS CONTINUES
The rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front announced a cease-fire today and declared victory in its four-year battle against the Government.
But representatives of relief agencies said they still faced another huge surge of refugees.
"We have captured all of Rwanda up to the French protection zone and a cease-fire is effectively in place," the rebel leader, Paul Kagame, said today in Kigali, the capital.
French troops have carved out an area in southwestern Rwanda to offer a haven for civilian refugees.


CHRONICLE
PHIL COLLINS, the British pop star, is seeking a divorce from his wife of 10 years, Reuters reported yesterday.
The 43-year-old singer and songwriter issued a statement on Friday about his divorce plans after his wife, Jill, was quoted as saying he was going through a midlife crisis.
Admitting in the statement that he had had an affair with a former girlfriend two years ago, Mr.
Collins said: "Contrary to what has been reported, I am not going through a '40-something thing.' In simple human terms, I am not in love with my partner anymore. I cannot stay in a relationship where the flame, at least from my standpoint, has burnt out."


Disney's Chief on His Feet 2 Days After Heart Surgery
The Walt Disney Company said today that Roy E. Disney, its vice chairman, was "minding the store," along with company divisional heads, as Michael D. Eisner, its chairman, recuperated from the emergency quadruple heart-bypass surgery he underwent on Saturday.
John Dreyer, a company spokesman, said Mr.
Eisner had taken a short walk and had spoken to several of his executives by telephone this morning to talk about company management issues.
Mr.
Dreyer reiterated that Mr.
Eisner was expected to leave the hospital, the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, within a few days.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
WILLIAM W. PUTNEY, a retired veterinarian, was determined that the dogs that served in the Marines in the Pacific theater in World War II would not be forgotten.
As a result of his efforts, a monument will be dedicated to them on Thursday on Guam.
"During the battle and liberation of Guam, the Marine Corps War Dog Platoons had 25 dogs killed in action," said Dr.
Putney, who was the commanding officer for the dogs and their handlers.
During a visit eight years ago to see the War Dog Cemetery, he was distressed to see it had been moved into the jungle and was sorely neglected.
"I got the Navy to move the cemetery to the naval station at Orote Point, and the United Doberman Club commissioned Susan Bahary Wilner to cast a statue of the Doberman, the official Marine war dog in World War II," he said from Guam yesterday.
"Those dogs saved hundreds of lives in the battle of Guam. Now I can go to my grave knowing that the dogs have a good place to rest and the Government is honoring them in the manner they rightly deserve." NADINE BROZAN


Microsoft
Far from tainting Microsoft's reputation, the antitrust settlement with and harsh words from the Justice Department did not seem to disturb the company's investors.
Analysts say the Government could have taken more severe action, even a Bell System-style breakup.
In its first full day of trading after the settlement, Microsoft's stock rose strongly.


Hanns Kornell Is Dead at 83; Built and Lost a Major Winery
Hanns Kornell, who built and lost a multimillion-dollar sparkling wine business and then spent his last years virtually indigent, died at his home in the Napa Valley in California on Sunday.
He was 83.
The cause of death was complications after a series of strokes, his daughter, Paula, said.


U.S. Taken With World Cup, But What About Pro Soccer?
Americans showed up in record numbers for the World Cup.
The question now is, how many of them will come back to support a new professional soccer league and nourish the sport in general?
As of today, soccer will largely disappear from television and the sports pages until April, when the proposed Major League Soccer league is scheduled to begin play.


At Conde Nast, Changed Mind
In a curious reversal of a decision announced less than a week ago, Conde Nast Publications Inc. said yesterday that Alexandra Penney would remain as editor in chief of Self magazine instead of becoming director of media development for the company's magazine unit.
Ms.
Penney said she had reconsidered because she realized that the new challenge she had been seeking was at Self.
"Whenever I've taken on a challenge in the past, it was always to take something and turn it around and make it successful," she said in a telephone interview.
"I've never taken something that's at the top of its game and made it better. That's going to be my new challenge."


Easy Ways To Start Preparing A Pedigree
THE end of both a century and a millennium seems a natural time to get interested in one's family history.
Genealogical research isn't easy, though, even with a personal computer to help.
"There's been a significant increase in the number of people who want to research and document their family history," said Myrna LeFerver Smith, a genealogical consultant with the Menlo Park Family History Center in California.
"This is largely due to the fact that we are approaching the end of the 20th century, and people of all ages are becoming aware of their place in history and of their connections with both the past and future."


Synergen Halts Tests; Stock Dives
Synergen's stock price plunged nearly 50 percent yesterday, and the future of the once high-flying biotechnology company fell into doubt, after the company said it was halting human trials of its flagship drug, Antril, for the treatment of sepsis, an often-fatal kind of bacterial infection.
Synergen's announcement followed a series of disappointments for other biotechnology drugs in recent months that have contributed to a protracted bear market for biotech stocks.


Craig Miller Memorial
A memorial gathering for Craig Miller, a lighting designer for ballet, theater and opera, will be held at 2 P.M. on Friday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street.
Mr.
Miller died on June 7 of cancer.


ABC Snores Its Way for 120 Minutes
You're ABC.
You're broadcasting the final game in the biggest sports event in the world.
You can provide your World Cup viewers with your most exciting, inviting and heart-pounding announcing team.
But, alas, you don't.
You go with the passionless Roger Twibell, Seamus Malin and Rick Davis.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; As merger partners, Ammirati provides style, while Interpublic promises a large network.
WHEN Katharine Hepburn was asked why the unlikely pairing of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers was so successful, Ms.
Hepburn replied it was because she gave him sex and he gave her class.
For the teaming of Ammirati &amp; Puris Inc. and the Interpublic Group of Companies to work as well, Ammirati must play Astaire's part and Interpublic must give Ammirati growth opportunities in place of hubba-hubba.
The union of Ammirati, an independent shop with a reputation for deft creativity, and Interpublic, the world's No. 2 agency company, was announced yesterday, as expected.
Interpublic signed an agreement to acquire Ammirati after months of on-again, off-again negotiations.


Chess
When the question was put to a group of illustrious figures of the game, "How many moves ahead do you see?," most of the answers ranged between 10 and 20.
The one maverick was Richard Reti, 1889-1929, a founder, along with Aron Nimzovich and Julius Breyer, of ultra-positional hypermodernism.
He replied, "One move -- but it is always the best."
Reti was stressing the importance of judgment as contrasted to calculation, the mapping out of general strategy as contrasted to concrete tactical operations and the carrying out of plans.
Yet he knew very well that chess on a high level cannot be played without a balance of both.


Microsoft's New System Promises to Fix Glitches
"GOIN' to Chicago," runs the classic blues lyric, "sorry, but I can't take you." It is a tune the Microsoft Corporation apparently hopes computer users will consider singing to their current Windows software.
Chicago is the not-so-secret code name of the next version of Windows, the operating system that dominates the personal computer software market.
Beginning in June a release dubbed "Beta-1" (computerese for "nowhere near ready for public consumption") was shipped to more than 10,000 test sites, and Microsoft now says the final edition should appear by late this year or early next year.
Many industry experts do not expect it until as much as six months later.


No Headline
"If they'd ripped off $35,000 and gone to the Cayman Islands, it would be different. But they used it to buy feed for hogs. I'm not saying they were right. But they were desperate." BILL CHAPIN, the lawyer for a Nebraska farmer.  [ A10:2. ] "If you're going to avail yourself of the bankruptcy courts, you have certain obligations. And one of them is to tell the truth. He didn't do that." THOMAS J. MONAGHAN, United States Attorney.  [ A10:2. ]


Genentech Inc.(GNE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reebok Intl(RBK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Does Belle's Bat Case Ring True?
THE Case of the Purloined Bat seems to be open and shut, but is it?
It is a nefarious crime, since it impacts not only on a man's reputation but even more important, for some, on the division race itself!
Albert Belle, the Indian slugger, is appealing a suspension for use of a corked bat, and is being allowed to play until the league hearing scheduled for July 29.
Belle also happens to be going for a record, since this is the fourth time he has been suspended in four years, though the first time for corking.


Legal Bid to Block Cuomo Primary Foe
ALBANY, July 19
Three Democratic county leaders filed papers today challenging the nominating petitions of Lenora Fulani, a perennial candidate with the New Alliance Party who is seeking to run against Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in the Democratic primary.
Though Ms.
Fulani is not considered a threat to Mr.
Cuomo, the Governor's aides fear a primary could cost money and possibly weaken his stature going into the general election.


Lamson &amp; Sessions (LMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


About Real Estate; A Growing Orlando, Fla., to Get 3 More Large Malls
Three regional malls are planned here, the first new malls to be built in the city in eight years.
Construction is under way on Seminole Towne Center, a 1.2-million-square-foot project being built by the Simon Property Group.
The Homart Development Company plans to build a 1.1-million-square-foot mall.
And the Rouse Company recently announced plans for a yet-unnamed mall that will have 1.2 million square feet of space.


Landstar System Inc.(LSTR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Coastal Banc Savings Association reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Equifax Inc.(EFX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp.(OCF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lunar Legacy
When Neil Armstrong set foot on the moon 25 years ago today, the nation responded ecstatically.
It was not just that American astronauts had beaten Soviet cosmonauts to the moon in the cold war's most visible symbolic struggle.
Their feat implied that the same combination of heroism, determination, technical wizardry and managerial genius would soon conquer other worlds and a host of earthly ills as well.
But how fast the dream dissipated!
The space agency that put astronauts on the moon later blew up the shuttle Challenger and gained a reputation for incompetence rather than omnipotence.
Space budgets shriveled.
NASA lowered its sights.
Instead of venturing onward to Mars, astronauts now cling close to home, working only in low earth orbit.
It is as if, critics say, Columbus's epic voyage to the New World had been followed with boat trips around the harbor.


AK Steel Holding Corp.(AKST,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wine Talk
COLLECTORS are a breed apart; rich collectors even more so.
According to an article in The New Yorker, a well-off bibliophile recently paid $17,500 for an undistinguished out-of-print children's book because it had an original dust jacket.
Wealthy wine enthusiasts are no different.
They eagerly spend thousands to acquire ancient bottles of often undrinkable wine.
Why?
Because the labels are famous.


Summit Bancorp (N.J.) (SUBN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CCB Financial (CCBF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, hnowever, we regert that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Earthly Worries Supplant Euphoria of Moon Shots
Twenty-five years ago today, much of humanity listened to Neil Armstrong's first words on the moon and pondered the implications of his "giant leap for mankind." It was a day for taking stock and looking ahead, for prophesying the technological marvels and perils of the next quarter-century, and as usual it turns out that the prophets erred.
Their two biggest mistakes were failing to foresee two things:


Western Digital Corp.(WDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Geon Co. (GON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rockwell International (ROK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alex. Brown Inc.(AB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 24


Get Ready For Field Gooooaaal By Meola
The Jets today told Tony Meola they would see him Saturday night for the opening of training camp.
"I've got to be in by 6 o'clock?" said America's World Cup soccer goalie and the newest member of the Jets.
"I've got to learn the rules here."


Albany International Corp.(AIN,NX) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Farmer, 70, Saw No Choice; Nor Did the Sentencing Judge
Ernest Krikava, wearing bib overalls caked with the dust of the Nebraska fields he was struggling to save after 50 years on the farm, would trudge past the hog pens and cringe at the frantic sound of his hungry pigs: a pained, high-pitched wail.
It was the sound of starvation.
But there was no money for feed.
The 70-year-old Mr.
Krikava was behind on his loan payments, and the bank, which held a lien on his assets, including his hogs, was keeping the bulk of his income toward repayment of his debt of $240,000, releasing little to maintain his 1,000-acre farm.


Comdisco Inc.(CDO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Williams Cos.(WMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


This Time, Mets Enjoy The Comic Relief
The Mets know about bullpen disasters -- they tend to create them.
Game after game, Manager Dallas Green goes to his bullpen with trepidation, never certain what kind of performance he will get.
Tommy Lasorda must know exactly how Green feels.


LOTUS DEVELOPMENT CORP. (LOTS,N)
The Lotus Development Corporation stunned Wall Street yesterday, as it reported lower-than-expected earnings and said it could not promise better results in the second half of the year.
Its stock fell 14.5 percent, or $5.625, closing at $33.125 on Nasdaq.
The software maker, based in Cambridge, Mass., said its second-quarter profit from operations fell 36 percent as introductions of several key products were delayed and the company faced more competition from the Microsoft Corporation.


65 Meet to Set Standards for the Information Highway
In the hope of averting a collision of competing technologies, representatives from the computer, broadcast and telecommunications industries have joined to develop a set of standards for construction of the information highway.
The New York-based American National Standards Institute will work with a panel of representatives from industries that hope to set ground rules or standards that would make a costly competitive battle over the fine technical points of the data highway avoidable.


Accounts
*
Turner Classic Movies, Atlanta, to Mad Dogs and Englishmen, New York, as the first agency to handle the account of the new cable television network.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Paramount Parks, Charlotte, N.C., to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, to handle its account, previously handled by various agencies.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications estimated them at $10 million.


One Part Grisham, Three Parts Telling Detail
If the opening episode of "The Client" has not yet entered the pantheon of classic American storytelling, at least it's well known on every beach, bus and airplane in the land.
Here it is: an 11-year-old boy sneaks off to smoke a cigarette, then witnesses the suicide of a mob lawyer, right after the lawyer has told him where an important body is buried.
John Grisham, reigning master of the instant grabber, has yet to concoct a savvier beginning than this.
Knowing that Mr.
Grisham has never written a book that Hollywood didn't like, his readers may recognize this as the blueprint for a movie scene.
But until they see "The Client" on screen, they might not suppose that the boy wears an earring, looks sullen and furtively watches his mother's pocketbook in hopes of stealing cigarettes behind her back.
Or that this thriller has room for countless other small, knowing touches that bring it to life.


Italian Withdraws Divisive Edict That Freed Corruption Suspects
Bowing to a revolt within his divided coalition Government, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi today withdrew a six-day-old decree that had been widely denounced as an effort to cover up white-collar crime.
Mr.
Berlusconi, whose coalition emerged from elections in March, said the decree, which changed the rules on preventive detention, would be replaced by a bill to be sent to Parliament.
The bill, said a Government spokesman, Giuliano Ferrara, would also allow detention for serious crimes against the public, including bribery and corruption.


Arvin Industries Inc.(ARV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Zoll Medical
Shares of the Zoll Medical Corporation lost more than a third of their value yesterday after the company, which makes heart-resuscitation devices, posted sharply lower third-quarter earnings, of 3 cents a share.
Some analysts had expected as much as 23 cents a share.


Outside Review In Lease Case Gains Support
Former Mayor David N. Dinkins and Public Advocate Mark J. Green both called yesterday for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to name an outside monitor to examine the leases granted to 15 administration officials and former campaign workers by a real-estate executive who was one of the Mayor's major fund-raisers.
The two Democrats said the Mayor's strong defense of his aides had made it difficult for either the Department of Investigation or the city's Corporation Counsel to be considered credible judges of the lease arrangements.
Most of the campaign aides and officials received between two and three months of free rent in four buildings owned by the fund-raiser, William W. Koeppel.
Dinkins and Green Speak Out
"There needs to be an independent investigation for the reason that the Mayor has indicated his posture, which makes it difficult for the Department of Investigation to do anything about it," said Mr.
Dinkins, answering questions after he addressed a group of students in City Hall yesterday.


Temple-Inland Inc.(TIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Back Rehabilitation for Barkley
CHARLES BARKLEY has to learn a new golf swing.
It's part of the Phoenix Suns forward's effort to rehabilitate his back for next season.
A bulging disk was found in Barkley's lower spine last summer.
Thickening tissue around a nerve near his spine caused numbness and weakness in his legs, leading to a collapse during training camp in October.
After waffling over retirement, Barkley decided to face up to months of rehabilitation to strengthen his back so he could play another season.
Dr.
ARTHUR WHITE, a spinal surgeon in Daly City, Calif., is overseeing the effort, along with the Suns' physician, RICHARD EMERSON.
Emerson said Barkley, an avid golfer, will be taught how to modify his swing to help eliminate spinal stress.
Barkley faces two months of therapy and workouts, six days a week for two to four hours a day. (AP)


Haverty Furniture Cos.  (HAVT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Graf Will Try to Go on Attack More Often
STEFFI GRAF says that she wants to go to the net more often, but that at age 25 it might be too late in her career to change her style of play.
"I should have come in more against LORI McNEIL," Graf, a signature baseline player, said yesterday in a conference call from her Manhattan apartment, alluding to her first-round defeat at Wimbledon.
"But it's difficult to change my game and start now."
Nevertheless, Graf, the top-ranked women's player, said she would try to attack more often when she begins play tomorrow night in the Pathmark Classic in Mahwah, N.J.
She has not played in the Pathmark since winning it for the third straight year in 1990.


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (MAH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Camco International (CAM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


From Fresh-Baked Bread to Bulldozers: Former Taystee Plant Is Demolished


New Jupiter Scars May Be Only Skin Deep
As more cometary fragments hurtled into Jupiter yesterday, black, Earth-size spots blossoming across the planet's southern hemisphere left it looking battered.
But some astronomers believe that the havoc, evident even to amateur stargazers with back-yard telescopes, may be only skin deep.
Scientists began to catch their breath yesterday after three days of continuous excitement, during which the face of Jupiter has changed from minute to minute in a planetary show unequaled in recorded history.
Jupiter's bombardment by fragments of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, which began Saturday afternoon, will continue until Friday, when the last of 21 large fragments is expected to hit.


Western Digital Corp.(WDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Straws Stirring in the Bronx
In the beginning, there was Billy versus Reggie, George versus Reggie, and, of course, George versus everybody.
There were the old Yankees -- the Martin, Jackson, Steinbrenner Yankees, bombastic Yankees, rich in triumphs and rife with egos, a high-octane mix of talent and controversy stirred by, well, Reggie's straw.
And now there is . . . Billy Connors versus Matt Nokes?


Justin Industries (JSTN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Italy's Economy Posts Gains, Not Losses; Cellular Necessity
To the Editor:
Your July 6 news article made reference to merchants busily speaking on cellular phones in an unnamed city between San Sepolcro and Monterchi in Umbria.
Your tone indicated they were so rich (or indolent) they could afford to use a cellular phone.


Fresh Corn in Patties
SWEET local corn and tomatoes are in markets now, and they are the best that summer has to offer.
For a change, make patties by mixing the corn with some chicken and adding a few seasonings to heighten the sweet flavor.
If you wish, complete the meal with a slice of good country bread.
Game Plan Prepare patties through Step 6.
Prepare tomatoes Finish patties.
Corn-and-Chicken Patties With Basil Sauce
8 ounces whole onion or 7 ounces chopped ready-cut onion (1 2/3 cups)  1 teaspoon canola oil  2 ears corn or 1 heaping cup corn kernels  8 ounces skinless, boneless chicken breasts  1/3 cup dry bread crumbs  1 tablespoon hot-sweet mustard  1/2 teaspoon ground cumin  Black pepper to taste  6 tablespoons nonfat yogurt  2 tablespoons reduced-fat sour cream  8 to 10 large leaves basil (to yield 2 tablespoons chopped).
1. Chop onion, if whole.
2.
Heat large nonstick pan over very high heat.
Add oil, and reduce heat to medium high.
3. Saute onion until it begins to brown. Do not wash out pan.
4. Scrape off kernels. Put corn and chicken into food processor; grind.
5.
Add bread crumbs, mustard, cumin and pepper to food processor.
Mix well.
Stir onion into the mixture.
6.
Shape 6 or 7 patties.
Brown on both sides in the pan used for the onion, cooking for about 10 minutes.
7. Mix yogurt and sour cream.
8.
Wash, dry and chop basil, and stir into the sour cream and yogurt.
Serve with the patties.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 405 calories, 7 grams fat, 70 milligrams cholesterol, 340 milligrams sodium, 35 grams protein, 50 grams carbohydrate.
Honey-Mustard Tomatoes
2 ripe medium-large tomatoes  1 to 2 tablespoons hot-sweet mustard  Freshly ground black pepper.
Wash, dry and trim tomatoes; slice thick.
Spread the mustard on each slice, sprinkle with pepper and serve.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 70 calories, 1 gram fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 85 milligrams sodium, 2 grams protein, 15 grams carbohydrate.


Beepers Track Baseball With Home-Run Alerts
The Toronto Blue Jays, winners of last year's World Series, may be struggling this season.
But the hand-held wireless monitor that Motorola Inc. built to help fans scattered across Canada track the progress of each Jays game has been a hit this season and last.
Now the Chicago White Sox figure their fans deserve the same high-tech lifeline, so Motorola showed up here at Comiskey Park for tonight's game against the Detroit Tigers to announce the immediate availability of the first American version of the device, called the Sports Trax.


Public Service Enterprise Group Inc.(PEG,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp.(DNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dow Slips 7.12 Points in Sluggish Trading
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, is not expected to say anything before Congress today that will stampede the financial markets.
Nonetheless, stock traders throttled back their trading yesterday in advance of his testimony.
Bank earnings, helped by the Fed's interest-rate increases earlier this year, were strong, usually a signal for a pickup in stocks.
Citicorp, Chemical Banking and Chase Manhattan all reported unexpectedly robust quarterly profits.


In Rural Ohio, Armstrong Quietly Lives on His Own Dark Side of the Moon
After that one small step on the moon and all the hoopla that followed, Neil A. Armstrong landed here in flat and familiar small-town Ohio.
Back on Earth, the hero of the heavens with the cherubic face disappeared behind a tangle of trees off a country road where he pursued ranching, engineering and, above all, obscurity.
While fame opened glamorous options, Mr.
Armstrong chose life in a place much like the one where he was reared.
Thirty miles from his new teaching job at the University of Cincinnati, he found a community of 10,500 people willing to help him create his own dark side of the moon.


Nicor Inc.(GAS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Conrail Inc.(CRR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Profit Is Down Sharply At Merrill and Lehman
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the nation's largest securities firm, and Lehman Brothers Holdings, a large stock and bond underwriter, reported sharp declines in second-quarter earnings yesterday.
Two major regional firms -- Raymond James of St.
Petersburg, Fla. and the Inter-Regional Financial Group of Minneapolis -- also reported big drops in their profit.


Kroger Co. (KR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 18


Italy's Economy Posts Gains, Not Losses
To the Editor:
Your July 6 news article on Italy paints a grotesquerie of "very real fiscal problems" that differs sharply from reality.
During the entire month of June, my wife and I toured the country, speaking with people at every stratum of society, getting the feel of post-election Italy.


A Pope Who Is as Prolific as He Is High-Priced
When Alfred A. Knopf announced last week that it planned to pay more than $6 million for a book by Pope John Paul II, among the biggest selling points, the company said, was the fact that it was so rare for a pope to write a general-interest book.
But as they looked through their files, several rival publishers found something very interesting: previous Pope books, some they'd published themselves.
In fact, as far as making public pronouncements goes, this Pope is hardly the Sphinx.
He has published poems and plays.
He has published dozens of homilies, speeches and essays, alone and in compilation.
Most of the books have been published by Roman Catholic presses, but several have been brought out by trade publishers and marketed as works of general interest.


Prosecutor Confronts Specter of Racial Bias in Simpson Case
Reflecting racial sensitivities that have kept this city on edge in recent years, a group of civil rights leaders met today with District Attorney Gil Garcetti and urged him to tread carefully in his prosecution of O. J. Simpson.
"This is a continuation of previous discussions and exchanges that leaders from the African-American community have had to try to narrow the racial divide with the criminal justice system," said John Mack, president of the Los Angeles chapter of the Urban League, who played host to Mr.
Garcetti and half a dozen civil rights leaders, including the Rev.
Cecil Murray of the First African Methodist Episcopal Church.
Promise of Fair Trial
After the meeting, Mr.
Garcetti promised that Mr.
Simpson would receive a fair trial, saying, "We're interested in fairness for Mr. Simpson and that's my interest also. But we're also interested in fairness to the victims and interested in fairness, frankly, for the community as a whole."


Kellogg enlists real people to stress the value of its breakfast.
THE Kellogg Company is extending ambitious efforts to change consumer perceptions that the prices of its cereals are as high as the corn in Kansas in August.
Humorous television commercials and print advertisements by Leo Burnett U.S.A. promote the notion that the prices of three best-selling Kellogg brands -- Frosted Flakes, Raisin Bran and Rice Krispies -- are "just part of the value in a Kellogg's breakfast."


Mayor Booed as Residents Focus on Race
Jeered repeatedly, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani faced questions at a town meeting in Queens last night about police conduct, cuts in summer jobs, his Board of Education appointments and a deputy mayor's rhetoric.
The town meeting, Mr.
Giuliani's seventh, was the first he had held in a predominantly black neighborhood.
During the two hours, he was heckled as he defended Deputy Mayor John S. Dyson, who had said City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi "ought to know the difference between a bid and a watermelon" during a dispute over whether the city should hire a financial firm owned by a black woman.
Mr.
Dyson subsequently apologized, saying he had not meant the comment as a racial slur. 'Take Him Out of Office'
"You say you accept his apology," Al Haj Abdus-Alaam said to the Mayor from a microphone in Springfield Gardens High School.
"We say take him out of office."


Mellon Bank Corp.(MEL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mexico Rebellion: Politics Heat Up, Talks Cool Down
Earlier this year, the Government seemed intent on negotiating an end to the rebel uprising in southern Mexico before the presidential election in late August.
Now, with one of the most important elections in Mexican history less than five weeks away, the Government has all but abandoned hope of reaching a settlement before the vote, and the rebels' demands for national political reform remain unmet.


Northern Trust Corp.(NTRS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Familiar Late-Night Face For New Day: Tom Snyder
After a 12 1/2-year hiatus, Tom Snyder is preparing to return to late-night network television.
Unless protracted negotiations derail at the last minute, Mr.
Snyder, 57, will command the hour beginning at 12:35 A.M. each weeknight on CBS, right after David Letterman's show.
Mr.
Snyder was, in fact, selected by Mr.
Letterman.
As part of the three-year deal that brought the late-night star to CBS from NBC last year, Mr.
Letterman's production company, Worldwide Pants, was given the rights to produce a show in the time slot after "Late Show With David Letterman."


Swift Transportation Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Galey &amp; Lord Inc.(GANL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Tribune Co.(TRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Energy Service Co. (ESV,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Continental Bank Corp.(CBK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mark Twain Bancshares Inc.(MTWN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Personal Health; On land or, especially, sea, an old malady.
THOSE who feel queasy at the mere thought of a long car ride, an airplane trip in bad weather or a sail on a rolling sea may take small comfort in the fact that they are hardly alone.
Fully 90 percent of people are susceptible to motion sickness to varying degrees, and, going back in history, they have had some illustrious company in their misery.
Lawrence of Arabia, for example, had difficulty keeping down lunch while riding on his camel in the campaign against the Turks.
Charles Darwin is said to have "discovered" evolution after insisting that he be let off the Beagle to quell his seasickness.
Cicero, Julius Caesar, Winston Churchill and Admiral Lord Nelson (his high naval ranking helped him not) were also plagued by motion sickness.


Beckman Instruments (BEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


One Part Grisham, Three Parts Telling Detail
If the opening episode of "The Client" has not yet entered the pantheon of classic American storytelling, at least it's well known on every beach, bus and airplane in the land.
Here it is: an 11-year-old boy sneaks off to smoke a cigarette, then witnesses the suicide of a mob lawyer, right after the lawyer has told him where an important body is buried.
John Grisham, reigning master of the instant grabber, has yet to concoct a savvier beginning than this.
Knowing that Mr.
Grisham has never written a book that Hollywood didn't like, his readers may recognize this as the blueprint for a movie scene.
But until they see "The Client" on screen, they might not suppose that the boy wears an earring, looks sullen and furtively watches his mother's pocketbook in hopes of stealing cigarettes behind her back.
Or that this thriller has room for countless other small, knowing touches that bring it to life.


Barnes Group Inc.(B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hussein, King of Realpolitik
The pioneer of realism in the Arab perception of Israel was not President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt, who made peace with Israel in 1979.
It was King Hussein of Jordan, who was talking amicably, but secretly, with Israeli leaders when Egyptian and Israeli forces were still exchanging bombardments and casualties.
As an ardent Arab nationalist, King Hussein would probably have preferred a Middle East without Israel, but he was quicker than any other Arab leader to understand that Israel had passed the threshold of destructibility.


FirstTier Financial Inc.(FRST,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wolverine World Wide Inc.(WWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 18


Heritage Media Corp.(HTG,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


If It's Tuesday (Make That Dienstag), This Must Be the Grand Canyon
Lutz Jung blut, a high school English teacher from Germany, claims he has never been one to toss around superlatives.
"Americans say, 'It was incredible!' " he said.
"They say, 'It was great! I loved it! You have to go there!' We Germans are more rational. We might say: 'We liked it very much, but you have to see it for yourself.' "
But on the sixth day of his 12-day, 2,500-mile, high-speed, highly organized bus tour of the American West, Mr.
Jungblut was getting carried away.
Standing at the west rim here, amid people exclaiming in Italian, French, Spanish, Dutch, Japanese, Greek, English and, yes, German, he proclaimed the Grand Canyon "perfect, a miracle." It was, he said, even better than the movies.
Later, he went even further: He loved the Grand Canyon.


Scott Paper Co.(SPP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


In America; The Monkey Wrench
So I went up to Macombs Dam Park in the Bronx to see the so-called monkeys and the colored boys doing their thing, but it had been raining for a couple of days and the park was deserted.
Monkeys and colored boys are terms (not quite of endearment) that refer to the black and brown youngsters who play in the park, which is next door to the gleaming blue and white baseball palace called Yankee Stadium.


Continuum Co. (CNU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


KeyCorp (KEY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tidewater Inc.(TDW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Topics of The Times; Don't Starve the Police Corps
Last-minute wrangling in a Congressional conference committee over the crime bill may eliminate some of its most innovative and valuable provisions.
The wrangling also threatens to impoverish programs both houses have agreed on.
One example is the Police Corps, which would grant college scholarships to students willing to serve city police departments after graduation.
Both the Senate and the House voted $100 million for this program in its first year and $250 million for the second year; now a figure of $25 million a year is being suggested, to be shared between the police corps and a police education program.


ROCK
Blues About Lost Love With a Hint of Country  The Bottom Line
Ted Hawkins has enough idiosyncrasies for a whole band.
Playing at the Bottom Line on Monday night, he sat on a cushion atop a milk crate.
On his left hand he wore a black glove, which he sprinkled with talcum powder; he tapped his left foot on a piece of wood, ticking out a beat.
His guitar was tuned to an open chord, so he simply moved his gloved hand up and down the neck to change chords, picking the strings with long fingernails.
To let a song fade out, he would slowly pivot away from the microphone.


Diagnostek Inc.(DXK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Republic New York Corp.(RNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Haggar Corp.(HGGR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Larry Hogue Fled Hospital to Help Fiancee, Lawyer Says
The lawyer for Larry Hogue, the mentally ill man who for years menaced residents of the Upper West Side of Manhattan, told a courtroom yesterday that Mr.
Hogue walked away from a psychiatric hospital last week to get money for his fiancee, a Bridgeport, Conn., woman who is three months pregnant with the couple's baby.
In a brief appearance in State Supreme Court on the grounds of the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Bellerose, Queens, Mr.
Hogue and his lawyer, C. Vernon Mason, asked for and were granted a five-week postponement of a hearing that would have determined whether Mr.
Hogue could be released from the hospital.


Caray Plans Return to Booth on Friday
HARRY CARAY plans to return to the Chicago Cubs' broadcast booth Friday, a month after he fell before a game in Miami.
Caray, 77, will remain with the team through an 10-game homestand that ends Aug. 10 and then skip an 11-day road trip, said WAYNE VRIESMAN, vice president of Tribune Broadcasting Co.
Caray, in his 50th year broadcasting major league baseball, was apparently overcome by heat June 23 before a game against Florida.
He suffered a cut above his lip and a scrape on his forehead in the fall and spent a day in intensive care at Parkway Regional Hospital in Miami.
He was then transferred to Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Evanston, Ill., where doctors treated him for an irregular heartbeat.
He was released July 7. (AP)


Harland (John H.) Co. (JH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Carlisle Cos. (CSL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Police Raid Drug Paraphernalia Stores in the East Village


Mastercard Plans to Move 540 Employees to Westchester
Mastercard International will move all of its 540 employees in New York City to Westchester County next year, the company said yesterday.
While negotiations on a new building have not been completed, real-estate brokers familiar with the situation said the most likely new site is a vacant building owned by I.B.M. in Harrison, N.Y.


Weis Markets Inc.(WMK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Goal: Living to 150. But Is It Living?
"SHE said it looks like Fido food. Ask her."
"I'd never say a thing like that. You said it."


Ametek Inc.(AME,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Police Captain Apologizes For Remarks on Homeless
A police captain yesterday apologized for remarks he made about the murder of a homeless woman and the rape of three others in Central Park, in which he suggested that the homeless did not belong in the park in the first place.
Enraged advocates for the homeless had demanded either an apology or the resignation of the captain, William Bayer.
The advocates, at a press conference yesterday near the site where a 51-year-old woman was raped over the weekend, described Captain Bayer's response to the crimes as callous and discriminatory.


Jordan Hints It May Cooperate With Israel Before Signing Pact
Jordan's chief negotiator in talks with Israel suggested today that his country might be willing to begin joint projects with the Israelis even before a peace treaty is signed.
His remarks reinforced the feeling that has been building in recent weeks that the Jordanians are ready for more normal relations with Israel despite the technical state of war between the countries and King Hussein's reluctance to race too far ahead of Syria in peace negotiations.


Teradyne Inc.(TER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Harris's Suspension Will Be Reviewed
Track's world governing body is willing to consider reducing DANNY HARRIS's drug suspension, the International Amateur Athletic Federation president, PRIMO NEBIOLO, said yesterday.
Harris, the 1984 Olympic silver medal winner in the 400-meter hurdles, was banned for four years after testing positive for cocaine in February 1992.
He was reinstated by USA Track and Field in March 1994 after an appeal and competed in five events this year.
But the federation stepped in and reimposed the ban after it realized Harris was running again.
"Unfortunately, our doping office did not follow this case with sufficient attention," Nebiolo said.
"I regard the situation as an unfortunate one and one that caused me great disappointment. The suspension can not be rescinded by the federation of an athlete, only by the council." (AP)


Harley-Davidson Inc.(HDI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Nathan Suskind, College Teacher, 87; Was Yiddish Expert
Prof.
Nathan Susskind, a retired teacher of German and Jewish studies at City College and an authority on Yiddish, died on Thursday in Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 87 and lived in West Palm Beach, Fla.
Professor Susskind taught at City College from 1932 until his retirement in 1974.
He was also a director of the Institute for Yiddish Lexicology at the City University of New York.
The institute was founded to create the Great Dictionary of the Yiddish Language, of which four volumes have appeared.


Warner Music Group Names Chairwoman for New Unit
The realignment at the Warner Music Group continued today as the giant recording company named a chairwoman for one of its three recording units.
Sylvia Rhone will head Elektra/ EastWest, a new group formed by merging Elektra Entertainment and the much smaller EastWest Records America label.
Ms.
Rhone previously headed EastWest.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.23
3.08
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.25
4.31
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.62
4.71
3.18
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.13
7.18
5.73
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.46
7.50
6.55
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.26
8.29
7.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.39
5.73
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Trudging up the subway staircase at 79th and Broadway, I felt the ominousfirst drops of an evening summer storm.
Gauging the immediacy of the onslaught, I determined that I had just enough time to make it up the block to a seafoodshop, select a ready-made-dinner-to-go and still arrive home reasonably dry.


INSIDE
Many Continue to Flee As Rwanda Installs Leaders
Victorious Rwandan rebels, most from the minority Tutsi tribe, installed a new Government and promised to protect everyone, but thousands of members of the majority Hutus continued to flee.
Page A6.
Fewer Haitians at Sea
The number of Haitians trying to flee in boats has dropped off, which may ease pressure and allow more time for sanctions to work.
Page A3.
Off the Shopping Block
Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of CBS, said the company was not for sale, despite rumors after the demise of its planned merger with QVC.
Page D1.
The Jet Age and History
T.W.A.'s gull-winged terminal at Kennedy Airport was designated a landmark by New York City.
Page B1.


Allegheny Power Systems Inc.(AYP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Out-of-Wedlock Births Up Since '83, Report Indicates
With the debate over reducing the country's welfare rolls focusing renewed attention on the rising birthrate among unwed women, the Census Bureau reported today that the number of children living with a parent who had never married -- a reflection of out-of-wedlock births -- soared by more than 70 percent from 1983 to 1993.
According to the bureau, 6.3 million children, or 27 percent of children under the age of 18, lived in 1993 with a single parent who had never married, up from 3.7 million in 1983.


CompuCom Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wheelabrator Technologies Inc.(WTI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Region's Tastes Commingle in Israel
IT'S as if some mystical wind from Israel were rustling through the collective unconscious of America's chefs: Terrance Brennan of Picholine, near Lincoln Center, is slipping nuggets of halvah into his coffee ice cream; Donna Insalaco, at Fama in Santa Monica, Calif., is offering lamb ragout with cumin and feta cheese, and Andrew Nathan, of Frontiere in SoHo, grinds a batch of incendiary harissa every day to serve with merguez-and-couscous salad.
These chefs, and dozens like them, are experimenting with a big, inclusive style of cooking from the collision of cultures that is Israel.
Some call it Med-rim cooking.
Others prefer Pan-Mediterranean cuisine.
Or Levantine fusion cooking.


STRONG SUPPORT FOR HEALTH PLANS
Amid the cacophony of warring health care plans and partisan jibes, the public remains strongly committed to getting a plan passed and continues to endorse universal coverage.
Americans are now as concerned about health care as they are about crime, and a majority say they are willing to pay higher taxes to make sure everyone is insured, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll.


Upjohn Co.(UPJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


General Instrument Corp.(GIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rohm &amp; Haas (ROH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Albemarle Corp.(ALB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Management Touts Togetherness Theme
Speaking at the National Press Club in Washington last week, baseball's highest-reigning official, Acting Commissioner Bud Selig, said: "This game has a magnificent future, but it needs to have a partnership between players and management. That is absolutely essential."
Only the evening before, during the telecast of the All-Star Game, a showcase event in the baseball season, the game's fans saw the difference between management's words and actions.


Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co.  (AHM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Off the Menu
Chili in Times Square
The Manhattan Chili Company, which ended a 10-year run on Bleecker Street in Greenwich Village last week, will open on Friday at 1500 Broadway (43d Street).
It replaces Dosanko, a Japanese noodle shop.
"Our lease was up and we could not work out a new agreement with our landlord," said Bruce Sterman, who owns Manhattan Chili with Luba Pincus, his wife.
"We looked for a new location in the Village but began to get a sense of a lot of positive things happening in the Times Square area, so we decided this move would be a good idea."


Seafirst Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Citizens First Bancorp Inc.(CFB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Two Million Refugees
The heart constricts and the mind swirls in trying to grasp the enormity of the tragedy now gripping Rwanda.
In the greatest mass flight of people in modern times, more than a million Rwandans surged within 48 hours into neighboring Zaire.
The town of Goma is now encircled by the world's largest refugee settlement, a distinction held only recently by the town of Ngara in Tanzania, where 250,000 Rwandans, most of them Hutus, fled in terror some weeks ago, fearing massacres by an advancing Tutsi-led rebel army.
The total of refugees who have fled Rwanda is now estimated to be 2.1 million.
In Zaire, unlike Tanzania, few aid agencies are operating, and simply providing subsistence rations to the million Rwandans there is a colossal task.
President Clinton has taken the right first step in sending Brian Atwood, the official of the American aid agency in charge of humanitarian relief, to Goma.
The White House has approved 80 airlift missions and $31 million in emergency funds for food and medicine; this is in addition to $118 million in aid already airlifted to Rwanda.
But nobody has ever dealt with so many uprooted people, driven by panic across frontiers to a remote, wholly unprepared provincial city.


Warsaw Journal; Solidarity Forever? Well, It's Not the 80's Anymore
The strikers at the gates of the steel works here look eerily familiar.
The name of their union, Solidarity, remains unchanged, and the jagged red lettering that became synonymous with the fight for freedom is instantly recognizable.
But five years after Solidarity brought down the Communists here, the union is searching for a role.
From a mass social movement that included intellectuals and street cleaners, Solidarity is struggling to re-position itself as a trade union devoted to bread-and-butter issues.


Legg Mason Inc.(LM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Compass Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.(FRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ohio Edison (OEC,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Rwandan Rebels Name Cabinet of Hutu and Tutsi, but Those Fleeing Are Still Fearful; U.N. Relief Effort
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali began to marshal a global relief effort today for the hundreds of thousands of refugees from Rwanda.
Officials here said another half million people had fled into neighboring Zaire in the last 24 hours.
To speed what is expected to be a huge increase in relief supplies, United Nations officials met in Geneva today to coordinate delivery.
Supplies are arriving sporadically at the airports at Goma, Zaire, and Ngara, Tanzania.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-6  ITALIAN LEADER BACKS DOWN  The Prime Minister of Italy rescinded a decree that would have allowed the release of some people in preventive detention and that had been denounced as subverting the effort to stamp out corruption.
A1  SERBS INCH CLOSER ON PEACE  Bosnia Serbs gave a highly conditional indication that they are ready to work with the international peace plan for Bosnia, bringing the possibility of peace closer.
A1


FlightSafety International (FSI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reynolds Metals Co.(RLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
CINCINNATI GAS AND ELECTRIC CO., Cincinnati, said it had acquired the assets of Power International Inc., Prague, an engineering and consulting firm.
Terms were not disclosed.
KUHLMAN CORP., Savannah, Ga., and Communication Cable Inc., West Siler City, N.C., two makers of television transmission cables, agreed to a stock-swap merger worth nearly $40 million.


Digital Shows Doctrine the Door
When Digital Equipment's chief executive announced last week that the company was taking yet another huge charge against earnings in yet another effort to revive the staggering computer giant, he also announced an end to the company's decades-old management system.
"Matrix management at our company is dead," Robert B. Palmer, Digital's president and chief executive, told reporters.
"For Digital, that statement is monumental."


Kaman Corp.(KAMNA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Teradyne Inc.(TER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


The Incorrect Mr. Kraft
So what does the Yankees' management really think?
The club issued an unequivocal apology for racist remarks attributed to Richard Kraft, the team's vice president for community relations.
But it also allowed Mr.
Kraft to issue a denial that he had compared black people to "monkeys" in an interview with New York magazine.
If George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' owner, cannot figure out where to stand, it falls on the community to tell him.
Whatever words Mr.
Kraft used, no one denies that his remarks fit a pattern of consistent Yankee hostility to its Bronx neighborhood.
As the Rev.
Patrick Hennessy of Christ the King Church put it, Yankee executives like to "bad-mouth the neighborhood."


Dominion Resources Inc.(D,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Michigan National Corp.(MNCO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Harte-Hanks Communications Inc.(HHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Whitman Plays the Quiet Student at Governors' Conference
During four days of conferences and caucuses, interspersed with lobster dinners and a Boston Pops concert, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman acted the student, not the professor, among the self-assured throng at the National Governors' Association annual meeting this weekend.
She observed, took copious notes and spoke up only once or twice as the governors ranged over their agenda -- health care, welfare reform, international trade, education reform.


Hemlo Gold reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


G.E. Earnings Up 14% Despite Some Setbacks
The General Electric Company, the nation's fifth-largest industrial concern, reported yesterday that its profits jumped 14 percent in the second quarter, as strong gains in many of its manufacturing and financial operations offset weakness at NBC, G.E.
Aircraft Engines and Kidder, Peabody, its troubled brokerage subsidiary.
G.E., based in Fairfield, Conn., said its second-quarter net income totaled $1.52 billion, or 89 cents a share, up from $1.33 billion, or 78 cents a share, in the comparable period last year.
Revenue rose 10 percent, to $16.2 billion from $14.76 billion.


SmithKline Beecham Plc(SBH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Archdiocese of New York to Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, New York, for its Inner-City Scholarship Fund.


Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc.(CCE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Integra Financial Corp.(ITG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jersey Defeats Florida
The New Jersey Rockin Rollers (6-5-1) defeated the Florida Hammerheads (3-10-0), 9-5, before 4,531 fans at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena in roller hockey tonight.
Lain Duncan, Steve Mirabile and Jamie Allan scored two goals apiece.


Astec Industries Inc.(ASTE,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
No literary pas de deux for CYNTHIA GREGORY and Simon &amp; Schuster: Judge JOHN S. MARTIN JR. of Federal District Court in Manhattan has ruled that the former principal dancer with the American Ballet Theater is not entitled to the $480,000 she was to receive for an autobiography.
The book was never published.
Ms.
Gregory, who had previously written two books for Simon &amp; Schuster, was commissioned to do a memoir, "Black and Blue," in 1990 by JUDITH REGAN, who edited books by Rush Limbaugh and Howard Stern and who has since left to form her own company.


First Security Corp.(FSCO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Associated Banc-Corp (ASBC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRW Inc.(TRW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Engelhard Corp.(EC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Crestar Financial Corp.(CF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Magna Group Inc.(MAGI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Accepting One's Replacement as a Wife
A devoted middle-aged husband, whose wife is dying of a mysterious disease, is attracted to another woman.
The wife senses this, though she hasn't guessed that the other woman is a blind novelist.
"Blind?" the dying but upbeat wife chirps.
"She'd have to be if she took a shine to you!" That's her idea of a joke, and it's probably the most memorable among dozens of embarrassing attempts at wit in "The Wedding Gift," a film that manages to make its tragic characters seem annoying.
Made by the BBC, the film was originally shown on television in England under the title "Wide-Eyed and Legless," which gives a fair idea of how it strains to be cheeky.
"Wide-Eyed and Legless" is the name of a song that Deric and Diana Longden (Jim Broadbent and Julie Walters) sing as they drive to the hospital.
For three years Diana's muscles have been growing weaker; her hands are cramping into fists; the doctors' best diagnosis is hysteria.


Bergen Brunswig Corp.(BBC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Christopher Says Syrian Chief Is Serious About Negotiations
Despite his declarations that the Arab-Israeli conflict is nearly over, Secretary of State Warren Christopher acknowledged today that there are serious obstacles to peace between Israel and Syria.
Asked at a news conference what he meant by his uncharacteristically ebullient remarks on Monday in Jerusalem that "there is every indication" that the war between Arabs and Israelis "is about to come to an end," Mr.
Christopher recited examples of recent progress.


National City Corp.(NCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THEATER
'The Manchurian Candidate,' With Some Alterations  Theater Row Theater
In John Lahr's stage adaptation of "The Manchurian Candidate," the action is moved up to the end of this century; the mesmerized soldiers are brainwashed after they are captured during a peacekeeping operation in the Middle East, and the object of American paranoia is not Soviet Communism but Japanese capitalism.
Otherwise Mr.
Lahr generally follows the plot of Richard Condon's 1959 novel and the 1962 film made from it, and the familiarity of the story allows him to concentrate on his own political ideas.


Telephone &amp; Data Systems Inc.(TDS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Federal-Mogul Corp.(FMO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Plays to Replace Films at Theater 80
Theater 80 St.
Marks, the revival-movie house on St.
Marks Place in the East Village, is to present its last films at the end of the month, with the space to be taken over by a classical-theater group.
Lawrence Otway, whose father, Howard Otway, opened the theater in 1967 as a venue for live performances, said in an open letter to the theater's patrons that the return to the theater's original purpose was a memorial to his father, who died this year.


Democrats Pick Chicago for Convention
Hoping to erase the stain of the violent 1968 convention from the image of the Democratic Party and the city of Chicago, party officials said today that they had selected this proud Midwestern city as host for their 1996 Presidential nominating convention.
Mayor Richard M. Daley is clearly eager to burnish the image of the Daley family and the city itself.
His father, the late Mayor Richard J. Daley, was seen on national television during the 1968 convention cutting off irate delegates and defending the brute force used against Vietnam War protesters by his police officers.


Market Place; In Snapple, investors see a glass either half-empty or half-full.
SNAPPLE, the hot-weather beverage with the snappy commercials, is one of the more provocative stocks traded today.
Opinions about this fast-growing company run high: investors either love it or hate it.
While consumers eagerly guzzle its fruit-flavored iced teas and fruit drinks, the question that divides investors is whether demand will be large enough to offset higher promotional costs and new competition.
The Snapple Beverage Corporation, based in Valley Stream, L.I., entered the investing scene with an initial public offering in December 1992, two subsequent stock splits and a secondary offering in November.
The stock closed yesterday at $20.375, which is 23 times last year's earnings.
It reached a 52-week high of $32.25 in February and its second-quarter results, about to be released, are expected at 22 cents a share.
Considered a "new age" product, Snapple is part of a trend in beverages away from carbonated colas and sodas and toward more natural drinks and juices.


Kansas City Southern Sells Its Century-Old Railroad
Railroads may have built this country, but it looks like mutual funds are its future, as Kansas City Southern Industries announced yesterday that it was selling its century-old railroad business to concentrate on financial services.
In a deal that at today's stock prices is worth about $1.6 billion, the Illinois Central Corporation will buy Kansas City Southern's railroad using 21.2 million shares of its stock and assuming $929 million of debt.
If approved by Federal regulators, the merger will create the country's eighth-largest railroad by revenues, said George W. Edwards Jr., president of Kansas City Southern Railway.


Midlantic Corp.(MIDL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


T.W.A.'s Hub Is Declared A Landmark
Trans World Airlines' arching, gull-winged terminal at John F. Kennedy International Airport became an official landmark yesterday, joining Grand Central Terminal as one of New York City's most honored -- and potentially embattled -- monuments to transportation.
The expressionistic jetport, designed by Eero Saarinen &amp; Associates, was completed in 1962, as wreckers were poised to raze another transportation hub, Pennsylvania Station.
It was the station's destruction that gave birth to the Landmarks Preservation Commission, the agency that voted landmark status yesterday for the exterior and much of the interior of T.W.A.
Terminal A.  The airline objected to the interior designation.


Newell Co.(NWL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Consolidated Freightways Inc.(CNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRAVELERS INC. (TRV,N)
Travelers Inc., the parent company of Smith Barney and other financial, insurance and mutual fund companies, said yesterday that second-quarter earnings rose 72 percent from the quarter a year earlier.
But those year-earlier earnings did not include the profits of the Shearson securities firm, which was acquired last July.
Indeed, Travelers' earnings fell 5.7 percent in the second quarter from the first quarter, to $320.5 million from $339.8 million.
All the decline in profits from the first quarter occurred at Smith Barney, where profits fell to $78.8 million from $144.3 million in the first quarter.
Like other securities firms, Smith Barney was hurt by declines in trading volume and securities prices.


LCI International Inc.(LCII,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Topics of The Times; Broadway Bridal
One very hot day recently a man and woman in full bridal rig walked along a midtown Manhattan street eating slices of pizza.
The rest of the wedding party, several of whom were partial to sequins, followed closely, also eating pizza.
Passers-by were stunned.
Actually, it takes a lot -- usually a car -- to stun a habitue of midtown.
But this curious little procession did, mostly because there was no logical place it could have been processing from.
Unless, that is, a manicurist in one of the countless nail parlors that line the street has taken to performing wedding ceremonies on the side.


Johnson Controls (JCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Italy's Economy Posts Gains, Not Losses; Spoofer Unmasked
To the Editor:
I see from the July 19 letters protesting "Poison Ivy Myths: Up in Smoke" (Op-Ed, July 7) that my secret is out.
I might as well come clean.
Edward Frankel is correct:


Army Gets Serious About Its Stomach
SOLDIERING has always been arduous, but advanced technology demands that soldiers be able to transport and use complex equipment in addition to their traditional duties.
So what is the military doing to improve performance?
Until recently, the Army focused most of its attention on improving weapons systems, training and equipment, said Dr.
David Schnakenberg, executive officer of the American Society for Clinical Nutrition and an expert on military nutrition.
"It paid less attention to sustaining the ultimate fighting machine: the soldier or airman," he said.


Number of Haitians Fleeing by Sea Drops Off Abruptly
The number of Haitians intercepted by the United States Coast Guard while trying to flee their country aboard boats has dropped sharply in recent days.
Not a single Haitian was reported to have been picked up on the high seas last weekend, compared with 1,344 people aboard 30 vessels the previous weekend and 12,345 during the first week of July.
For Monday, the figure was a single boat with 170 people on board, the Coast Guard reported.


Riverwood International Corp.(RVW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Dr Pepper/Seven-Up Cos.  (DPS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Expansion For Honda
The Honda Motor Company, the first Japanese auto maker to build vehicles in the United States, announced a series of steps today that are intended to increase its North American car production.
The expansion should help to mitigate the high costs, caused by the soaring value of the Japanese yen, of building cars in Japan and exporting them to the United States.
The expansion, consistent with Honda's decade-old strategy of seeking growth mainly outside Japan, is expected to tap emerging Latin American markets, especially Mexico, and raise Honda's market share in the United States and Canada.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Trudging up the subway staircase at 79th and Broadway, I felt the ominous first drops of an evening summer storm.
Gauging the immediacy of the onslaught, I determined that I had just enough time to make it up the block to a seafood shop, select a ready-made-dinner-to-go and still arrive home reasonably dry.
I quickly paid for my microwavable mussels in white wine sauce but was no sooner out the door than the heavens descended.
Very irate heavens.
This was no simple shower.
I hoisted my dinner over my head and made a run for it.


IBP Inc.(IBP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Deal Is Made On Disk Unit
As expected, the Digital Equipment Corporation signed an agreement yesterday to sell its disk storage business to the Quantum Corporation for $400 million.
Digital had acknowledged two weeks ago that it was in negotiations with Quantum.
As part of the agreement, Digital will transfer 5,000 employees to Quantum's payroll, including 3,500 full-time and 1,500 temporary workers.
Charles F. Christ, vice president of Digital's components division and the executive who oversaw the deal for Digital, said these employees were not included in the 20,000 job cuts the company has scheduled for the next 12 months.


Public &amp; Private; Justice For Nina
Herewith a story about two motherless children whose father is accused of having murdered his wife after a marriage fraught with violence.
But this is not another rumination on the O. J. Simpson case.
It is the story of Mohammad Abequa, who, law enforcement authorities say, strangled his wife, Nihal, during the Fourth of July weekend while their son and daughter slept in the next room.
By the time the victim's older sister led police to the New Jersey apartment where her body was hidden, Mohammad had taken the kids to his homeland of Jordan, a country that has no extradition treaty with the United States.
When he arrived at his mother's home in Suweileh, he told his family that he was on vacation and that his wife was doing great.


Springs Industries(SMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Crown, Cork &amp; Seal Co.  (CCK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Honors
*
Martin Nisenholtz, senior vice president and director of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct's Interactive Marketing Group, New York, was awarded the Distinguished Service Award by the Interactive Services Association.


Temple-Inland Inc.(TIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cypress Semiconductor Corp.(CY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Ceridian Corp.(CEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Georgia Gulf Corp.(GGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Remembering a Haven From Shame; Japanese Americans Mark Wartime Transfer From Desert Camps to New Jersey Town
Iddy Asada remembers the ride aboard a transport train 50 years ago carrying her and other Japanese Americans toward an uncertain future in New Jersey.
The shades on the coach were pulled down.
The passengers were ordered not to raise them.
More curious than defiant, Iddy, then 16, peeked outside into the darkness at the alien landscape sliding by.


Deposit Guaranty Corp.(DEPS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Tennessee National Corp.(FTEN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tisch Says CBS Isn't For Sale
An emphatic Laurence A. Tisch, the chairman of CBS, said today that CBS was not for sale, despite the rumors that have raged through the television industry after the demise of its planned merger with the QVC cable channel.
"I'm sending a signal to Wall Street," Mr.
Tisch said here.
"I want to make it unequivocal. We've had no intention for eight years in selling; we have absolutely no intention today of selling CBS."


Banco Latinoamericano de Exportaciones S.A. (BLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp.(CNK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


New Music Seminar: Total Immersion
In theory, the New Music Seminar is an entrepreneur's fantasy.
More than 8,000 people from all over the world are expected at the 15th annual music-industry smorgasbord of informational panels, live performances and careerist chit-chat.
The convention begins today and continues through Saturday at the Sheraton New York Hotel and Towers, and 600 bands are to perform at some 30 clubs throughout the city.
With registration fees between $380 and $440, the seminar stands to gross some $2 million, even with an estimated 2,000 to 3,000 registration badges being given away and discounts for members of the press and college radio.


New Puzzles From Jupiter
Astronomers are striving to interpret the streams of new data created by the first impacts of the comet.
Page A13.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Trudging up the subway staircase at 79th and Broadway, I felt the ominousfirst drops of an evening summer storm.
Gauging the immediacy of the onslaught, I determined that I had just enough time to make it up the block to a seafoodshop, select a ready-made-dinner-to-go and still arrive home reasonably dry.


American Electric Power Co.  (AEP,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Living Centers of America Inc.(LCA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Julian Schwinger, 76, Physicist Who Shared Nobel Prize in 1965
Julian Schwinger, a theoretical physicist whose work in electro dynamics earned him a Nobel Prize in 1965, died on Saturday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 76.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said officials at the University of California at Los Angeles, where he had been a member of the faculty for the last 22 years.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Laurence A. Tisch, the chairman of CBS, declared that the company is not for sale, despite the speculation that has raced through the television industry after the demise of CBS's planned merger with QVC.  [ Page D1. ]
The relationship between Walt Disney's chairman, Michael D. Eisner, and Jeffrey Katzenberg, head of the company's studios, has turned tense, with questions about the company's line of succession as well as Mr.
Katzenberg's future.  [ D1. ]


No Headline
Twelve men have walked on the moon: some of them look at how it changed their lives.
Page A14.


Chemical Waste Management Inc.(CHW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rangers Sue Keenan, and Throw In Some Insults
In a vividly written complaint describing Mike Keenan as both a "great hockey coach" and a "faithless employee," the Rangers have filed suit to force Keenan to abide by the five-year contract he repudiated last Friday.
The suit, which amounts to a second action by the Rangers in the Keenan case, was filed in Federal court in Manhattan late Monday afternoon, the same day Gary Bettman, the commissioner of the National Hockey League, agreed to a request by the team that he resolve the dispute.
Bettman is expected to issue a ruling after a hearing next week.


Israeli Soldier Is Slain by Muslim Militants
Muslim militants shot and killed an Israeli Army officer in the Gaza Strip today in what they called a revenge attack for the killing of two Palestinians and the wounding of scores of others on Sunday when laborers rioted near a border crossing into Israel.
The armed wing of the militant Islamic group, Hamas, took responsibility for the attack, an ambush of an Israeli patrol jeep near Rafah on the border between the Gaza Strip and Egypt.


Public Service Enterprise Group Inc.(PEG,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


On Ridding The Jungle Of Its Louts
MALCOLM GETS didn't start out intending to be a criminal.
Tall, good-looking guy.
Sure, maybe a little wild sometimes, growing up in Florida, and later attending Yale Drama School.
Still, after moving to the city two years ago, he seemed to have settled down.
A movie coming out with Jennifer Jason Leigh about the Algonquin Round Table (she's Dorothy Parker); the lead in "Merrily We Roll Along," off Broadway; about to open as a lead in "Two Gentlemen of Verona," in Central Park.
Things were looking good.


Idex Corp.(IEX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Great Western Financial Corp.(GWF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Karate Coach Is Charged With Abuse
The owner of a karate school in Yonkers was indicted today on charges that he sexually assaulted a 16-year-old female student in May, the Westchester District Attorney's office said.
It is the third case brought in roughly a year that has involved accusations of sexual misconduct against an athletic coach or instructor in Westchester County.
The incidents have stirred deep concern in many suburban communities, where parents often send their children several times a week to instructors and coaches for lessons in gymnastics, dance, swimming and similar activities.


Trinity Industries(TRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mayor Picks Banker For Youth Services
Seeking to restore order to the city's troubled Department of Youth Services, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is expected to name as its new commissioner the head of the Staten Island branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
At a press conference scheduled for this morning, Mr.
Giuliani is to name Alfred B. Curtis Jr., 36.
Mr.
Curtis, a native of Staten Island, is a vice president at Chemical Bank and has been active in a number of civic and youth groups.


Beverly Enterprises (BEV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AT LUNCH WITH: Richard Hughes; An Actor Prepares; Vietnam Interrupts
RICHARD HUGHES, fabled as the last American to leave Saigon in the 1970's, is finding that Vietnam still refuses to let go of him.
And vice versa.
In fact, he believes Vietnam has a way of following him around.
So Mr.
Hughes was hardly surprised when, rehearsing for an Off Off Broadway production of "The Seagull" in 1992, he stepped off the A train at Canal Street and came face to face with the big green sign of the Kinh Do Vietnamese Restaurant.


First Fidelity Bancorp (FFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Leader Financial (LFCT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


PNC Bank Corp.(PNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Fashion; Slim Silhouette At Chanel, Vintage Flair From Ungaro
Karl Lagerfeld reinvents Chanel every season.
Now he thinks he has devised a look that might stick around for two or three years.
It is based on defined shoulders that are very lightly padded, reasonably high armholes and a body line that looks corseted but isn't.
Lagerfeld's word for the shoulders is "impeccable," and they set the tone for the rest of the shape.
His jackets are seamed, though they look boned, and are actually lightweight and supple.
The secret of the smooth fit is that they are worn over a long strapless bra that keeps the upper body firm and has lightly padded cups.


HUMANA INC. (HUM,N)
Confounding analysts who said enrollment growth in health maintenance organizations would be slowing, Humana Inc. said yesterday that it had added 200,000 members for a total of 1.8 million in the last year and increased after-tax earnings by 94.7 percent.
Humana, based in Louisville, Ky., said that net income was $37 million in the second quarter, excluding a $17 million one-time gain, which was related to the favorable settlement of tax disputes with the Internal Revenue Service.
Second-quarter net income last year was $19 million.


Blockbuster Entertainment Corp.(BV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ROCK
A Song Master Who Leans Toward Subtlety  The Mercury Lounge
Freedy Johnston's songs seem mild-mannered.
When he performed on Monday night, starting a three-night stand, he played tuneful, midtempo folk-rock tunes.
His sincere tenor voice carried clear melodies; every guitar lick was in place.
With Buddy Holly, the early Beatles and the Byrds as their forebears, the songs play by the rules, but the characters in them don't.
They are borderline types, ominous or desperate or visionary.


TLC Beatrice in Sale
TLC Beatrice International Holdings Inc. said yesterday that it had sold its Danish ice cream company, Premier Is, to Albani Bryggerierne, a Danish company, for cash and the assumption of debt.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed.


Williams Cos.(WMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lydall Inc.(LDL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
Patrons of the Senate dining room in Washington are usually blase about seeing famous faces in their midst, but heads swiveled on Monday when Senator PATRICK J. LEAHY, Democrat of Vermont, turned up with the Grateful Dead: JERRY GARCIA, BOB WEIR, PHIL LESH and MICKEY HART.
"Senate staff members don't always recognize foreign dignitaries but they certinly recognized the Dead," Joe Jamele, the Senator's press secretary, said yesterday.
"Strom Thurmond came by and shook hands with Jerry Garcia, and so did Senator David Pryor," he said, speaking of the Senators from South Carolina and Arkansas.
Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California, was a guest at the leisurely lunch.


Inter-Regional Financial Group (IFG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Today's N.A.A.C.P. Draws on History
To the Editor:
In 1934, as in 1994, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People appeared to be at a "crossroads." Addressing the annual N.A.A.C.P. convention in 1934, Charles Houston urged his listeners to "take the association home to the people."


Praxair Inc.(PX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ITT Corp.(ITT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Telephone &amp; Data Systems Inc.(TDS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Good Guys Inc.(GGUY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Perfect Score for Americans in World Math Tourney
Six American high school students astonished judges at a world mathematics competition in Hong Kong, achieving perfect scores on a nine-hour examination for the first time in the tourney's 35-year history, officials said yesterday.
The youths' flawless performance on the test of algebra, geometry and numbers theory swept them to victory over 360 other students from 68 countries, bringing the United States its first triumph at the International Mathematical Olympiad since an American team tied the Soviet Union in 1986.
China and Russia have dominated the competition in recent years.


People
*
Frances Wu was named president at Krimstein/Clapps, New York, succeeding Ken Krimstein and John Clapps, co-presidents and creative directors, who were promoted to co-chairmen.
Ms.
Wu was previously an account supervisor at Jerry &amp; Ketchum, New York. *
Donald L. Berry was named president at SPAR Marketing Inc., Minneapolis, succeeding G. Michael Calvert, who left.
Mr.
Berry was previously vice president of operations of the Service First unit of the Huffy Corp., Dayton, Ohio.


Results Plus
TENNIS  American and Spanish Teams Advance  Spain and the United States, the two top-seeded teams, moved into the second round of the Federation Cup by sweeping both singles matches yesterday in Frankfurt.
Spain routed Chile with Conchita Martinez defeating Alejandra Quezada and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario beating Paula Cabezas by identical scores of 6-1, 6-0.
But the competition between the United States and the Czech Republic was tougher.
Mary Joe Fernandez needed more than 1 hour 10 minutes to defeat Petra Langrova, 6-2, 6-4, and Lindsay Davenport lost her first set to Ludmila Richterova, 4-6, before bouncing back to win by 6-1, 6-4.
Spain will play Argentina in the second round and the United States will meet Canada. (AP)
Easy Victory for Raymond: Lisa Raymond, the 1992 and 1993 National Collegiate Athletic Association champion, defeated Sandy Collins, 6-2, 6-0, yesterday in the opening round of the 17th annual Pathmark Classic in Mahwah, N.J., losing just 8 points in 7 service games.
In the round of 16, Raymond meets Patty Fendick, who defeated Angela Lettiere, 7-5, 6-2. (AP)
Washington Holds Off Challenger: Ninth-seeded MaliVai Washington shook off a stubborn challenge from Roberto Jabali of Brazil yesterday in a 6-7 (5-7), 6-2, 6-3 first-round victory at the IBM/ATP Tour Legg Mason Classic in Washington.
Washington was one of three seeded players to win on the second day of the $650,000 event.
No. 11 Richey Reneberg beat Martin Damm of the Czech Republic, 6-3, 6-4, and No. 13 Henrik Holm of Sweden beat Nicolas Pereria of Venezuela, 6-3, 6-4.
No. 10 Brad Gilbert was the only seeded player to lose, falling to Jonas Bjorkman of Sweden, 6-1, 7-5. (AP)


Ferro Corp.(FOE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oxford Industries(OXM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 3


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a conversation between President Clinton and a top bank regulator about Mr.
Clinton's ties to a failed savings and loan misidentified the Deputy Treasury Secretary who was involved in earlier discussions with White House officials.
He is Roger C. Altman, not Robert Altman.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League  CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Agreed to terms with Bennie Thompson, safety.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Ruffin Hamilton, linebacker, and LeShon Johnson, running back.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Gary Downs, running back.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Tony Meola, kicker.
Waived Craig Mitter, running back, and Gary Beckford, defensive back.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Waived Reggie Lawrence, wide receiver; Matt Morrill, defensive lineman; Ryan Tobin, linebacker; and Mark Dixon, offensive lineman.
Signed Jimmy Smith, wide receiver, and Mickey Pruitt, linebacker.
Hockey  National Hockey League  FLORIDA PANTHERS -- Signed Stu Barnes, center, to a multiyear contract.
USA Hockey  USA SELECT TEAM -- Named Mike Eaves coach and Moe Mantha and Mark Kumpel assistant coaches.
College
NCAA -- Announced the Trans America Athletic Conference baseball champion will receive an automatic bid to the NCAA tournament effective for the 1995 season.
ARIZONA STATE -- Named Krista Dunn women's assistant basketball coach.
CALIFORNIA, PA. -- Named Kathy Wotus women's part-time, assistant volleyball coach.
COLGATE -- Named Timothy Leahy women's assistant soccer coach.


American Maize-Products Co. (AZEA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Their Cruise Disrupted, Passengers Get a Bonus
Most of the 11 members of the DeRosa clan who had sailed here on the cruise ship Horizon lolled on the pool deck of the Hamilton Princess hotel, sipping drinks and smiling self-satisfied smiles at how misfortune had begotten opportunity.
For one thing, a scare about Legionnaires' disease that may have originated aboard their ship had deposited them in the luxurious, coral-colored hotel overlooking Hamilton Harbor for the night -- free.
Now they had also been informed that the full cost of their trip -- $2,000 and up per couple -- was going to be reimbursed by the Celebrity Cruise Lines, operators of the Horizon.


Citicorp and Chemical Report a Solid Quarter
The environment for banks remained surprisingly fertile in the second quarter, as big banks continue to report solid profits despite the sharp rise of interest rates.
Citicorp, the nation's largest bank, said yesterday that its second-quarter profits were $877 million, nearly double the level of a year ago.
Its profits were increased by tax benefits and the restructuring of Brazil's long past-due debt.
But the bank's core business still performed slightly better than expected.


Bronx Girl, 9, Raped On Roof of Building
A 9-year-old Bronx girl was raped at knife point and slashed across the neck yesterday morning on the roof of her apartment building by an assailant who had followed her home, the police said.
The girl, who was not identified, was taken to Lincoln Hospital, where she was in serious condition, the police said.
She was under sedation for much of the day and has not yet been interviewed.


Allergan Inc.(AGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Inland Steel Industries Inc.(IAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Another Glitch for Chemical
It was not quite what they meant by the cashless society.
At 6:20 A.M. yesterday, a Chemical Bank computer stopped allowing customers to withdraw cash from automated teller machines. (Customers of other banks using machines at Chemical's branches were not affected.)
Several attempts to fix the problem did not work.
So the bank was forced to turn the computer off and restart it, a lengthy process.
The system was not working again until shortly after noon.


Hollywood Sees Tension at Disney
Has the longstanding business relationship between Michael D. Eisner, the chairman of the Walt Disney Company, and his associate, Jeffrey Katzenberg, the chairman of Walt Disney Studios, reached a fraying point?
One of the most successful and durable partnerships in the entertainment industry, the Eisner-Katzenberg relationship has turned tense, with questions emerging today across Hollywood about the line of succession at the normally stable Walt Disney as well as Mr.
Katzenberg's future there.


Oakwood Homes Corp.(OH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Investment In Tobacco Is Questioned
The trustees of New York City's largest public employee pension fund have taken what could be the first step toward eliminating the stocks of tobacco companies from the fund's portfolio of investments.
The trustees, who oversee $23 billion in pensions for city employees and retirees, have sent letters to eight tobacco manufacturers or suppliers whose stocks the fund holds, asking them to show how they will protect the fund's investments despite growing efforts across the country to restrict smoking.


CTS Corp.(CTS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Baybanks (BBNK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Miscellany
*
Anne McBride, former president and chief executive at Ludgate McBride, New York, now known as Ludgate Communications, has opened the Anne McBride Co., New York, a corporate communications and investor relations company.


Dana Corp.(DCN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mead Corp.(MEA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Johnson Worldwide Association Inc.(JWAIA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Amgen Inc.(AMGN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COVERAGE OF 95% MIGHT BE ENOUGH, CLINTON CONCEDES
Suggesting that he was ready for compromise on health care legislation, President Clinton today softened his call for insurance coverage for all Americans, saying 95 percent or 98 percent might do.
One day after the National Governors' Association declined to endorse his proposal that employers pay much of the cost of their workers' insurance, Mr.
Clinton repeated his willingness to consider other ways to pay for coverage.
But he said his advisers had found serious problems with other methods they had studied, and he repeated his contention that making employers pay was the fairest and most efficient way to finance expanded coverage.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 15
July 8
July 16
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.0
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.2
3.2
Gasoline stocks
213.0
214.5
217.3
Distillate stocks
124.9
122.7
117.0
Crude imports, daily
8.6
8.0
7.9
Product imports, daily
1.6
2.1
1.4
Crude stocks
330.0
327.2
360.0
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
95.7
94.9
95.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Ship Is Evacuated To Be Disinfected For Legionnaires'
From the moment passengers began climbing the long, steep gangplank on Saturday, they knew it would be an unusual cruise: stewards were handing out leaflets saying that they faced a low risk of getting Legionnaires' disease.
Yesterday, in a harbor hundreds of miles from home, the 1,200 passengers aboard the Horizon got more unsettling news: the ship would be evacuated in Hamilton, Bermuda.


Two Brooklyn Players Hurt in Crash
Two California-Irvine basketball prospects from Brooklyn were injured early yesterday when the convertible they were in went over a center divider, hit a tree and overturned near the campus, the police said.
TCHAKA SHIPP, a 20-year-old center who played for Seton Hall the last two seasons and intended to transfer to California-Irvine, was in the intensive care unit at Western Medical Center in Santa Ana, Calif., said Sgt.
SCOTT CADE of the Irvine Police Department.
KEVIN SIMMONS, a 19-year-old who had signed a letter of intent with the Anteaters, suffered minor injuries, Cade said.
Cade said both players were wearing seat belts. (AP)


Union Camp Corp.(UCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jean Coutu Group reports earnings for Year to May 31


McClatchy Newspapers Inc.(MNI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Today's N.A.A.C.P. Draws on History; Set Farrakhan Aside
To the Editor:
Benjamin F. Chavis's plea to "let the N.A.A.C.P. get about its business" of addressing the real crisis situation confronting African-Americans is compelling ("The Farrakhan Sideshow," Op-Ed, July 12).


John Nuveen (JNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Trade Deficit Swelled Again in May
The United States trade deficit soared again in May, as the American economy pulled in more and more manufactured products from abroad while the weak dollar did only a little to spur foreign buying of American goods and services by the still sluggish economies of Europe and Japan.
The Commerce Department reported today that the shortfall between exports and imports climbed to $9.17 billion, from $8.53 billion in April.
American imports rose 1.2 percent, to a record $65.45 billion, while exports grew only two-tenths of a percent from April, to $56.27 billion.


CHRONICLE
RAYMOND W. KELLY, who was the New York City Police Commissioner under Mayor David N. Dinkins, has a new job: he will be president and director of New York operations for the Investigative Group, which handles investigations for corporations, law firms, financial institutions and public agencies.


Wells Fargo Chairman Is Retiring
Carl E. Reichardt, the chairman who led Wells Fargo &amp; Company's charge into the new world of bank mergers, said today that he would retire at the end of the year.
Succeeding Mr.
Reichardt, 62, as chairman and chief executive will be Paul Hazen, 52, the banking company's president.
William F. Zuendt, 47, who is currently vice chairman, will serve as president and chief operating officer.


After Brief Moon Visits, Lifetimes of Measuring the Experience
Only 12 men have walked the still and dusty surface of the moon.
They were launched into space over three years amid the turmoil of the Vietnam War on a journey that had captured mankind's imagination for eons.


Banc One Corp.(ONE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bonilla Says Yanks Ignore Big Fan Base
Bobby Bonilla lives in Greenwich, Conn.
He plays baseball in Queens.
He is building a winter house in Bradenton, Fla.
It is the Bronx, though, that remains his home.
Bonilla grew up there, at 149th Street and Jackson Avenue., about 10 blocks from Yankee Stadium.
He played baseball -- and basketball -- in the streets and on the playgrounds that are within walking distance of the park.
He went to games and sat in the upper deck with friends.
Sometimes they would scrape up $1.50 apiece for the tickets.
Sometimes they would sneak in the gate.


Polaroid Corp.(PRD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Signet Banking Corp.(SBK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


At Chanel, shoulders set the tone: C9


The Three Victors Who Will Lead Rwanda
Pasteur Bizimungu  President
In his early 40's, Mr.
Bizimungu is a Hutu from the northwest who until his defection to the rebel front in 1990 had very close ties to the Rwandan President, Juvenal Habyarimana.
He is fluent in English and French and is considered by Rwanda analysts to be close to General Kagame.
Until 1990, he was director general of Electro-Gas, a powerful, Government-appointed position.
As a student in Rwanda in 1973, Mr.
Bizimungu (pronounced busy-MOON-goo) is believed to have had ties with radical, anti-Tutsi organizations in the southern city of Butare, according to Philip Reyntjens, writer of "L'Afrique en Crise, Rwanda Burundi 1988-1994."


Liberty National Bancorp Inc.(LNBC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Conti, an Italian, Puts Dent In Tour de France Standing
Roberto Conti, an Italian rider, won the jewel of the climbing stages in the Tour de France today and helped shake up the overall standing as the bicycle race completed the first of four stages in the Alps, those splendors of nature.
Conti crossed the line an impressive 2 minutes 2 seconds ahead.
That moved him up from 11th place to sixth and gave him a fighting chance to finish second over all, the only big battle left before the Tour ends in Paris on Sunday.


Apache Corp.(APA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Abused Women Fighting Back Still
O.
J.
Simpson, on whom news magazine programs have been hooked for several weeks, receives passing mention on tonight's edition of "Turning Point." Maybe the producers just couldn't go cold turkey.
"Framingham Eight" takes its title from a group of women who wound up in a Massachusetts prison for killing a husband or an ex-husband or a boyfriend or a lover. (Rule No. 1 for protest: Link a place name to a number so placards can be inscribed "Free the ------ ------!") All sought to have their sentences commuted on the ground that they were suffering from "battered woman syndrome," a recently discovered defense that has proved effective in some trials.


Caremark International Inc.(CK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co.  (CTB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article in Science Times on June 28 about a snag in a previously announced proof of a famous math conjecture, Fermat's last theorem, misstated the theorem.
It states that the equation xn + yn = zn , where n is an integer greater than 2, can have no solution in which x, y and z are positive integers.


Finning Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Westamerica Bancorp (WABC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rudolf Firkusny, an Elegant and Patrician Pianist, Is Dead at 82
Rudolf Firkusny, a Czech-born pianist known for his elegant performing style and his warm, patrician manner, died on Tuesday morning at his country home in Staatsburg, N.Y.
He was 82 and lived in New York City.
The cause was cancer, said his press agent, Constance Shuman.


Cadence Design Systems Inc.(CDN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hawaiian Electric Industries (HE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Panhandle Eastern (PEL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Virginia Poll Finds That North Has Pulled Even With Robb
A new poll shows that Oliver L. North, the Republican nominee in Virginia's four-way race for the United States Senate, has gained on the Democratic incumbent, Charles S. Robb, and is now running neck and neck with him for the lead.
The survey's findings indicate that Mr.
North is being embraced by many moderate Republican voters and not just the conservatives who promoted his nomination, political analysts say.


Returning to Chicago
Although Chicago has been the site of more national party conventions than any other city, none has been held there since the turbulent Democratic one in 1968.
But Democrats said yesterday that they would hold their 1996 national convention there.
Article, page A8.


Schools Can't Give Students What They Don't Get at Home
To the Editor:
A July 8 news article reports that, according to new test results, "the proportion of black and Hispanic students in New York City public schools who read and do math at the level expected for their grade is far below that of white and Asian students."


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Quartet Takes On Beethoven Heavyweights  Avery Fisher Hall
String quartets seldom get a chance to show off for the galleries, particularly in weighty repertory like Beethoven's three "Razumovsky" Quartets, but members of the Emerson Quartet managed to bring down the house at a Mostly Mozart concert on Monday night.
Their secret weapon was the finale of Opus 59, No. 3, delivered at a dizzying bumblebee tempo.
Not only the speed but also the control and unanimous force of the playing were extraordinary.
The same spirited precision buoyed the other movements of the C-major quartet, which is at once the most classically trim and most harmonically adventurous of the middle quartets.


Upjohn Co.(UPJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bosnia Serbs Hint Conditionally They'll Accept Latest Peace Plan
The Bosnian Serbs stopped short of rejecting a new international peace plan for Bosnia today and indicated a highly conditional readiness to work with the proposal.
With the plan already approved by the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government, the Serbian stance, however ambivalent, brings the possibility of at least a temporary peace in Bosnia closer than at any time in the 27-month war.


Morrison Knudsen (MRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Joslyn Corp.(JOSL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Cyanamid Corp.(ACY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dial Corp.(DL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Silas Adjusts to His Changing Role With the Nets
After Chuck Daly decided in May to give up his job as the Nets' coach with a year left on his contract, the leading candidate to replace him was his assistant, Paul Silas.
After all, not only had Silas paid his dues with New Jersey, but he had also served as a head coach in the National Basketball Association.


First Commerce Corp.(FCOM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corestates Financial Corp.(CFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hi-Lo Automotive Inc.(HLO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Amos Melamede, 61; Chairman of Maker of Museum Tapes
Amos Melamede, head of the company whose taped commentaries advise visitors about what they are looking at in the world's finest museums, died on Thursday in Manhattan.
He suffered a stroke and died at the home of a friend, where he had just celebrated his 61st birthday, his family said.
At his death, Mr.
Melamede, a resident of the East Side, was chairman of the Acoustiguide Corporation of Manhattan.
The company provides audio tapes for special exhibitions as well as permanent cultural sites around the world, from New York to Beijing.
He led its expansion in Eastern Europe and China.


Food Notes
Reviving La Marqueta
For many years, New York City has attempted to revitalize La Marqueta, the series of indoor market stalls under the viaduct on Park Avenue between 110th and 116th streets.
Once a vibrant market, it now houses only a dozen or so merchants in a recently refurbished section from 114th Street to 115th Street.
Last week, Park Avenue and 115th Street became the city's newest Greenmarket site, as a number of farmers started selling produce outside La Marqueta there.
The corner will be a Greenmarket every Friday, through the end of October.


UJB Financial Corp.(UJB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Allied Holdings Inc.(HAUL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Augat Inc.(AUG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Setting the Rhythm for a New Era
King of Ragtime
Scott Joplin and His Era
By Edward A. Berlin
Illustrated. 334 pages. Oxford University Press. $25.
"Suddenly I discovered that my legs were in a condition of great excitement. They twitched as though charged with electricity and betrayed a considerable and rather dangerous desire to jerk from my seat. The rhythm of the music, which had seemed so unnatural at first, was beginning to exert its influence over me."


Armstrong World Industries Inc.(ACK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Choreography of Grief, North Korea Bids Farewell to Leader
A vast sea of North Koreans filled the center of the nation's capital this morning to hear eulogies to their late leader, Kim Il Sung, and prepare for the ascension of his son Kim Jong Il, in the first dynastic succession in the Communist world.
What appeared on television broadcasts seen here seemed to be hundreds of thousands of people gathered in Kim Il Sung Square, a huge plaza filled with statues and murals to the late dictator and his socialist cause.


California Judge Refuses to Apply a Tough New Sentencing Law
A California judge has refused to abide by a provision of the state's new law on harsher sentences for repeat offenders.
The case involves Jeffrey D. Missamore, 32, who was convicted of burglary, a felony, in 1986.
While recently serving time on an honor farm for petty theft, he was caught with marijuana and charged with two counts of carrying drugs into a prison.
One count was dismissed.


State Street Boston (STBK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


METRO DIGEST
SHIP OF FEAR: AT SEA WITH LEGIONNAIRES'
From the moment passengers began climbing the gangplank to the Celebrity Cruises Horizon, they knew it would be an unusual cruise: stewards were handing out leaflets saying that they faced a low risk of getting Legionnaires' disease.
Days later, hundreds of miles from home, the 1,200 passengers got more unsettling news: the ship would have to be evacuated to empty and disinfect its plumbing system.
A1.
For some passengers, misfortune begets opportunity.
B2.
NEW YORK CITY  MOVE TO DROP TOBACCO STOCKS
The trustees of the city's largest public employee pension fund -- including the Comptroller, the Public Advocate and the Mayor's office -- have taken what could be the first step toward eliminating the stocks of tobacco companies from its portfolio of investments.
B3.
LAWYER SAYS HOGUE WAS HELPING FIANCEE
The attorney for Larry Hogue, the mentally ill man who for years menaced residents of the Upper West Side, told a courtroom that Mr.
Hogue had walked away from the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center last week to get money for his fiancee, a Bridgeport, Conn., woman who is three months pregnant with the couple's baby.
B3.
MAYOR BOOED AS RESIDENTS FOCUS ON RACE
Amid jeers, Mayor Giuliani faced questions at a town meeting in Queens about police conduct, cuts in summer jobs, his Board of Education appointments and a deputy mayor's rhetoric.
B3.
APOLOGY FOR REMARKS ON HOMELESS
A police captain apologized for remarks he made about the murder of a homeless woman and the rape of three others in Central Park, in which he suggested that the homeless did not belong in the park in the first place.
B6.
DINKINS AND GREEN CALL FOR RENT INQUIRY
Former Mayor David N. Dinkins and Public Advocate Mark J. Green called for an outside monitor to examine the leases granted to 15 administration officials and former campaign workers by a real-estate executive who raised funds for the Mayor.
B6.
Mayor Giuliani picks a new commissioner of youth services.
B3.
Mastercard International will move its employees in New York City to Westchester County.
B2.
REGION
COACH CHARGED IN SEXUAL ABUSE
The owner of a karate school in Yonkers was indicted on charges that he sexually assaulted a 16-year-old female student in May, the Westchester District Attorney's office said.
B4.
WHITMAN PLAYS THE QUIET STUDENT
During four days of conferences and caucuses, interspersed with lobster dinners and a Boston Pops concert, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman acted the student, not the professor, among the self-assured throng at the National Governors' Association annual meeting.
Yet as a moderate Republican with a strong dislike of taxes, Mrs.
Whitman, the freshman governor from New Jersey, drew an extra measure of interest from association members.
B4.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. will head a health-services company, an industry member says.
B4.
Governor Cuomo began airing a campaign commercial in which he is endorsed by two victims of the Long Island Rail Road shootings.
B4.
About New York by John Kifner B3


Tidewater Inc.(TDW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pepsi Posts Flat Profit; New KFC Chief Named
Pepsico appointed a new head for its KFC fast-food chain yesterday, even as it announced subpar earnings for the second quarter.
The earnings report fulfilled the forecast the company made last month that sales at its restaurant chains and for its soft-drink business would be unexpectedly slow.
That announcement, on June 9, prompted a selloff in stocks of several beverage and fast-food companies as investors feared Pepsi's problems were indicative of industrywide woes.


Honeywell Inc.(HON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


GFC Financial Corp.(GFC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Westcorp Inc.(WES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Financial Management (FFM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Promus Cos.(PRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Horseback Riding as Therapy


Rwandan Rebels Name Cabinet of Hutu and Tutsi, but Those Fleeing Are Still Fearful
The victorious Tutsi-dominated Rwandan Patriotic Front installed a new Government today, naming moderate Hutu as President and Prime Minister, repeating a pledge to protect all Rwandans and urging those fleeing the country to stay put.
But the new Government's assurances were greeted with defiance at this border town, where hundreds of thousands of Hutu have crossed into Zaire and additional multitudes are poised to go.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Comerica Bank, Detroit, a unit of Comerica Inc., is selling $150 million of 8.375 percent subordinated bank notes due in 2024 at 99.322 to yield 8.437 percent through Lehman Brothers.
Callable in 20 years, the issue is rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service, A- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Limbaugh's Listeners
To the Editor:
"Teachers Endorse a Boycott Over Juice Ads on Limbaugh" (news article, July 5) refers to "the 15 or 20 million people" who listen to Rush Limbaugh's daily radio program.
It is a common misconception.
The talk- show host has about 20 million listeners a week.


McGraw-Hill Inc.(MHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Classrooms on the Information Highway
Prof.
Maria Domoto stood alone in a quiet broadcast room on the campus of the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, ready to teach her Japanese course to high school students.
She checked the television monitor.
The large screen was divided in four and all of the quadrants were on.
She could see her three high school classes taking their seats.
"Jamie, you don't have your glasses on today," she said, glancing at the lower left quadrant of the screen, the North Mecklenburg High School class.


2 Victims of L.I.R.R. Shooting Appear in Commercial for Cuomo
Seeking to turn the crime issue to his advantage, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo began airing a campaign commercial today that uses two victims of the Long Island Rail Road shootings to endorse his opposition to the death penalty and his call for a ban on assault weapons.
The 60-second ad, first broadcast today on stations in New York City, stresses Mr.
Cuomo's position on those two pivotal issues, portrays him as "a man of principle" and assails Republicans' role in blocking a statewide assault-weapons ban.


Alaska Air Group Inc.(ALK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BB&amp;T Financial Corp.(BBTF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ball Vanishes, And So Do The Yankees
Mark McGwire admired the massive home run, watching it sail higher and higher before it vanished into the back row of the left-field bleachers.
Jim Abbott did not watch the ball so closely.
He turned toward left field, turned away and then spit on the ground.
It might have been his comment about the sloppy night.
Every game cannot be pretty.
Every game cannot be fundamentally sound.
Every game cannot be competitive.
So file tonight's clash between the Yankees and Athletics as a definite clunker for the visitors as they bumbled, stumbled and finally lost on the road, 6-2.
McGwire's three-run blast in the fifth inning made sure that any possibility of the game being competitive was squashed and proved that Abbott is not sound.


Health Firm Is Reported As Next Job For Weicker
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. is returning to Washington after his term as Governor ends in January to head a new health-services company, an industry member familiar with Mr.
Weicker's plans said today.
Mr.
Weicker, a former three-term United States Senator who has long been interested in medical issues, will be joining the health-care debate in Washington with two well-known lobbyists on health matters, Robert K. Dresing and Terry L. Lierman, according to the industry member, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Gypsies, Dispersed and Despised
A little boy traveling with a Gypsy caravan through the desert in northwestern India raises his voice in a piercing lament for the fate of his people, who are destined to wander the earth.
Moving through a landscape as breathtaking as a Rousseau painting, he cries: "I will burn my horoscope that exiled me so far from those I love. I want to return to my family and run barefoot."
A group of Gypsy women gather on the street of an unidentified Spanish town and sing about the hatred they feel from the outside world.
"Some evenings, like many other evenings, I find myself envying the respect you give your dog," go the lyrics for this traditional flamenco ballad.


Mankind's Giant Leap Has Become a Shuffle
To the Editor:
Re "Target Jupiter. Next: Us?" (Op-Ed, July 12) by Von R. Eshleman: It is ironic that the collisions of fragments of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 with Jupiter coincide with the 25th anniversary of the first Apollo moon landing.
That giant leap for mankind has become such a befuddled shuffle.


Pioneer-Standard (PIOS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Diamond Shamrock Inc.(DRM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lukens Inc.(LUC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Aviall Inc.(AVL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Allstate Corp.(ALL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Union Bank (UBNK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reeves Putts to Early Lead
Although John Reeves disputes it, his deadly putting proved to be the difference today in the first round of the New York State Open on the Black Course at Bethpage State Park.
Reeves, assistant pro at Fairview Country Club in Greenwich, Conn., stroked five birdie putts, including a 25-footer on the 150-yard, par-3 third hole, to shoot a four-under-par 67 and take a one-shot lead over Mel Baum and David Young.
The second round of the $65,000 tournament is Wednesday, and the final 18 holes will be played Thursday.


Once More, Jackson Is the Giants' Receiver
In the National Football League's wacky and not-always-wonderful world of free agency, winners sometimes become losers and then, if they are lucky, they more or less become winners again.
Just ask Mark Jackson, a starting wide receiver for the Giants last year, an unemployed player 10 weeks ago and now a Giants starter again.
A year ago, when unrestricted free agency came to the N.F.L., Jackson left the Denver Broncos after seven seasons and signed with the Giants.
One attraction was the Giants' new coach, Dan Reeves, his coach with the Broncos.
Another was the money: $4.5 million over three years.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the fragments of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 that struck Jupiter misstated the size of the largest nuclear explosion ever set off on Earth.
It was 57 megatons, not 5.


Federal Signal Corp.(FSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


GTE CORP. (GTE,N)
The GTE Corporation, the nation's largest local phone company, said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose 8 percent from the comparable period a year ago, before accounting for gains and charges.
Including the special items, the company's profits rose about 35 percent.
GTE's net income in the quarter that ended June 30 was $595 million, or 62 cents a share.
A year earlier, GTE earned $438 million, or 46 cents a share.


Norwest Corp.(NOB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Commercial Corp.(FCLR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sprint Corp.(FON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Whirlpool Corp.(WHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nash Finch Co.(NAFC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 18


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Before 'Cavalleria' Became an Opera  St. Patrick's Cathedral
Before he set up shop as an opera composer, Pietro Mascagni was the municipal conductor and director of a music school in Cerignola, a small town in southern Italy.
As part of his duties, he composed a grand, hourlong Messa di Gloria, for chorus and orchestra with tenor and bass soloists.
The piece was performed in April 1888 and then pretty much disappeared.
Pretty much, but not entirely.
When Mascagni entered an opera composition contest, a few months later, he cannibalized the Mass, using stretches of it in his entry, "Cavalleria Rusticana."


Rwandan Rebels Name Cabinet of Hutu and Tutsi, but Those Fleeing Are Still Fearful; France Recognizes Rebels
France recognized the rebel victory in Rwanda's civil war today and said it was ready to start negotiations with the new Government for the withdrawal of the French force by mid-August.
Foreign Minister Alain Juppe also appealed to the victorious Rwandan Patriotic Front to respect the cease-fire it declared on Monday and to allow hundreds of thousands of refugees to return home.
"If there is a legal Government in Rwanda, it is up to this Government to reassure and protect its people," he said.


Jacoby Leaves Redskins After 13 Years
Tackle JOE JACOBY battered away at defensive linemen for more than a decade as a member of the Washington Redskins' notorious Hogs, perhaps the most famous offensive line ever assembled.
Yesterday, he announced his retirement, signaling the end of another legacy of the JOE GIBBS Redskins.
For 13 years, Jacoby anchored a front line that dominated the scrimmage line, opening big, game-winning holes for runners such as JOHN RIGGINS and EARNEST BYNAR.
But back pain and other injuries, age and the salary cap have ended Jacoby's long ride.
He hadn't played since Nov. 7 last year against the Indianapolis Colts.


People
*
Michael C. Porter was named director of client services at McCann/SAS, Troy, Mich., succeeding Marianne Fey, who was named director of retail.
Mr.
Porter was previously vice president of marketing at the Stroh Brewery Co., Detroit. *
Michael Gill, a consultant at Arnold Advertising, McLean, Va., was named to the new position of senior vice president and co-creative director, joining Jim Kingsley.
And Dennis Mollura, also a consultant to Arnold, was named to the vacant position of senior vice president and public relations director.


Officer Who Posed Nude Is Reassigned
A police officer who set off a controversy by appearing in uniform and nude in the August issue of Playboy magazine has been reassigned from the 45th Precinct to a desk job at the Bronx Borough Command, the Police Department announced yesterday.
The transfer was not a disciplinary action, officials said.
A spokesman for the department, John Miller, said the officer, Carol J. Shaya, 24, was reassigned because other female officers in the precinct had complained that they had become targets of verbal abuse from residents in their patrol area in the northeastern Bronx.
The other officers, Mr.
Miller added, were bothered by questions about Officer Shaya's whereabouts and comparisons between them and Officer Shaya.


Columbia and Developer Plan Rental of Midtown Office Tower
Columbia University, which last year received the office tower at 570 Lexington Avenue as a gift from the General Electric Company, is negotiating an agreement to have the building renovated and rented as office space.
The plan calls for the Mendik Company, a developer in New York, and the Quantum North America Realty Fund, which the financier George Soros operates, to renovate and rent the 50-story building at 51st Street.
In return, Mendik and Quantum will receive unannounced degrees of equity in the building.


City Comptroller's Wife Attempts Suicide
Carol Hevesi, the wife of City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi, attempted suicide yesterday morning because of health problems, according to the police and her husband's office.
She was in stable condition last night at Jamaica Hospital.
John Miller, the deputy police commissioner for public information, said Mr.
Hevesi had left his wife in their Forest Hills, Queens, home around noon yesterday to run an errand and returned about 20 minutes later.
He asked his son where she was and was told she was taking a bath, Mr.
Miller said.
When he found the bathroom door locked and received no answer from inside, Mr.
Hevesi forced open the door and found his wife in the bathtub with both her wrists cut.


Dictating Instead of Dialing
FOR thousands of telephone users, the party on the other end of the line is, more and more often, a computer.
Of course computers have been talking to people by telephone for years, with voice-mail mazes and messages like "deposit 30 cents, please," but lately, several companies have introduced programs that let people talk back.
Sprint, for example, in a nationwide program introduced in January, began substituting its customers' voices for their calling-card numbers.


Stu Jackson May Rejoin N.B.A.
Just months after coaching Wisconsin to its first National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament berth in 47 years, STU JACKSON could be heading back to the National Basketball Association.
Several news organizations said yesterday that Jackson would be named general manager of Vancouver's N.B.A. expansion team.
The Capital Times of Madison said Jackson's appointment would be announced tomorrow.
Jackson, 38, a former New York Knicks coach, wasn't in his office yesterday to comment. (AP)


Housing Starts Decline 10% In Sign of Slowing Economy
Housing starts fell sharply in June, the Commerce Department reported yesterday.
Economists interpreted this latest statistic as strong evidence that rising interest rates had finally shifted home construction, and the entire economy, into a lower gear.
Housing starts -- the breaking of ground to build apartments and houses -- fell nearly 10 percent, to an annual rate of 1.351 million, continuing a decline that began in the spring after starts hit 1.519 million units, the second-highest level in this decade.
Most of the May-to-June drop came in the construction of multifamily dwellings, although single-family home building also fell.


Corrections
A front-page article and headline yesterday about a Census Bureau report on unwed mothers characterized the statistics incorrectly in some copies.
The figures reported were for children living in single-parent households with a parent who had never married; the figures were not birthrates -- the number of births to unwed mothers.


CHRONICLE
When EDWARD ALBEE was shut out of a Tony nomination for his "Three Tall Women" this year, the people who know him at the McBurney branch of the Y.M.C.A. began planning what they might do to compensate.
The playwright, after all, is well known at the Y, at Seventh Avenue and 23d Street: when he's in town, he exercises there four times a week.
It may not be the Tony, but on Wednesday Mr.
Albee will receive a plaque to honor his play, which did win a Pulitzer Prize.
Some 200 Y members will attend a reception at 4 Columbus Circle before seeing the show at the Promenade Theater as part of a benefit for the organization.


Sports of The Times; The Giants: Old Numbers, New Games
UNLIKE all the recent noise surrounding their sports neighbors, life at the Giants' training camp is relatively serene.
Unlike the Rangers, the Giants aren't suing a "faithless" coach.
Unlike the Yankees, they don't even have a vice president for community relations.
Unlike the Mets, none of their players are suspended for violating drug-abuse after-care.
Unlike the Nets and the Islanders, they don't have a new coach.
Unlike the Jets, they're not trying out a World Cup soccer player.
Unlike the Devils, they didn't sign their best player to a four-year $17.1 million contract.


METRO DIGEST
MICROBE PUTS CRUISE SHIP OUT OF SERVICE The cruise ship Horizon was taken out of service, and the vacation plans of more than 1,000 passengers were upended, after test results came back showing the possible presence of the Legionnaires' disease bacteria in the ship's water system.
A1.
Few people canceled cruises, but travel agents were swamped by calls seeking assurance.
B8.


Stocks Tumble Over Fears of a Rate Rise
Alan Greenspan managed to spook the financial markets yesterday by merely telling them generally what he has said before and refusing to rule out further increases in interest rates.
But there were some nuances in his testimony before Congress that put traders' teeth on edge.
The stock, bond, and currency markets all nose-dived on the Federal Reserve Board chairman's statement to the Senate Banking Committee that Fed policies "need to remain disciplined and focused."


Doubling Fun and Safety
HERE are two ways to get around by bicycle this summer: safely and in tandem.
The idea of riding a bicycle built for two makes perfect sense until it's time to store it in a cramped corner.
How will it ever fit?


Bridgeport Tries Tourist Shuttle to Offset Violent Image
In an attempt to lure tourists who may shun Bridgeport because of its crime-ridden neighborhoods, an arts consortium unveiled a new bus shuttle service today that will take visitors from the downtown ferry to its four major attractions.
The "showcase shuttle," a colorfully decorated bus, was introduced today at one of the attractions, Captains Cove Seaport, by Art Force, a consortium of Bridgeport tourist attractions.
The organization hopes to increase attendance by combating the dangerous image the city -- Connecticut's largest -- has in the minds of some outsiders.


A Disease That Thrives on Squalor
Cholera is a severe form of bacterial dysentery that can thrive under conditions of squalor and poor sanitation like those among the Rwandan refugees in Zaire.
In its most severe form, cholera causes profuse watery diarrhea and vomiting.
In turn, these symptoms can lead to dehydration, collapse of the circulatory system and death within a few hours of onset.
Death rates of 50 percent have been recorded in epidemics.
But if fluid loss is promptly corrected intravenously or by drinking oral rehydration solutions, the death rate is less than one percent.


When the Light Touch Is the Right Touch
In our age of hard-sell entertainments, the light touch is vastly undervalued.
It tends to be equated with the frivolities of another theatrical era, when actors sported ascots and actresses trailed chiffon scarfs in drawing rooms with French doors.
These days, to emphasize style over content, manner over meaning, is thought mildly irresponsible.


AIDS Center For Babylon Draws Fire
When word got out in this Long Island village that Dianne Burrows was opening an AIDS counseling center on Railroad Avenue, local officials acted decisively.
The village's lawyer, Joel Sikowitz, warned Ms.
Burrows and the owners of the building that Ms.
Burrrows needed a permit before she could operate a counseling center in a commercially zoned district, or she and the owners each faced fines of $250 a day.
The rule applies to drug counseling and similar enterprises.


Minor Figure in Bomb Plot Sentenced to Time Served
A man portrayed as a minor conspirator in the terrorist plot to blow up New York City landmarks was sentenced yesterday to the three and a half months he has already served on charges of conspiring to supply explosives.
The defendant, Earl Gant, could have received up to five years in prison at his sentencing in Federal District Court in Manhattan.


More Than a Big Brother
Am I my brother's keeper?
It is a question for the ages.
It is a question Michael Strawberry has had to answer, not once but twice in his life.
Both times, the answer has been yes.
Both times, Darryl Strawberry has been the beneficiary.


Owners Fail in Bid For Court to Dismiss Armored-Car Case
The owners of an armored-car company who have been accused of stealing millions of dollars suffered a setback yesterday in an attempt to have the case dismissed on the ground that important evidence was lost.
The lawyers for the defendants, Robert J. and Susanna Scaretta, owners of Revere Armored Inc., have maintained that the Government had allowed the destruction of thousands of documents vital to their defense when a landlord threw out records stored in a warehouse in Beacon Falls, Conn.


Offering Tips on Removing Graffiti
SOME people consider it urban artistry.
Homeowners and the New York Landmarks Conservancy, a nonprofit group in Manhattan devoted to landmarks preservation, do not.
So the conservancy asked itself, "What is the best way for homeowners to remove graffiti without harming the building material or harming themselves?" said Ken Lustbader, a program manager there.


Canada Gives Somali Mother Refugee Status
In a landmark immigration ruling, Canada has granted refugee status to a Somali woman who fled her country with her 10-year-old daughter because she feared that the daughter would face ritual genital mutilation.
In one of the rare times that any Western nation has specifically cited the threat of this ancient custom, widely practiced in Africa, as a reason for granting asylum, a panel of Canada's Immigration and Refugee Board said the daughter's "right to personal security would be grossly infringed" if she were forced to return.


Reinvestment Law Aids Poor Areas
To the Editor:
A July 11 news article offers two explanations for growing interest by banks to lend in New York's poorer areas: banks are stronger, and city and neighborhood development groups have helped rejuvenate many areas over the last decade.
I believe there is a third factor: renewed emphasis on the Community Reinvestment Act and the obligations it places on lending institutions to reinvest in neighborhoods from which they take deposits.
The law, passed in 1977, has been criticized by neighborhood development groups because of the soft approach the bank regulatory agencies have taken to enforcement.


Weicker Rejects Presidential Bid (Probably) for Private Sector
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. said today that he has no plans to run for President as a third-party candidate in 1996, saying he is leaving the Governor's office in January "to make money, have fun and spend time with my family."
Still, Mr.
Weicker, who won a three-way race for Governor here in 1990 as an independent candidate and who once before considered a run for President, could not bring himself to say, flatly, finally, that no, he would not, under any circumstances, be a candidate.


Computer Snoopers Imperil Pentagon Files, Experts Say
Armed with increasingly sophisticated snooping tools, unauthorized computer programmers operating both in the United States and abroad have gained access to hundreds of sensitive but unclassified Government and military computer networks connected to the global network Internet, computer security experts said.
"There is no information to indicate that command and control systems were affected by these intrusions," a spokeswoman for the Defense Information Systems Agency said Wednesday.
Classified Government and military data, like those that control nuclear weapons, intelligence and other critical functions, are not connected to the Internet and are believed to be secure.


Powerful Hurricane, a View From Space


INSIDE
Study of Vitamins Uncovers No Colon Cancer Prevention
In a surprise to scientists who thought vitamins in fruits and vegetables might account for lower cancer rates a study of people at high risk for colon cancer finds the vitamins have no effect.
Page A20.
Argentine Bomb Toll Rises
The bombing of the Jewish cultural center in Buenos Aires has left at least 37 people dead and 56 more missing.
Page A10.
White House Shift on Coding
The Clinton Administration said it may consider alternatives to the Clipper chip, in a reversal of its stand on the wiretapping technology.
Page D1.
Bomb Caused Panama Crash
A bomb caused the crash of a commuter plane in Panama that killed 21 people, President-elect Ernesto Perez Balladares said.
Page A10.
Studying Jupiter's Scars
As astronomers watch more comet fragments hit Jupiter, a debate has already opened on whether the scars will last or quickly fade.
Page A20.


Destructive Entitlement Caps
The House votes today on a defective proposal by Representative Charles Stenholm of Texas to place a cap on overall entitlement spending -- programs like Medicare, food stamps and Social Security.
Mr.
Stenholm's bill would limit annual increases to an amount that would offset inflation and increases in the number of eligible recipients.
That may seem reasonable, but it fails to account for many other reasons spending rises -- such as health-care prices that drive up the cost of Medicaid faster than inflation, or import surges that drive up the cost of agriculture subsidies.
A Congressional committee estimates that the Stenholm cap would require cutting entitlements by a whopping $150 billion over five years.
Under the bill, Congress could close the gap by cutting entitlement programs or raising the cap.
If it did neither, programs would be cut across the board.


A Plague Of Flies Bedevils A Valley
It is not hard to see why Joe and Natalie Wood chose to live here in Bachman Valley.
Like some of the 50 or so other families in the area, they left the clutter of cities and suburbs for a quieter life amid the soft, rolling hills and farmland of Carroll County, where one neighbor is well beyond shouting distance of the next.
What the Woods and families like them did not expect was the flies.


Now Put Africa on Foreign Policy Agenda
To the Editor:
Last month's White House Conference on Africa was a good first step in raising the profile of the continent among policy makers.
The United States has been a leader both in providing humanitarian relief to Africa and in designing effective population programs.
Moreover, our diplomacy has been very effective in several countries; in South Africa, for example, steadfast United States support for the transition to nonracial democracy played an important role in that country's astounding success.


How Noguchi Shed Light On Light Itself
If there's a lamp department in heaven, it must look something like "Quiet Light," the radiant exhibition that opened yesterday at the Gallery at Takashimaya (693 Fifth Avenue, between 54th and 55th streets).
Isamu Noguchi's famed Akari lamps are the soul of this small but ethereal show: 16 poems in paper and electricity that take domestic decoration to the far side of sculptural abstraction.
And the show's designers, the New York architects Tod Williams and Billie Tsien, lift commercial display to a peak of architectural distinction.
Designed to enhance the formal qualities of Noguchi's lamps -- their variety, simplicity, translucence and craft -- this ephemeral shrine to light also illuminates the mind that kindled them into being.
Noguchi's "Quiet Light" animates the inner state of esthetic contemplation as vibrantly as it does rooms.
Fold a piece of paper, and you can change the world.
Or at least create one.
Varying in form from abstract geometry to subtle figuration, the Akari lamps evoke a universe of archaic and modern images: jars, baskets, samurai helmets, Cycladic figurines, moons, kites, flying saucers, the tensile structures of Buckminster Fuller, paper bags from the corner deli.


Texaco Agrees To Tone Down Ads
Texaco Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to modify aspects of a campaign for a new premium gasoline product after it was challenged by a rival, the Chevron U.S.A.
Products Company, before the National Advertising Division of the Council of Better Business Bureaus.
The division, part of the advertising industry's self-regulation efforts, conducted a three-month review of the campaign for Texaco's Clean System 3 gasoline after Chevron complained that among other points the Texaco ads overexaggerated the newness of the product.
Chevron said it has produced a similar gasoline for 14 years.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Four interest-rate increases this year may not be enough to rein in inflation, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, told the Senate Banking Committee.
Although Mr.
Greenspan stopped short of indicating that the Fed would act, he said for the first time that it would be better for the nation's economy if rates were too high than not high enough.  [ Page A1. ]
Alternatives to the Clipper chip may be considered by the Clinton Administration, in a reversal of its position on the Clipper, a coding system designed by the National Security Agency.  [ D1. ]


Wings Ask Waivers on Probert
Saying they were fed up with his off-ice problems and lack of commitment, the Detroit Red Wings yesterday waived the troubled forward BOB PROBERT, whose National Hockey League career has been plagued by battles with alcohol and legal problems.
Probert, 29, was treated most recently for minor injuries stemming from a motorcycle accident.
He had played out his contract and had been negotiating with Detroit and other clubs.


Indians Lose Game And Lose Pitcher
Rangers 13, Indians 11
Juan Gonzalez hit a two-run home run in the 14th inning, his second homer of the night, and the Texas Rangers overcame five Cleveland homers to beat the Indians, 13-11, at Jacobs Field.
The Indians lost their 11-game winner, Mark Clark, to a fractured right wrist in the third inning, then squandered the remainder of what had been a five-run lead when Manuel Lee hit a three-run homer off Jeff Russell in the ninth, tying it at 11-11.
The homer was Lee's first in 321 at-bats since Sept. 3, and only his 18th since coming to the majors in 1985.


Franco's Best Tosses Were Not to the Batter
The first move was gutsy, a risk that could lose him the ball game, and John Franco knew he would be lucky to see it pan out.
The second move simply was smart.
Together, the two crafty plays defused a potentially volatile ninth inning yesterday afternoon at Shea Stadium, as Franco preserved Bret Saberhagen's one-run lead for a 5-4 Mets victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers.


Yankees Want to Hear Magazine Tapes
The Yankees asked New York magazine yesterday to make public the tapes and notes of an interview with a club vice president who has denied making controversial remarks attributed to him by the magazine.
The remarks, attributed to Richard Kraft, who is in charge of community relations for the Yankees, likened youngsters swinging on basketball hoops in the predominantly black neighborhood surrounding Yankee Stadium to "monkeys."


Culprit In Disease Thrives In Water
In the nearly 20 years since the discovery of Legionnaires' disease and the bacterium that causes it, scientists have come to recognize the importance of water as the microbe's hiding place and source of transmission.
Though the bacteria thrive in water, they are transmitted as droplets in the air to cause pneumonia and a spectrum of other conditions.
A typical infection begins with a general feeling of malaise, loss of appetite, muscle pains and headache.
About a day later, fever and chills develop.
Abdominal pain and diarrhea may follow.
Temperatures can rise to 102 to 105 degrees Fahrenheit.
In the pneumonia form of Legionnaires' disease, there may be a dry cough.


In Israel, a Send-Off For Sinai Treasures
Even now, years after they waved farewell, many Israelis find it emotionally difficult to let go of the Sinai Peninsula.
They held it for 15 years, from 1967, when their army captured it from Egypt in the Arab-Israeli war, until 1982, when it all went back under a peace treaty between Israel and Egypt.
A dozen years later, many here still talk wistfully about the wilderness they lost.
These people include those more than willing to give up land in the name of peace.
For them, Sinai represented magic and mystery, Bible and beach front: a getaway place that offered that most elusive commodity in this postage stamp of a country, wide-open space.


That's One Small Step, or He'll Take a Giant Leap


Economic Scene; The Microsoft case shows that trustbusters won't be referees.
MICROSOFT v. the United States and the European Union: What had all the makings of the global antitrust case of the decade ended with a whimper.
Microsoft had been rumored to be facing strict monitoring of its relations with competitors and clients, or even a breakup of its operations into two companies.
In the end, however, the Justice Department and its European counterpart demanded only modest changes in the way the giant software maker markets its products.
Not surprisingly, the consent decree was greeted with dismay by rivals most vulnerable to Microsoft's juggernaut, notably those that produce software applications like word processing, along with those that produce utilities -- anti-virus programs, for example -- that are often sold as a package with Microsoft's basic operating system.
What may surprise is the lack of a passionate response from antitrust economists and lawyers.


RESULTS PLUS
FIELD HOCKEY  U.S.
Team Reaches Semifinals  The United States, ranked 11th in the world before the tournament, moved into the semifinals of the women's World Cup when it defeated China, 1-0, in the last game of the preliminary round yesterday in Dublin.
The United States joined the pre-tournament favorite, Australia, Germany and another surprise, Argentina.
The United States will play Argentina, and Australia will meet Germany. (AP)
GOLF  Palmer Joins 2 Others at Top  Arnold Palmer fired a three-under-par 69 in the Senior British Open yesterday in Lytham, England, and tied for the first-round lead with Liam Higgins of Ireland and Alberto Croce of Italy.
Palmer played the last 14 holes in six under par, shooting an eagle at the 15th where he used a driver, a 1-iron and one putt.
The former British Open champion Tony Jacklin was disqualified for signing an incorrect score card at the Royal Lytham and St.
Anne's, the same course on which he won the Open 25 years ago.
Making his debut on the British seniors circuit, Jacklin signed for a four at the 13th hole, when he had actually taken five strokes.
He also took an eight at the par-5 11th after his ball rebounded onto his chest as he tried to escape from a greenside bunker.
Jacklin completed his round in 81, nine over par. (AP)


Tuam Journal; Nomadic, Gaelic, and Now Ready for a Fight
Ellen Mongan, who was born to illiterate parents 30 years ago in a tent on a roadside not far from this western town, says she is proud to be a tinker, one of the Irish nomadic people who have traveled Ireland's roads in Gypsylike caravans for at least 300 years.
While the term "tinker" -- many of them used to be tinsmiths -- has given way to "traveler," about 30,000 members of this native underclass still live in Ireland.


Putting Faith in Images
Reasoning that the biggest wall between their nations is psychological, Prime Minister Rabin has high hopes for his symbolic encounter with King Hussein next week.
Page A16.


Bridge
The Summer National Championships begin tomorrow in San Diego, just as eight months of play in the Grand National Team Championship comes to a close there.
In the latter, which concludes this weekend, a New York City-area foursome of Jim Cayne, Alan Sontag, David Berkowitz and Larry Cohen is expected to mount a strong challenge, and perhaps bring home New York's first Grand National title.
In the New York semifinal stage, Berkowitz found himself in four spades as shown after his partner had shown a strong raise with a Drury two-club response.
It would have been hard to predict that the spade four had a crucial role to play.


Haiti Holding Up Relief Supplies as a Bargaining Chip to Gain Recognition
In an effort to win some form of diplomatic recognition, Haiti's military-appointed Government is holding up shipments of food and other relief supplies until foreign embassies apply to the two-month-old Government for a special tax exemption on imports.
In some instances, food shipments from donor countries, which include the United States, Canada, France and the European Union, have been kept on the docks here since April and have rotted or been pilfered.


CHRONICLE
Another place where Mr.
Albee will be looked for is a party at the East Hampton (L.I.) Airport on July 30.
The event, with 2,500 guests filling hangars, runways and tents, will benefit the Long Island Association for AIDS Care.
Mr.
Albee is listed along with 91 other luminaries on the party committee because, as STAN HERMAN, the chairman, put it: "I had no other A's. He said you can have my A."


New Study Finds Vitamins Are Not Cancer Preventers
A new study of people at high risk for colon cancer has failed to find evidence that vitamin supplements protect against the development of precancerous growths in the colon.
People who took vitamin C or vitamin E or beta carotene or all three over four years were no freer of disease than people who took dummy pills.
The findings came as a surprise to some researchers.
It is well established that people whose diets are rich in fruits and vegetables have lower rates of colon cancer than do those who eat less of these foods.
Some researchers had thought that the vitamins in fruits and vegetables might have been the source of their benefits.
The study was an effort to test this thesis.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.19
3.36
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.28
4.25
3.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.68
4.62
3.18
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.22
7.13
5.83
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.54
7.46
6.63
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.33
8.26
7.34
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.35
5.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Austin Retires for Second Time
Saying she didn't love the game as much as she once did, TRACY AUSTIN bade goodbye to professional tennis with an unexpected retirement announcement on Tuesday night at the Pathmark Classic in Mahwah, N.J.
It marked the second time Austin has announced she is quitting tennis.
One of the game's best young players in the late 70's and early 80's, Austin quit in 1983 before making two comebacks.
One ended because of injuries she suffered in a car accident; the latest began a year and a half ago.
"I came back because I was enjoying i," Austin said. .
And about three months ago, I stopped enjoying it."


BANKAMERICA CORP. (BAC,N)
The BankAmerica Corporation, the country's second-largest banking company, said yesterday that it earned $525 million in the second quarter, up about 8 percent from the corresponding quarter a year earlier as lower losses from bad loans compensated for essentially flat revenue.
BankAmerica, based in San Francisco, set aside $125 million in the quarter to cover future bad loans, down 44 percent from $227 million a year ago.
The company's loan business grew by $1.4 billion in the quarter, but, at $124.8 billion, was still $1.4 billion lower than a year ago.
Home mortgages represented the fastest-growing segment of the company's portfolio.


Bretton Woods: A Policy Revisited
A half century after the about-to-be victorious Allies of World War II put in place bold plans for a global financial system and two decades after that system was formally abandoned, a high-profile group of economists, bankers and diplomats is trying to put it back together again.
But the privately sponsored Bretton Woods Commission, which meets today in Washington amid dramatic erosion in the value of the dollar, is sure to meet resistance from a host of sources.
To some, the effort led by Paul A. Volcker, the former chairman of the Federal Reserve, to invent a more effective form of economic super-government to coordinate currency exchange rates, is ideologically offensive.
"It's against the trend of the times," said Ian Vasquez, the director of the Cato Institute's Project for Global Economic Liberty.


Television provides the yeast for media-savvy campaigns by three brewers.
BEER advertising has always been an integral part of television, from the days when "Schlitz Playhouse of Stars" presented live dramas to the elaborate "Bud Bowl" commercials during the last VI Super Bowls.
Now, three large brewers are all running television commercials that are as much about television as they are about beer.
The tongue-in-cheek campaigns, for two brands of beer in this country and one in Britain, use the self-referential device of presenting ersatz television to viewers as they watch actual television.
The commercials seek to attract attention by mocking the familiar conventions of television: soporific series, silly sports, tacky talk shows, breathless network promotions, earnest public service announcements and, of course, commercials themselves.


City of Black Humor, Despite Its Majesty
Berlin Rising Biography of a City By Anthony Read and David Fisher Illustrated. 341 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company. $35.
To walk the grander streets of Berlin is to wonder why instead of being celebrated as a city of light, like Paris, Berlin is more often thought of as the city of black humor, filled with inhabitants who enjoy few things more than cracking bitter jokes about the place where they live.
After all, even Mark Twain was impressed, remarking after a visit in the 1890's that "all of Berlin is stately and substantial, and it is not merely in parts but uniformly beautiful."


Accounts
*
Kaiser Permanente, Oakland, Calif., to Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco, to handle the national image account of the health maintenance organization, previously at J. Walter Thompson San Francisco.
Billings have not been determined.


Building Small . . . Thinking Big
A COTTAGE as pretty as a picture postcard, nestled behind the sort of tidy wooden fence that Tom Sawyer so famously whitewashed.
Cozy and eminently affordable, it was the American dream for much of this century, until the decade of the leveraged buyout caused the average middle-class home to balloon from 1,710 square feet in 1982 to more than 2,100 square feet last year.
But even as houses continue to grow, the small, sensible cottage is coming into vogue again.
A band of architects and builders is trying to shake some sense into their industry, spurred on by statistics that show that the American family is shrinking, and by the rise of single-person and single-parent households.
Such people say they don't need and can't afford the bodacious four-bedroom house that has strong-armed the suburban landscape for more than a decade -- "the junior embassy look," as Michael Walsh, a syndicated columnist, has called it.


POP
Three Underground Trios With Three Paths  Knitting Factory
On Tuesday, as part of the New Music Seminar's first of five nights of performances around New York, three trios cut three different paths through underground rock.
H.
P.
Zinker, an Austrian band that came to the East Coast several years ago, played a loud, concentrated grind.
Since 1989, it has been shifting from a style that embraces jazz, noise and every rock genre on vinyl to a more rarefied sound that fuses the late 60's punk of Detroit bands like MC5 and the Stooges with the progressive heavy metal of European bands of the same era like Black Sabbath and Deep Purple.
The best part of H. P. Zinker was not the streamlined choruses, the punchy vocals or the crunching rhythms, but the moment three-fourths through each song when the frontman, Hans Platzgummer, would let loose a screaming wah-wah guitar solo.


Washington Talk; A Panama Enemy Becomes an Ally
Panama's President-elect, a stalwart in the political party that Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega controlled until American troops ousted him in 1989, is suddenly the darling of official Washington.
The President-elect, Ernesto Perez Balladares, says he would allow up to 10,000 Haitians to stay in temporary havens in Panama after he takes office on Sept. 1.
The Clinton Administration thought it had a deal with Panama's incumbent President, Guillermo Endara, to take in the boat people.
But Mr.
Endara, who was installed by American troops after General Noriega's downfall, abruptly withdrew his offer this month, leaving the White House strategy in shambles.


Prosecutor Seeking White House Files on Foster
The independent prosecutor looking into the Whitewater affair has obtained a subpoena requiring the White House to turn over all its files relating to how Presidential aides handled the aftermath of the death of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the White House said today.
Documents previously sought by the prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr., as he investigated the circumstances surrounding Mr.
Foster's death were mainly Mr.
Foster's own files.
The newly sought documents are any that reflect how those files were distributed after his body was discovered in a suburban Virginia park a year ago today and how Presidential aides dealt with an inquiry by the United States Park Police into his death.


Classifying Autism
To the Editor:
Maria Zachmanoglou should know as a professional that autism is classified as a developmental disability, not a mental illness (letter, July 8).
Developmental disabilities are not treatable the same as diabetes or heart disease.
Autism, in particular, is a poorly understood disorder for which various interventions are being researched.


Commissioner to Make The Call on Keenan
The next phase in the developing mystery over whether Mike Keenan belongs to the Rangers or the St.
Louis Blues unfolds today when all sides submit briefs by 10 A.M. to National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman.
If the parties submit a light volume of paperwork, Bettman could make a decision without a hearing.
But the contradictory stories and conflicting facts that characterize the different versions appear to require a hearing.
Bettman has offered the parties three hearing dates, two next week and one the week after.


Pawns Get to Play the King in Sarajevo


No Headline
It's too hot, too crowded and too noisy, and we can't get enough of it.
People told us we'd either love it or hate it.
So far, we love it. - BRETT SPENCER, a Londoner visiting New York City.  [ A1:4. ]


Numbers Game on Health
President Clinton says he thought his remarks sounded innocent enough.
Speaking to the nation's governors on Tuesday, Mr.
Clinton said he would be satisfied if health-care reform managed to insure "somewhere in the ball park of 95 percent" of Americans and that he would not insist that Congress impose an employer mandate.
Neither remark deviated one iota from Administration policy.
But that did not stop a torrent of speculation that the President was retreating on universal coverage and was backtracking from mandates.
Yesterday a rattled White House disclaimed any such signals.
And the First Lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton, visited Capitol Hill to reassure Democratic leaders that the President was not wavering.
By the end of the day, the Hill was supposed to believe Mr.
Clinton was singing the same old tunes -- for now.


New York Grand Jury System for Drug Offenses Seems a Waste
To the Editor:
Having finished grand jury duty in Special Narcotics three weeks ago, I would like to add a note to Philip B. Heymann's "Billions for New Prisons? Wait a Minute" (Op-Ed, July 9), about the costs of imprisoning low-level drug offenders.
In narcotics alone, four grand juries of 23 people each sit five half-days a week, 52 weeks a year.
If most jurors show up most of the time, as they did in the jury on which I served, roughly $400,000 a year is paid to them in Manhattan alone for this single aspect of the process.
This, of course, does not include administration, recordkeeping, space, security, court and police personnel, all before those accused even get to trial, much less prison.


South Renews Recrimination In Korea
For nearly two weeks the world has been treated to a rare and somewhat sugar-coated look at one of the world's most secretive and, some would say most dangerous, countries.
As North Koreans cried at the passing of their leader Kim Il Sung, Government-provided television pictures have presented the Communist dictatorship with a human face, and four decades of tension on the Korean peninsula seemed to be suspended.


Rwanda Relief Workers Fear Cholera Epidemic
Exhausted relief workers fear they are seeing the start of a severe cholera epidemic among the one million Rwandan refugees here, who are already dying in droves.
At a place called Munigi, a few miles north of this border town, where at least 200,000 refugees have camped, medical workers today were administering their sparse supplies of intravenous solution to scores of men, women and children lying on the ground who had been diagnosed as having cholera.


Albert J. Marino; Judge, 90
Albert J. Marino, a retired judge of the New York City Civil Court, died on Sunday at the Applegarth Care Center in Hightstown, N.J.
He was 90 and a longtime resident of Brooklyn.
His death came after a long illness, his family said.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Powdery Mildew
Q.
A whitish-looking covering is spreading over the leaves of my cucumber plant, and the affected parts seem to be dying.
What can I do? -- Jean H. Langley, Wilmington, Del.


China Sends Warships to Vietnam Oil Site
China has deployed two warships in the South China Sea to blockade a Vietnamese oil rig built at a site claimed by both China and Vietnam, diplomats and oil industry analysts said today.
The Chinese ships have already turned back at least one Vietnamese vessel that was ferrying supplies to the rig, in a dramatic increase in a long-simmering dispute between the two countries over oil rights in the South China Sea.


Air Conditioning Forces Yeltsin to Come In From His Cold
The Kremlin announced today that Boris N. Yeltsin had recovered from his cold.
The Russian President's spokesman, Vyacheslav Kostikov, said the condition that forced Mr.
Yeltsin to cancel his schedule early this week was brought on by air conditioning.


Maddox, a Quarterback, May Join His Old Coach
Going into his second year as the Giants' coach, Dan Reeves has taken advantage of what some in the National Football League have nicknamed the Colorado Trail, a path from Denver to New York in which former Broncos players have made their way onto the Giants' roster.
Is quarterback Tommy Maddox next in line?


Yanks Pull The Switch: Mattingly Bats Fifth
The Yankees made a concession to Don Mattingly's ailing wrist and his dwindling power and to Paul O'Neill's continued hitting excellence by switching the players in the lineup tonight, bumping Mattingly from the third to the fifth spot and signaling the end of his paper status as their premier hitter.
Although O'Neill has obviously been New York's best hitter this year while Mattingly has not hit above .300 or driven in 100 runs since 1989, the lineup change was still dramatic because Mattingly has basically been lodged in the No. 3 spot since 1984.
Mattingly, who last batted out of the third hole Aug. 11, 1992, hit second often while winning the American League most valuable player award in 1985 and has hit fourth on occasion, but he has been known and renowned for batting third.
But probably not anymore.


Study Finds More Drug Use But Less Concern About It
A 13-year decline in illicit drug use has halted as Americans are becoming less concerned about the hazards of drugs, Federal researchers said yesterday, suggesting to some experts that the country's drug problem might be on the brink of worsening.
In an annual survey of households across the country, researchers from the Department of Health and Human Services said there were already indications of increased drug use in two age groups: teen-agers and those 35 and older.


Gottfried Reinhardt, 81, Film Director and Producer
Gottfried Reinhardt, a producer, director and playwright who worked on such films as "Two-Faced Woman," "The Red Badge of Courage" and "Town Without Pity," died on Monday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 81.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said Allan Parachini, a friend of the Reinhardt family.


Han Xu, 70, China Diplomat And Ex-Envoy to U.S., Dies
Han Xu, a senior Chinese diplomat whose lifelong association with the United States culminated in a four-year tour as Ambassador to Washington in the 1980's, died in Beijing on Tuesday, the official New China News Agency reported yesterday.
He was 70.
The cause was cancer, the news agency said.


Mr. Clinton's Whitewater Contact
The viral disregard for the independence of Federal regulatory agencies that has gripped President Clinton's associates seems to have infected the President himself.
According to a leaked memorandum to Congress, Mr.
Clinton asked the nation's top banking regulator last Jan. 1 to provide legal advice on how to deal with the increasingly nettlesome story of Mr.
Clinton's Arkansas land investments and their ties to a failed savings and loan.
The conversation marks the first time the President himself is known to have discussed the Whitewater affair with an independent regulator.
Eugene A. Ludwig, who as Comptroller of the Currency regulates banks, quickly concluded that it would be "impermissible" to offer such advice.
He thus showed greater respect for the protocols of government than other Treasury Department officials who capitulated to requests to keep White House aides abreast of the Whitewater inquiry.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
At Mostly Mozart, Concertos Elegant and Energetic  Avery Fisher Hall
Two Mozart concertos, each steeped in both the elegance and energy of the Classical style, were framed by examples of nascent Romanticism in the Tuesday evening installment of the Mostly Mozart Festival.


State Accuses Con Edison of Polluting Waterways for 7 Years
From 1984 to 1991, environmental regulators allege, Consolidated Edison illegally discharged oil and other contaminants into New York City waterways, failed to clean up scores of leaks and spills properly and ignored the state's demands to stop those activities.
The regulators, from the State Environmental Conservation Department, brought the charges two years ago but did not make them public as they tried to prod the utility into a settlement.
The state is seeking a fine of $20 million, the largest the department has sought in an administrative action.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the Senate Judiciary Committee's hearings on Judge Stephen G. Breyer's nomination to the Supreme Court misstated part of the testimony of a witness who opposed the nomination.
In discussing a New Hampshire site involved in a court case that Judge Breyer had said was a swamp, the witness, Dr.
Sidney Wolfe, said the site was not a swamp and was in fact zoned for residential use.
But he did not say there was a current plan to develop it.


Bernard Benstock, English Professor, 64
Bernard Benstock, a professor of English at the University of Miami and an authority on James Joyce, died on July 14 at his summer home in South Egremont, Mass.
He was 64 and also lived in Coral Gables, Fla.
His death, in his sleep, was apparently caused by a heart attack, said Kevin Finnerty of Finnerty &amp; Stevens Funeral Homes in Great Barrington, Mass.


That Blur on the Court Is 76ers' Point Guard
Although B. J. Tyler has yet to play a minute in the National Basketball Association, his new coach is already calling him the quickest player in the league.
"Nobody's as quick as he is," John Lucas, the Philadelphia 76ers' coach, has been saying this week at the New York Summer Pro League, which concluded its eight-day stint with a championship tripleheader today at the Westchester County Center.


Telemundo Plan Backed
Telemundo Group Inc. said yesterday that its plan to emerge from bankruptcy protection had been approved by a Federal bankruptcy judge.
Telemundo, a Spanish-language television network based in New York, filed for Chapter 11 in June 1993.
The reorganization plan will mostly wipe out current shareholders' equity and transfer control of the company to Leon Black's Apollo Investment Fund.


Bacterial Evidence Forces Cruise Liner To Stop All Service
The cruise ship Horizon was taken out of service today, and the vacation plans of more than 1,000 passengers were upended, after test results came back showing the possible presence of the Legionnaires' disease bacteria in the ship's water system.
Spokesmen for Celebrity Cruises, which operates the luxury liner, said it would arrange flights back to New York on Thursday for the passengers.
They had been evacuated from the ship Tuesday and put up in hotels here while the Horizon's water systems were being disinfected to eliminate any bacteria that might have caused four confirmed cases of Legionnaires' disease and 18 possible cases among passengers who had traveled on recent cruises.


Fliers Who Fed Sarajevo Run Rwanda Airlift
The international squadron of fliers who have helped feed the citizens of Sarajevo for the last two years took charge of the new United Nations airlift into Rwanda today and sought to straighten out the clogged relief pipeline, which now includes medicine, to deal with an outbreak of cholera.
At dawn Thursday, a C-130 carrying 18 tons of cornmeal, beans and rice will head south from Nairobi on what is expected to be the first of thousands of flights under the command of the Sarajevo Air Operations Cell in Geneva.


Nothing's Changed in the Way We Raise Sons
To the Editor:
In reading your July 11 front-page article on a poll of teen-agers about their expectations concerning the family roles they will play as adults, I was reminded of a phone call I received a couple of years ago inviting me to lecture to a group of parents of elementary school children on how to raise boys who respect girls.
"The boys insult our girls, push them around, hit them," the mother of two very young daughters explained on the phone.
"When we complain to the boys' parents, they (and that includes some 'feminist' mothers) just shrug their shoulders and say 'boys will be boys.' "


A Cheap New York? For Foreign Visitors, Yes.
Last week, Alain Tobier waited in line two hours to climb the Statue of Liberty.
He marveled at the view from the World Trade Center and had his picture taken with a dinosaur at the American Museum of Natural History.
But now he was concentrating on what really drew him to New York: shopping.
Standing at the counter at 47th Street Photo, Mr.
Tobier, an aerospace engineer from Toulouse, France, looked through the viewfinder of the Pentax autofocus 35-millimeter camera recommended by a salesman.
He had already bought an Epson portable computer upstairs.
One of his companions was carrying a new Wilson tennis racquet in his bag.
The other had a box of Timberland shoes.


Nothing's Changed in the Way We Raise Sons; Peer Pressure for Good
To the Editor:
The New York Times-CBS News Poll paints a negative picture of the attitudes of 13- to 17-year-olds (front page, July 10).
They can't talk to their parents; they fear the violence of other young people, and they are deeply frustrated and confused.
However, the survey omitted an important question on the help they do receive.
Had the poll asked the question directly about whom they would confide in, perhaps the results would have been different and more encouraging.


British Cabinet Replaces Four Members
Seeking to breathe new life into his politically troubled Conservative Government, Prime Minister John Major replaced four members of his Cabinet today and promoted several of the party's rising stars.
Mr.
Major acted one day before the opposition Labor Party is expected to name as its new leader Tony Blair, a 41-year-old moderate who has helped pull Labor from the left toward the political center.
The Labor Party now leads the Conservatives by more than 25 points in opinion polls measuring voter support.


In Paris, visions of the Far East


Quest for Return of the Timber Wolf; But Not Everyone Is Eager to See Predator in Adirondacks
Scott Thiele was bouncing down a rutted logging road in the Adirondacks recently, thinking about Jack Nicholson and the feral music of the backwoods, when the thought struck him: what a perfect spot for a howling party.
Amid the secluded bogs, hemlock forests and placid lakes where fishermen dreamily canoe, he envisioned tourists at dusk and a guide who mimics the mournful cry that has sent shivers down spines for centuries.


Jordan's King Offering Help In a Slaying
King Hussein of Jordan has pledged his country's cooperation with American authorities investigating the murder of a New Jersey woman whose husband is charged with killing her and fleeing to Jordan.
The husband, Mohammad Ismail Abequa, a Jordanian-born auto mechanic, is suspected of strangling his wife and fleeing the United States with their two children earlier this month.
Mr.
Abequa visited his mother and family near Amman last week and is now believed to be at large in Jordan.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Recalled Mark Lewis, infielder, from Charlotte of the International League.
Optioned Jerry DiPoto, pitcher, to Charlotte.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Activated Gary Gaetti, third baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Bob Milacki, pitcher, to Omaha of the American Association.


A Move to Revive Brooklyn's Trolleys
Bob Diamond has a dream that he hopes will return the dodgers to Brooklyn -- trolley dodgers, that is.
The original name of the borough's semi-sanctified baseball team was the Brooklyn Trolley Dodgers, derived from the fact that at the turn of the century, players and fans had to scoot out of the way of those newfangled, electrified street cars to get to the ball field.


Jordan's King Offering Help In a Slaying; Appeal Is Made to King
Nesime Dokur, the older sister of Nihal Abequa, made an emotional appeal to King Hussein to have her brother-in-law and her sister's children returned to the United States.
"I ask you, King Hussein, let justice be done," Mrs.
Dokur said in a statement made at the office of the Morris County Prosecutor, W. Michael Murphy, who is the head of the homicide investigation.
"Send Mohammad Abequa back to New Jersey to stand trial. Let our children be returned to us so that they may live in peace."


AT HOME WITH Matilda Raffa Cuomo; Working to Renew the Lease
Matilda Raffa Cuomo surveyed the parade of anniversary cards atop a mantelpiece in New York's Executive Mansion and feigned disbelief at the durability of her marriage.
"Forty years," she said.
"One man."
The last 12 of her 40 years with Mario M. Cuomo have been spent on Eagle Street in the 40-room mansion that the state has lent its governors since 1877.
It is easy to understand why the Cuomos might want to avoid eviction.


Making the Best of Her Situation


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the problems of elderly people in the suburbs misspelled the name of a nursing home in Commack, L.I.
It is the Gurwin Jewish Geriatric Center, not Gurmin.


Argentina's Jews Cry for Their Torn Heart
The bombing of the Jewish cultural center here has torn a physical and spiritual hole in the heart of Latin America's largest Jewish population, leaving at least 37 people dead, 56 more missing and 100 years of archives destroyed.
For 50 years, the building leveled by Monday's bomb had been the center of 250,000 Jews, a group second in size in the Americas only to the Jewish population of the United States.


Why American Steel Is Big Again
The blast furnaces, rolling mills and slab carriers at U.S.
Steel's six-mile-long lakefront plant here are running flat out these days, producing coil after coil of sheet steel for the automotive, appliance and container industries.
The plant, despite having the latest technology, is struggling to keep up with demand -- which is precisely the way U.S.
Steel and the nation's other big steelmakers have planned things.
After a decade of collapsing markets and bankruptcies by the dozens, mill closings and layoffs by the hundreds of thousands, prosperity has returned to the American steel industry.
Not Everything Matters
But this time, having learned the hard way how easily booms can go bust, the industry is prepared to let some business slip away rather than gear up to meet a peak demand that may be fleeting.


CHRONICLE
President NELSON MANDELA of South Africa has been named 1994 winner of the Africa Prize for Leadership, awarded by the Hunger Project, which seeks ways to combat hunger worldwide.


Two Are Tied In N.Y. Open
As the temperatures soared into the mid-90's, the names of golfers fell one by one from the leader board today at the New York State Open on the Black Course at Bethpage State Park.
Perhaps then it's not surprising that a native of Florida, Jim Reeves, the first-round leader, continued his solid play with a one-under-par-70 to share the lead after the second round.
The defending champion, Darrell Kestner, shot a three-under-par 68 to move into a tie with Reeves at 137.
The final round is Thursday on the 6,970-yard course.


Silicon Valley Concerns Offer Specialized News
Two small Silicon Valley companies began offering specialized news services to computer users this month, taking separate but ambitious paths toward designing the electronic newspaper of the future.
Both new companies said they were trying to simplify the task of retrieving information with a personal computer.
The services, which are part of a growing wave of cottage businesses using the Internet to reach millions of computer users, are made possible by the falling cost of delivering information electronically.
Until recently, this has tended to be more costly than using conventional paper-based delivery.


Meeting Set for Wednesday
Sometime late next week, the baseball world should know when this season is most likely to end.
Negotiators for the owners and the players yesterday scheduled their next bargaining session for next Wednesday.
At that meeting the owners' representatives plan to respond to the proposals the players presented at last Monday's negotiating session.


Clinton Reversing A Health Reversal
After supporters of a change in health insurance unleashed a storm of criticism over President Clinton's statement on Tuesday that he might be willing to accept something less than universal coverage, the President and his aides went all out to insist that he would never compromise.


Travelers Seek Assurances It's Safe to Sail
Travel agents reported yesterday that few people have canceled cruises because of the outbreak of Legionnaire's disease on the cruise ship Horizon, but they were swamped by calls seeking reassurances that it was still safe to sail.
"We've gotten lots of calls," said Rose Fanizzi of Going Places Travel on Staten Island.
"Our phones have been ringing off the hook for three days. People are concerned and want to know what's going on."


Rabin Sees Walls of Suspicion Crumbling
Even without trumpets and shouts, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin says, walls will come tumbling down when he and King Hussein of Jordan appear publicly for the first time at the White House next week.
The barriers are in the national minds, the Israeli leader explained, built brick by brick through "an accumulation of hatred, suspicion, animosity, bloodshed, antagonistic perception of one another."


White House Offers Compromise to Free Logjam on Crime Measure
Administration officials today proposed alternatives to a measure on racial bias in death sentences in an attempt to break the logjam on the anti-crime bill, but negotiators recessed tonight with no one budging and no resolution in sight.
Another, apparently final, meeting is set for Thursday.
The measure, which would allow death-row inmates to challenge their sentences as motivated by racial discrimination, has stopped progress on the $30 billion anti-crime bill, which President Clinton had hoped to sign earlier this year.


O'Brien to Try Again
A month up after he came up an event short in trying to set a world record in the decathlon, DAN O'BRIEN is off to Russia to try again, this time at the Goodwill Games in St.
Petersburg.
O'Brien was on a world-record pace through nine events at the USA/Mobil Track and Field Championships in Knoxville last month when he wilted in the 1,500 meters.
Since then, O'Brien, who lives in Moscow, Idaho, has been training hard.
"I'm in much better 400-meter shape and hopefully 1,500-meter shape," he said.


Giuliani Calls Keeping Yankees Bigger Issue Than Bias Furor
The storm over racist comments attributed to a New York Yankees official has got out of hand, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday, chastising the Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, for drawing attention from the "bigger issue" of keeping the team in the borough.
Mr.
Ferrer has repeatedly called on the Yankees to dismiss Richard Kraft, the team's vice president for community relations.
This week's issue of New York magazine quotes Mr.
Kraft as likening the youths who play at Macombs Dam Park, the park next to Yankee Stadium, to "monkeys" and using the term "colored boy." Mr.
Kraft has denied having made the remarks, and the Yankees have apologized.


U.S. Grand Jury Subpoenas Officials of 47th Street Photo
A Federal grand jury has begun an investigation into unrecorded cash transactions made by 47th Street Photo, the cut-rate consumer electronics store that has been mired in bankruptcy proceedings since January 1992.
The grand jury has subpoenaed a former director of the company, Joseph Fisher, and other company officials seeking documents and testimony about 47th Street Photo, its subsidiaries and its owners, Irving and Leah Goldstein, according to people familiar with the retailer's bankruptcy case.
Mr.
Goldstein, an immigrant from Hungary, founded the store in 1965.


Big Drug Companies Post Strong Earnings
Four of five big health care companies reported strong earnings growth yesterday in the second quarter, and all five announced double-digit gains in United States pharmaceutical sales.
Johnson &amp; Johnson, the world's largest diversified health care company, reported a hefty 26 percent increase in domestic drug sales from the corresponding period a year ago.
Despite pressure on prices by managed care insurers and Government Medicaid programs, domestic pharmaceutical sales rose 23 percent at the Schering-Plough Corporation, 16 percent at Pfizer Inc., 12 percent at the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company and 10 percent at Merck &amp; Company.


Inquiry Focusing on String Of 14 Blazes at Jewish Sites
Puzzled over a series of 14 small fires at synagogues, yeshivas and other centers of Jewish activities during the last three months, the New York City and Nassau County police are investigating whether the fires were set by the same person and whether they were acts of bias.
Police and fire officials have not determined whether 2 fires in Rockaway, Queens, and 12 more across the Nassau line in Long Beach are linked, and some investigators have hypothesized that copy-cat arsonists could be involved.


Calendar: Photograph Shows and Walking Tours
Gardens Unbound  Wave Hill, Independence Avenue and West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx; (718) 549-3200.


Federal Reserve's Chief Suggests A New Rate Rise May Be Needed
The hairman of the Federal Reserve said today that the four increases in interest rates this year might not have been enough to keep inflation under control.
His remarks caused a drop in American stock and bond markets as investors concluded that a further increase was more likely than many had thought.
Alan Greenspan, the chairman, stopped short of actually declaring that he would raise interest rates, saying that Government economic indicators were not currently providing a clear signal of future inflation.


Nothing's Changed in the Way We Raise Sons; Girls' Added Risk
To the Editor:
Your July 10 front-page article on teen-agers seems to assume that growing up male or female involves similar experiences.
Teen-age girls are subject to all the problems you mention, but there is an added dimension of vulnerability due to gender, according to recent research:
* Among adolescent girls, 22.7 percent had someone physically threaten them at school.


The Worst-Kept Secret in the Capital
The amount of money the Government spends on intelligence programs is ( ).
It is a state secret that the public is deemed to have no right to know.
It is deleted from the Federal budget.
Its disclosure would gravely damage national security, say the Central Intelligence Agency, the Pentagon and the White House.
Congress has voted time and again, most recently on Tuesday, to keep the secret spending hidden.


Giants Feel the Heat, From Reeves's Workout
If you're out of shape, don't bother coming to a Dan Reeves training camp.
If the heat doesn't get you, he will.
This season, Reeves is stressing conditioning even more than last year, and last year when wide receiver Stephan Baker reported out of shape, his breakfast ended up running faster than he did.
Baker wouldn't have lived through this one.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17 A PEACE SIGNAL FROM JORDAN  Signaling his independence from Syria and his desire for peace, King Hussein of Jordan suggested in Amman that he was prepared to move without President Hafez al-Assad of Syria and sign a separate peace treaty with Israel.
A1  Israel's leader wants to dismantle the "psychological wall." A16  CHOLERA AFFLICTS RWANDANS  Relief workers fear that they are seeing the start of a severe cholera epidemic among the one million Rwandan refugees at the Zairian border.
One official predicted an outbreak of 10,000 to 20,000 cases.
A1  The fliers who helped feed Sarajevo began an airlift into Rwanda.
A8  SERBS REJECT PEACE PLAN  An American mediator said that Bosnian Serbs had rejected a territorial division that was the central pillar of a Bosnian peace plan.
A3  HUNT FOR CULPRIT IN ARGENTINA  The bombing of the Jewish cultural center in Buenos Aires has torn a hole in the heart of Latin America's largest Jewish population.
At least 37 people are dead, 56 are missing and 100 years of archives have been destroyed.
A10  SOUTH LASHES OUT AT NORTH KOREA  As North Korea eulogized its late ruler and proclaimed his son to be the nation's new leader, South Korea blamed the deceased President for starting the Korean War.
The move lessens the odds that a high-level meeting will be held soon.
A9  RULING IN RITUAL MUTILATION CASE  In a landmark immigration ruling, Canada has granted refugee status to a Somali woman who fled her country with her 10-year-old daughter because she feared that the daughter would face ritual genital mutilation.
A14  HAITIAN RULERS BLOCK FOOD AID  In an effort to win some form of diplomatic recognition, Haiti's military-appointed Government is holding up shipments of food and other relief supplies until foreign embassies apply for a special tax exemption on imports.
A10  Germany reaffirmed that plutonium seized there was from Russia.
A13  Washington Talk: A warm embrace for Panama's President-elect.
A10  President Yeltsin is over his cold, his spokesman said.
A12  Tuam Journal: Still a tinker, and proud of it.
A4 National A18-21, B9-10 FIGURING HEALTH CARE COSTS  Many small businesses fear that President Clinton's health plan will saddle them with unbearable costs for insuring their employees, but others say they can pay for the insurance and survive.
A1  REVERSAL ON UNIVERSAL COVERAGE  The President and his Administration went all out to insist that he would never compromise on his goal of insurance for everyone.
B9  NEW RATE RISE POSSIBLE  Four interest-rate increases this year may not be enough to rein in inflation, the Federal Reserve's chairman, Alan Greenspan, told the Senate Banking Committee.
A1  ILLICIT USERS ON SUPERHIGHWAY  Unauthorized computer programmers both in the United States and abroad have gained access to Government and military computer networks connected to the Internet, computer security experts said.
A1  SHEDDING LIGHT ON A BLACK BUDGET  Though Congress votes time and again to keep it secret, the amount of money the Government spends on intelligence programs may be Washington's worst-kept secret.
B10  DRUG PROBLEM MAY BE WORSENING  A 13-year decline in illicit drug use has halted as Americans grow less concerned about the hazards of drugs, researchers said.
A18  BUZZING BANE TO SUMMER'S PEACE  Swarms of flies from two chicken-egg operations have angered and frustrated residents of a valley northwest of Baltimore.
A18  PROSECUTORS SEEKS FILES  The Whitewater independent prosecutor asked the White House to turn over all files on the aftermath of the death of Vincent W. Foster Jr.
A18  SURPRISE IN COLON CANCER STUDY  A study failed to find evidence that vitamin supplements protect against the development of precancerous growths in the colon.
A20  BEYOND '40 ACRES AND A MULE'  A three-day conference in Detroit is part of a small grass-roots movement to address the question of reparations for slavery.
B10  More fragments of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 hit Jupiter.
A20  President Clinton praised the the Apollo astronauts.
A20 Metro Digest B1 A TOURIST BOOM IN NEW YORK  Tourists from abroad are spending more freely, and with a revival in visitors from elsewhere in the United States, New York City appears to be experiencing its best tourist season in years.
A1  LEGIONNAIRES' BACTERIA FOUND  The cruise ship Horizon was taken out of service after tests showed the possible presence of the Legionnaires' disease bacteria.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-11  Building small, thinking big.
C1  Noguchi's lamps: light on light.
C1  At home with Matilda Cuomo.
C1  Dictating instead of dialing.
C2  Currents C3  Parent &amp; Child C8  Fashion: Saint Laurent dreams of China.
C11  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  In Israel, a send-off for Sinai artifacts.
C13  John Lennon's first known recording comes to light.
C13  Theater: On the lighter side.
C13  Books: "Berlin Rising: Biography of a City." C16  Television: "Hitler and Stalin." C16  Sports B12-19  Baseball: Strawberry's brother steps in again.
B13  Franco saves it for Saberhagen as Mets top Dodgers.
B13  Column: Anderson on Giants.
B13  Football: Giants feel the heat from Reeves's workout.
B16  Hockey: Blues or Rangers?
Commissioner gets Keenan case.
B19  Golf: Stories abound at the United States Women's Open.
B13  Obituaries B11  Han Xu, China diplomat and a former envoy to the United States.
E. Frederic Morrow, banker and an aide to President Eisenhower.
Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  Numbers game on health.
Mr.
Clinton's Whitewater contact.
Destructive entitlement caps.
A fair settlement on Microsoft.
Letters  Frank Rich: The Gump from Hope.
Aleksa Djilas: Serbs vs.
Serbs in Bosnia and Belgrade.
Melvin A. Goodman: We need two C.I.A.'s.
Bridge C14 Chronicle B5 Crossword C15


Dying Comet's Jovian Assault Generates Dazzling Fireworks
While astronomers in many parts of the world watched, as many as five huge impact scars at a time swung into view yesterday on Jupiter's pock-marked face, and more fragments of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 hitting the planet hurled dazzling fireballs high above the planet's atmosphere.
Besides drilling great holes in Jupiter's upper atmosphere, comet fragments hitting the planet yesterday sparked a shimmering display of auroral light, as electrically charged particles created by the impacts interacted with the atmosphere.
Although there are frequent auroral discharges on Jupiter, the light from the current one can be seen by small telescopes.


A Fair Settlement on Microsoft
Friends of Microsoft feared that Anne Bingaman, head of the antitrust division of the Justice Department, would recklessly attack the company to showcase her desire to replace 12 years of Reagan-Bush indifference with a much tougher antitrust policy.
She did not.
The weekend settlement with Microsoft -- whose MS-DOS and Windows programs dominate the market for operating systems that run personal computers -- provides a useful fix to some anticompetitive practices.
But it does not take unnecessary whacks at America's premier high-tech company.
The settlement would require Microsoft to abandon several anticompetitive practices.
For example, Microsoft would not be allowed to enter contracts with computer manufacturers that prevent them from doing business with Microsoft's competitors.
And Microsoft could no longer charge manufacturers of personal computers according to the number of computers they manufactured -- whether or not they were loaded with Microsoft's operating system.
This pricing system forced manufacturers who installed a competing operating system to pay, in effect, a second royalty.
Justice correctly called for an end to these practices.


Journal; The Gump From Hope
If a Presidential election were held today, the likely winner would be Forrest Gump.
I say this only half-facetiously.
Forrest Gump, a man with an I.Q. of 75 and a child's open smile, is a fictional character played by Tom Hanks in a Hollywood movie.
But "Forrest Gump" -- the movie and the character -- is rapidly becoming the cultural equivalent of a bandwagon candidate, as word of mouth, rather than its mixed reviews, spreads its popularity.


Sybase Spurs Software Downturn
Investors fled shares of the software company Sybase today, leading to a broad downturn in software stocks.
Despite beating Wall Street analysts' estimates and achieving record earnings and sales for its second quarter, Sybase saw its stock price plunge 18 percent on trading of more than 11 million shares -- the heaviest volume of any issue today.


All the Elements Are in Place For a Storied Women's Open
With all the sidelights swirling around the grounds here at the Indianwood Golf and Country Club on the eve of the United States Women's Open -- a 14-year-old player in the field, a woman competing with a bullet lodged in her body, three players who can get into the Hall of Fame with a victory -- this is an Open that is open to conjecture.
Among some of the points to consider are:


Health Care's Bottom Line Fans Small-Business Fear
Even at espresso bar prices, Crowley's Coffee has to move a lot of latte just to break even.
Daily expenses run about $1,200 at the small business, which opened on the Upper East Side of Manhattan last winter.
And like many other small-business owners, Frida Endler says she and her partners simply cannot afford health insurance for their employees.
Ms.
Endler is already pushing coffee and sandwiches with all she has got, assuring a customer who grouses about an $8.93 tab for two iced hazelnut decafs and some mozzarella and peppers on a rosemary roll that he is buying quality.
"That's not lettuce; they're more sophisticated greens," she says, smiling hard.


Apollo Team Celebrates Anniversary With Clinton
Commemorating the 25th anniversary of the first moon landing, President Clinton today praised the heroism of the Apollo astronauts, space shuttle astronauts celebrated in orbit and the Postal Service issued two new stamps.
In ceremonies across the nation, around the world and in space, people remembered the Sunday in 1969 when Neil A. Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landed on the moon in the Eagle spacecraft and became the first humans to walk on another celestial body.


DANCE
'The Sleeping Beauty' With Role Debuts  Metropolitan Opera House
"The Sleeping Beauty" is a revered classic and as such it can get a little solemn, even when opened up and aerated by refreshingly new sets and costumes like those created for the Royal Ballet.
New dancers also keep a ballet's heart beating briskly.
And role debuts by two of the Royal's male principals, each dancing Prince Florimund, brought extra color to the company's closing performances on Monday and Tuesday nights.


Market Place; The two big stock-picking styles aren't very stylish this year.
IN the stock market, style is usually as important as substance -- but not in 1994.
Style, the way investment professionals use the word, does not refer to hemlines or lapel widths or the chiffon-and-combat-boot look.
On Wall Street, style means the way portfolio managers pick stocks and the kind of stocks they stay with.
Consultants to pension funds get paid big money to come up with style categories and to put managers into them, a practice that is filtering into the world of mutual funds, as well.


After 45 Days in Hospital, Fire Officer Dies of Injuries
Forty-five days after he collapsed from smoke inhalation in the basement of a TriBeCa warehouse that was being consumed by an arson fire, a 15-year veteran of the Fire Department died yesterday, never having regained consciousness.
The death of Lieut.
George W. Lener, 40, raises the prospect of a murder charge against Alberto A. Raposo, 22, who was arrested on June 16 and charged with setting both the June 5 fire that claimed the lieutenant's life and another fire on May 30.
Manhattan prosecutors could not be reached for comment last night, but a statement released by the Fire Department said, "As a result of Lieutenant Lener's death additional charges will be filed."


COMPANY BRIEFS
AT&amp;T NETWORK SYSTEMS INTERNATIONAL, the Netherlands, a unit of AT&amp;T Corp, Basking Ridge, N.J., said it had chosen Philips Kommunikations Industrie A.G., a German subsidiary of Philips Electronics N.V., the Netherlands, to build base stations worldwide for its digital mobile telephone system.
Terms were not disclosed.


Clinton Insists He Won't Retreat on Coverage for All
After a torrent of criticism from supporters who feared that he was retreating on health care, President Clinton and his Administration went all out today to insist that he would never compromise on his goal of legislation providing health insurance for all Americans.
The President told reporters before a meeting with Congressional leaders that while he was "flexible" on how to reach the goal, he would not abandon it.
"If we tinker around with the system and don't try to do something comprehensive," he said, "we could actually make it worse for ordinary Americans. We could increase the cost to middle-class Americans and decrease coverage."


Review/Fashion; Yves Saint Laurent Dreams of China
At the end of Yves Saint Laurent's fall couture show today, the entire audience rose to its feet, applauding enthusiastically.
It was the first standing ovation of the showings here and it was not presaged by cheers or stamping of feet.
It was, until near the end, a sober collection with few of the wild flights of color or outrageous constructions for which the designer has been known.
Black with navy was one of his most adventurous combinations.
There was even a distressing moment or two at the beginning when he showed thigh-high skirts accompanied by over-the-knee boots and short coats with fox borders, as if to say: "You want trendy? I can do trendy."


Paul Delvaux, Belgian Artist, Is Dead at 96
Paul Delvaux, a painter of incongruous dreamscapes who was, after Rene Magritte, the best known of the Belgian Surrealists, died yesterday in Veurne, Belgium, a small town near the French border where he had lived for 15 years.
He was 96.
Although encounters with the paintings of de Chirico, Dali and Magritte converted Mr.
Delvaux to an implicitly Surrealist style, he remained otherwise closed to the currents of modernism.
And while critics and historians constantly associated him with the Belgian Surrealists, he never participated in their meetings or activities and did not consider himself one of their number.


Executive Changes
BOWATER INC., Greenville, S.C., appointed Arnold M. Nemirow president and chief operating officer.
LAUREL INDUSTRIES, Cleveland, appointed William H. Steinbrink president and chief executive.


Blacks Press the Case for Reparations for Slavery
The phrase "40 acres and a mule," recalling a post-Civil War proposal to compensate former slaves for their servitude, has become the rallying cry among a small but outspoken group of African-Americans.
Some invoke the phrase as they seek financial redress from the Government on behalf of their ancestors.
Others, who admit that seeking payment is impractical and the chances of receiving anything improbable, still maintain that gaining attention for the plight of their forebears is well worth their energies.


Compaq Net Up Sharply In Quarter
The Compaq Computer Corporation said today that second-quarter earnings more than doubled from a year ago as sales surged 53.4 percent.
But the company said that it had problems meeting demand for some personal computer models, which prevented sales from growing even more.
Although Compaq's earnings slightly surpassed Wall Street's expectations, investors were disappointed that the company did not exceed the high end of analysts' estimates.
Compaq shares fell $1.75, to $31.50, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange today.


MCDONNELL DOUGLAS CORP. (MD,N)
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose 22 percent on strong results in its military aircraft division.
"We have achieved these impressive results in a very difficult environment," said John F. McDonnell, chairman and chief executive officer.


Kidd's Absence Angers Motta
It didn't take long for JASON KIDD to anger Dallas Mavericks Coach DICK MOTTA.
The Mavericks' first-round draft choice was a no-show at minicamp this week.


Gore Shifts Stance on Chip Code
In an abrupt and significant reversal, the Clinton Administration indicated yesterday that it was willing to consider alternatives to its Clipper chip wiretapping technology, which has been widely criticized by industry executives and privacy-rights groups.
In a letter yesterday to a Congressional opponent of the technology, Vice President Al Gore said that the Administration was willing to explore industry alternatives to Clipper, a system designed in secrecy by National Security Agency scientists.


John Lennon's First Known Recording Is for Sale
A previously unknown tape of John Lennon's first band, the Quarry Men Skiffle Group, recorded moments after Lennon met Paul McCartney, has come to light in England after being stored in a vault for decades.
The three-inch reel includes Lennon's performances of two songs at St.
Peter's Church in Woolton, the Liverpool suburb where he lived, on July 6, 1957.
It is the earliest known recording of Lennon, who was 16 at the time.
The tape is to be auctioned at Sotheby's in London on Sept. 15.
Sotheby's expects it to bring $155,000 to $230,000.
The tape was recorded on a portable Grundig TK8 (the machine is included in the sale) by Bob Molyneux, a member of the church's youth club who is now a retired policeman.
In 1963, he offered the tape to Lennon, through Ringo Starr.
But Lennon never responded, so Mr.
Molyneux put the tape in a vault.
When he offered it to Sotheby's two months ago, the auction house asked Mark Lewisohn, a Beatles expert who wrote about the performance in "The Complete Beatles Chronicle," to listen to the recording.


Ford Prices Its New Line Of Compacts
The Ford Motor Company announced prices for its new compact sedans today, saying it expected typically equipped versions to sell for less than $15,000.
The cars are scheduled to go on sale on Sept. 29.
The prices are substantially above those of the models they replace in Ford's lineup, but below those of the Japanese sedans from which Ford hopes to steal customers.


Lure Is Victim of Red Tape And Won't Race in England
Lure, the two-time champion of the American turf, who was booked to leave for England today for his international debut, has been scratched from the trip by a technicality in the rules of English racing.
The 5-year-old star of grass racing, twice the winner of the Breeders' Cup, was stranded as an innocent victim of the regulations on the equine virus known as E.V.A., equine viral arteritis.
Lure doesn't have it, but he might test positive for it because he was vaccinated last year and still carries the antibodies.
And when the British racing authorities wouldn't relax their immigration policy, Lure's international debut was canceled.


Serbs Reject Accord, Envoys in Bosnia Say
Reversing an earlier signal, the Bosnian Serbs told international mediators that they could not accept a proposal for dividing up the country among the warring factions there.
The move, conveyed after a two-day meeting of the Serbs' self-styled parliament, opens them up to a series of reprisals by the international community, including tightening of sanctions against their Serbian backers in Belgrade and a possible lifting of the arms embargo on Bosnia.


Bosnian Serbs Said to Reject Mediators' Partition Plan
In a new blow to efforts to end the Bosnian conflict, Bosnian Serb authorities were reported today to have rejected a territorial division that was the central pillar of a new Bosnia peace plan proposed by international mediators two weeks ago.
Under the plan, which was presented to the warring parties on a take-it-or-leave-it basis, Bosnian Muslims and Croats would be given 51 percent of the new republic, while Bosnian Serbs, who now hold 70 percent of territory, would see their share reduced to 49 percent.


Simpson Case Has Errors, Coroner Says
The attempt by O. J. Simpson's defense lawyers to cast doubt on the evidence compiled against him so far gained a bit more momentum late today when the Los Angeles Coroner's Office acknowledged that some mistakes had been made in the handling of some evidence taken from the victims.
A spokesman for the office, C. Scott Carrier, said that "harmless" mistakes had occurred, including the mixing of labels on bile and urine samples taken from Mr.
Simpson's former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend Ronald L. Goldman, who were killed June 12.


KING HUSSEIN HINTS JORDAN CONSIDERS A SEPARATE PEACE
Signaling his independence from Syria and his desire for peace, King Hussein of Jordan suggested today that he was prepared to move without President Hafez al-Assad of Syria and sign a separate peace treaty with Israel.
The King's remarks were couched in his characteristically elliptical style, and he added that it could take some time before an agreement could be reached.


Corrections
An article in some copies yesterday about Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's appearance at a town meeting misstated the location of Springfield Gardens High School, the meeting site.
It is in southeastern Queens, not southwestern.


Goody's Family Clothing
After the market closed on Tuesday, Goody's Family Clothing, a retailer based in Knoxville, Tenn., warned that second-quarter earnings were likely to disappoint Wall Street analysts.
The company cited slowing sales and thinner profit margins.
Its share price lost more than one-fourth of its value in Nasdaq trading.


POP
Of the Beatles And Inner Battles  Bottom Line
Sam Phillips stood perfectly still, hands at her waist, staring straight ahead for most of her set on Tuesday night.
Her expression was birdlike and quizzical; now and then, she would turn her head and share a sly smile with her band (which included her producer and husband, T Bone Burnett, on guitar).
Her observant stillness was suited to songs that contemplate truth and beauty, good and evil and love and loss, not telling stories but spinning oracular images.
Her voice, raw and tremulous but somehow in tune, makes philosophizing sound like confessions as she sings lines like "You censor longing and organize beauty because you're afraid."


Big Increase In American Air Earnings
The parent of American Airlines, the AMR Corporation, said today that its earnings more than tripled in the second quarter despite a 2.6 percent decline in revenue.
While AMR executives said they were "encouraged" by the results, they also said that earnings levels were still "insufficient" and that fare discounting in the airline industry continued to reduce its yield -- the average amount that a passenger pays to fly one mile.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about talks between Fordham University and the New York Botanical Garden over the possible relocation of Fordham's new radio tower referred incorrectly to discussions about financing.
Garden officials said it was quite unlikely that they would help pay for reconstruction of the tower; the issue was not left aside in the discussions.


The 2 Great Killers: Recalling the Terror
The reasons offered for producing "Hitler and Stalin, a Legacy of Hate" are the re-emergence of Nazi strutters in Germany and the persistence of Stalinist apparatchiks in what used to be the Soviet Union.
Another possible reason for this retelling of a much-told tale is the need to keep Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf, that relatively new CBS News employee, occupied.
Whatever the inspiration, tonight's two-hour edition of "CBS Reports" is an effective rendering of the rise and fall of the two pre-eminent killers of the 20th century.
Using excellent newsreels and the vivid memories of victims, collaborators and observers, the program evokes the terrors of their times.


E. Frederic Morrow, 88, Aide In Eisenhower Administration
E.
Frederic Morrow, a retired banker, author and executive assistant to President Dwight D. Eisenhower, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 88 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from a stroke, his family said.


Lowe Promotion For Coke Account
The Lowe Group has promoted a top executive as part of a restructuring of the responsibilities on its global Coca-Cola account.
The agency, based in London, said yesterday that Paul Hammersley, the senior vice president of international business development at Lowe Group North America in New York, who had handled the international duties of the Coca-Cola account, had been promoted to executive vice president and would add the United States duties of the account.
Richard Newman, 38, the executive vice president and group director who had handled the United States duties, continues on the account and reports to Mr.
Hammersley, 32.


Inquiry Into Con Edison's Talks on Violations
The Speaker of the New York City Council, Peter F. Vallone, said yesterday that he had formed a task force to investigate the circumstances surrounding Con Edison's negotiations with the state to settle environmental charges against the company.
The State Department of Environmental Conservation said on Wednesday that it was working to negotiate a settlement of 319 environmental violations it lodged against the company for abuses dating from 1984 until 1991.
It is also seeking a $20 million fine from Con Edison, saying the company illegally dumped oil into the city's waterways during that time.


Two Unbeaten 2-Year-Olds to Test the House of Upsets
They call it the house of racing upsets, the graveyard of champions, where Secretariat lost and even Man o 'War.
It's the Saratoga Race Course, opening for its 126th year on Friday with 34 stakes races in 36 racing days and $5 million in prize money, and with a new doubleheader that may produce the early favorite for next year's Kentucky Derby.
The stars of the doubleheader are two undefeated juveniles trying to launch careers while testing the fates in the house of upsets.
They will both take the stage because the Saratoga schedule now opens with two smash acts: the traditional stakes for 2-year-old fillies, the Schuylerville, featuring the unbeaten Unacceptable, and the Sanford Stakes for 2-year-old colts, featuring the late-running De Niro.


Calgon Carbon Corp.(CCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Richard B. Salomon, 82, Dies; Ex-Head of Cosmetics Concern
Richard B. Salomon, a philanthropist and former chairman and chief executive of Lanvin-Charles of the Ritz, died yesterday at Stamford Hospital in Stamford, Conn.
He was 82 and lived in Stamford.
The cause was complications from pneumonia, his son Richard said, and he had had chronic lung disease for several years.


Tandem Computers Inc.(TDM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Arrow Electronics (ARW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oilers Retire Munchak and His Number
To the names ELVIN BETHEA, JIM NORTON and EARL CAMPBELL, add MIKE MUNCHAK.
The Oilers guard retired yesterday, citing chronic knee problems, and Houston immediately announced his No. 63 jersey will be retired, joining Bethea (65), Campbell (34) and Norton (43) in select company.
The 34-year-old Munchak anchored Houston's line for 12 seasons and went to nine Pro Bowls.
His ninth knee operation this past off-season told him it was time to quit.
"I wanted to be able to run and play basketball with my kids in five years," said Munchak, who will remain with the Oilers as an assistant, working with the offensive line. (AP)


Bosnian President Backtracks on Accepting Peace Plan
The Bosnian President, Alija Izetbegovic, said today that his Government's acceptance of an international peace plan was no longer valid, suggesting that yet another long-prepared attempt to end the 27-month-old Bosnian war is fast disintegrating.
In a statement, Mr.
Izetbegovic said that the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, had attached so many conditions to eventual acceptance of the international peace plan that his stance amounted to a rejection.
The plan offers 51 percent of Bosnia to the Muslim-led Government and 49 percent to the Serbs, who now hold 70 percent and would have to make substantial concessions.


Corrections
An article in some editions on Tuesday about the funeral of Kim Il Sung, the North Korean leader, described his coffin incorrectly.
It was made of an opaque material, not glass.


Vast Sum Spent to Sway Health Plan
The effort aimed at influencing health care legislation is probably unprecedented both in the amount of money spent and in the number of former members of Congress and former executive branch officials doing the lobbying, a research group said today.
"Health care reform has become the most heavily lobbied legislative initiative in United States history," said Charles Lewis, the executive director of the research group, the Center for Public Integrity.
The center, a nonprofit group that has taken no position on health care, studied disclosure forms at the Federal Election Commission as well as records at the Senate and House of Representatives.


Looking at Criminal Evidence in Simpson Case; On the Net
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's six-step program in "O. J. Come Home" (column, July 14) for "conquering O. J. deprivation until round-the-clock coverage resumes" is from the dark ages of information technology.


2 States Adopt Stringent Smoking Bans
Two states today put in place the most restrictive bans on workplace smoking ever enacted.
In California, Gov.
Pete Wilson signed a law banning smoking in any enclosed space that is also a place of employment as of Jan. 1.
And in Maryland, the Department of Licensing and Regulation adopted an even tougher ban that will take effect on Aug. 1.


Alza Corp.(AZA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on Wednesday misstated the date for Wine Spectator magazine's barrel tasting at Sag Pond Vineyards in Sagaponack, L.I.
It is Saturday, Aug. 20, not Aug. 30.


Partial Comfort for Clinton
Democratic Congressional leaders say they will offer health care bills that will meet the President's call for universal coverage, but not in the form Mr.
Clinton proposed.
Page A20.


Canadian Occidental Petroleum Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pirelli's Savior Faces New Headwind
It took near disaster at Pirelli S.p.A., Italy's giant rubber company, to bring Marco Tronchetti Provera to the helm.
Rapid expansion in Europe and the United States in the 1980's had spawned a mountain of debt, and by 1992, when Mr.
Tronchetti took over as chief executive in the midst of recession, the company's anchor businesses of automobile tires and electrical cables were floundering.
The success of Mr.
Tronchetti, who is 46, in refloating Pirelli made him just about the most-talked-about man in Italian business, raised the company's sagging share price, and last year landed him on the cover of Fortune magazine's international edition as one of Europe's tough new generation of managers.


8 Birdies, a Record 63 and History at the Open
On a spectacular day for scoring, Helen Alfredsson of Sweden snapped Indianwood Golf and Country Club across her knee like a twig today in the first round of the United States Women's Open.
In breaking the Open scoring record with a stunning round of 63, eight under par, Alfredsson finished two shots lower than any round ever shot by a woman in the Open.
The round by the 28-year-old Swede is a landmark achievement that transcends women's golf.
No one, man or woman, has shot a lower round in any major championship.
For magnitude, it approaches the record 63 shot by Johnny Miller at Oakmont in the final round of the 1973 United States Open, a breakthrough at the time.
It also approaches the 63 shot by Greg Norman in the 1986 British Open at Turnberry and the 63 by Patty Sheehan in the 1984 L.P.G.A.
Championship at the Jack Nicklaus Golf Center at King's Island, Ohio.
There have now been 12 rounds of 63 shot in major championships.


McReynolds Heading for the Disabled List, Again
A magnetic resonance imaging exam has revealed cartilage damage in Kevin McReynolds's right knee and McReynolds appears to be headed to the disabled list for the third time this season.
McReynolds, who jammed his knee sliding into home against the Dodgers on Tuesday night, had the test done at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan yesterday.
It was a day off for the Mets, who open a three-game series against Darryl Strawberry and the San Francisco Giants tonight at Shea Stadium.


At the Bar; A 1960's throwback leads the challenge to the financing of public schools in New Jersey.
Equality, a society without divisions, the true integration of schools across boundaries of geography and class and race -- Marilyn Morheuser still believes in these rallying cries of the 1960's.
Absolutely.
Why else, at the age of 70, would she spend chunks of time in a downtown office here, directing a people's law center?
Why else, when she is battling cancer, would she have carted herself before the State Supreme Court in May to argue again that New Jersey has failed to do right by its impoverished students?


At Carnegie, a More Resonant Philharmonic
It has been a nice idea sending the New York Philharmonic back to its old home at Carnegie Hall for summer concerts.
It is a potentially dangerous one as well.
Philharmonic players might get used to playing in a place like this.
The Philharmonic audience might get used to how they sound in it.
Listening to Kurt Masur conduct a program of familiar Beethoven items on Wednesday night -- and remembering the blunt, earnest sound of his subscription concerts at Avery Fisher Hall -- is an unsettling discovery.
The lingering rumble of lower strings and the warm brilliance of the higher ones create a resonance we are not used to and may sorely miss when the fall season comes around again and the orchestra returns to Lincoln Center.


More Kidder Resignations Are Expected in Jett Case
More high-level resignations are expected soon at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, the troubled brokerage firm owned by the General Electric Company, people close to the two companies said yesterday.
The resignations could come even before the findings of a three-month internal investigation into the Joseph Jett case are made public in a week or two.
Mr.
Jett was dismissed as head of the firm's government-bond trading desk in April and accused by the company of fabricating $350 million in profits with phony trades.


Straight Out of Brooklyn and Proud of It
Jeru the Damaja came out and performed his hits, "D. Original," "Da Bichez" and "Come Clean." Running around the stage and shouting, he gave the audience what it wanted, finally, which was a little energy and some pieces people had heard before.
He was performing in a show featuring Payday Records rappers at Tramps in Chelsea, as part of the New Music Seminar on Wednesday night, a night that stumbled along in slow motion, an amateur hour of rap that lasted five.
Jeru isn't a bad rapper.
He had the audience going with square, heavy rhythms he outlined with his hand, using chopping motions to spell them out.
On "D. Original" he used a piano sample that sounded like a sweep by the pianist Cecil Taylor, dissonant and jumpy, and it gave the piece a tension that isn't often heard in rap.
Like many other rappers on the show, he was Brooklyn-centric, rapping about the borough's supremacy.


Integrated Device Technology
Integrated Device Technology Inc., a Santa Clara, Calif., maker of integrated circuits, joined its counterparts in the computer industry and reported strong quarterly earnings on Wednesday but warned of a slower autumn season.
Yesterday, the company's share price plunged in Nasdaq trading.


Hannaford Brothers Co.  (HRD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Comcast Gets a Lift In QVC Bid
In a deal aimed at putting the cable television executive John C. Malone on its team, the Comcast Corporation has made Liberty Media a partner in its takeover bid for QVC, the cable television home shopping company.
The two companies said yesterday that they would offer $44 a share in cash for the outstanding shares of QVC Inc.
Comcast, on its own, had offered $44 a share last week.
But that offer was seen as less attractive than the new one because it included $37 a share in cash and $7 in Comcast's preferred stock.


Key's No. 15 A Thank-You From Yanks' Offense
The Yankees thanked Jimmy Key tonight for his meritorious service to the organization.
They did not give the pitcher a gold watch or a farewell bonus.
They gave him a bunch of runs, they gave him a comfortable cushion and they saved him.
Since Key was hardly stunning, the abundance of offense was a wonderful treat.
It was the perfect gift.
After Key had wandered through four innings aimlessly, cluttering the bases with Angels each inning and barely avoiding a few disasters, the Yankees provided him with their vision of offensive loveliness in the fifth when they pummeled Chuck Finley for six runs.
The inning ended Finley's night and turned Key's into a sweeter experience as he helped the Yankees register a 11-7 victory over California at Anaheim Stadium.


Georgia-Pacific Corp.(GP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Giuliani Vetoes Bill That Eased Rules For Food Vendors
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday vetoed a City Council bill that had posed a challenge to his crackdown on food vendors in midtown Manhattan, and he instructed several commissioners to conduct a 90-day study of the city's entire system for granting food-vendor permits.
The measure that Mr.
Giuliani vetoed would have allowed food vendors to operate on 17 midtown streets that had previously been restricted and that have been subject to a vigorous enforcement effort by the Giuliani administration.
The bill passed the Democratic-controlled Council by a vote of 40 to 11 on June 22.


Coca-Cola Names New President
Ending speculation about the future management of the Coca-Cola Company, the beverage giant's board unanimously named M. Douglas Ivester president and chief operating officer yesterday and solidified its next-generation management team with three other top-level executive appointments.
Mr.
Ivester, 47, who was principal operating officer of Coca-Cola's North American operations, was chosen by Roberto C. Goizueta, Coca-Cola's 62-year-old chairman and chief executive officer.
Mr.
Ivester was also elected to the board of directors by the 13-member group, which met yesterday for an hour and a half.


Kestner Bears Down on Final Six Holes to Seal Victory
For Darrell Kestner, steadiness in his game has always been the key to success.
Sometimes when that steadiness is challenged, when his shots just don't go where he wants them to, Kestner has to dig down deep.
That was precisely the case in the final round today, according to the 40-year-old head pro at Deepdale Golf Club in Manhasset, L.I., as he won the Carvel/Snapple New York State Open on the Black Course at Bethpage State Park.


Eaton Corp.(ETN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Interim Director Is Named At Kings County Hospital
For years the crumbling walls and sloppy administration at Kings County Hospital Center have made it the infirmary of last resort for the impoverished residents of central Brooklyn.
Now the head of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation says that the conditions have deteriorated so badly that New York's largest public hospital is in imminent danger of losing its medical accreditation.
As a result, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, the agency's president, said he was appointing a new executive director to oversee the 1,250-bed hospital, and was authorizing the expenditure of "several million dollars" to bring it up to standard before a review in October by the nation's largest hospital regulatory group.


Monday Face-Off Is Set For the Keenan Dispute
All parties to the Mike Keenan legal fracas made submissions yesterday to National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman, who will rule on whether the fiery coach belongs to the New York Rangers or the St.
Louis Blues.
Bettman said in a statement he had "received and reviewed" the submissions and ordered representatives of Keenan, the Rangers, the Blues and the Detroit Red Wings to a hearing Monday at 10 A.M. at the league office in Manhattan.


Excel Industries (EXC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Many Hands That Built the U.N.
A Workshop for Peace Designing the United Nations Headquarters By George A. Dudley The Architectural History Foundation/The MIT Press. $65.
If a camel is a horse designed by a committee, then perhaps the United Nations Headquarters should have been built in the Sahara.
In 1947, 10 distinguished architects, representing as many countries, pooled their talents to plan this monumental "workshop for peace." The design they brought forth may lack a hump, but it does sport a jaunty little dome, a feature added to the General Assembly Building because it was thought that conservative United States Congress members would not support a domeless edifice.


The Spoken Word
DRAMATIC READING BY ROSEMARY HARRIS, Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, at 55th Street.
The actress will read from works by Shakespeare and Katherine Mansfield.
Today at 1 P.M. (A chamber music concert will precede the reading, at 12:30 P.M.) Free.
Part of the Free Theater Project.
Information: (212) 874-2225.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Liberty Media will join Comcast in a $44 a share bid for QVC.
The move will put John C. Malone, who wields significant power in the cable television industry, on Comcast's side.
Although QVC's chairman, Barry Diller, said his company would consider the offer while seeking higher bids, analysts said they thought the Comcast-Liberty offer had a good chance of being approved.  [ Page D1. ]
The success of Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst, a buyout firm that has made $4.3 billion in acquisitions since 1989, is testimony to at least one thing: Texans still like to do deals with Texans.  [ D1. ]


Upsala College Decides to Stay Open
Debt-burdened, its enrollment shrinking, its accreditation slated to be revoked, its faculty unpaid for a month, Upsala College will nevertheless remain open for at least another semester while the 100-year-old college looks for a way to solve its financial crisis.
The decision to stay open was one of three choices before the Board of Trustees today; the others were to close outright or to reopen in the fall without a freshman class.
In a unanimous decision, the trustees chose a very difficult path.
It depends on reducing enrollment further, from last year's 1,000 to 600 this fall, cutting course offerings, reducing salaries of the faculty and reassigning teachers to administrative positions, and hoping that the state will come up with money to save the school.


Bonn Journal; A Literary Critic and His Critics: The Hazy Past
By now, it has become a familiar routine: a leading German literary figure is accused of collaborating with the Communist secret police during the cold war, initially denies it and finally admits the truth after being confronted with documents from files that had long been sealed.
This time, the protagonist is not an author from formerly Communist East Germany, but an immigrant from Poland who for decades has been telling Germans what they should read, as Germany's most influential and powerful literary critic: Marcel Reich-Ranicki.


One Offbeat String Quartet That Veers Toward Mellow
At first glance, the Balanescu Quartet, which gave an unusual recital in Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday night, bears a striking resemblance to the pioneering Kronos Quartet.
Both groups have ardently dismantled the sober-minded classicism that has been associated with the string quartet.
Both have been influenced by popular culture, amplifying their instruments, playing transcriptions of rock music and creating an atmosphere that is part SoHo loft, part concert hall and part jazz club.
And on Tuesday, in fact, hall lights were down, white flags were hung on the stage, everything was miked and the first violinist, Alexander Balanescu, introduced selections pop style by promoting the group's latest CD.


The Paintings Of Kainen: Quiet, Steady And Sure
Born in 1909, the painter Jacob Kainen saw the development of American modernism firsthand, or almost firsthand.
Although he was an engaged, forward-looking member of the New York art world through the 1930's, he left the city for Washington in 1942.
The move was a practical one -- Washington offered him a job when times were hard -- but it effectively took him out of circulation just as American art was coming to a rolling boil in New York.
Would Mr.
Kainen's star have risen higher had he stayed where the action was?
Impossible to say, of course, but a beautifully judged retrospective of his paintings at the Equitable Center Gallery, which originated at the National Museum of American Art in Washington, suggests that his reticent, hybrid sensibility was not of the kind to make news-breaking reputations.


AID FOR RWANDANS STARTS TO ARRIVE AT REFUGE IN ZAIRE
The first significant deliveries of food and medicine to treat cholera arrived yesterday in Goma, Zaire, as foreign governments and relief agencies worked to organize help for up to four million Rwandan refugees as they continued to flee at the rate of 2,000 an hour.
In Goma, where more than a million refugees have gathered, the camps were filled with hundreds of bodies.
Doctors Without Borders, a medical relief agency, has set up tents to begin treating thousands stricken with cholera.
The group predicted as many as 50,000 cases, half of whom could die.


Detroit Diesel Corp.(DDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stanley Works (SWK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


The Up-and-Down Battle for Second
Pyotr Ugrumov learned his lesson and so did Miguel Indurain and Richard Virenque.
They all proved that today as the Tour de France completed its third of four daily stages in the Alps, climbing three big mountains and preparing for the individual time trial Friday that should decide who will stand second and third below Indurain when the bicycle race ends Sunday in Paris.


Observing Peru's Growth At the Start Of the 1900's
Perhaps the most vexatious critical and curatorial problem in photography is to figure out just what to make of the vast number of images with no pretensions to being art, whether anonymous snapshots or commercial images produced by studio photographers.
The sheer quantity of such pictures is overwhelming, numbering in the untold millions; moreover, many of them are remarkable, either because of their subjects or for their formal qualities.
The question of how to respond to photography's prolific nature lurks in the background of "Visions of Modernity: Photographs From the Peruvian Andes, 1900-1930," the fascinating exhibition now at the Americas Society.
The show, organized by Fernando Castro, Edward Ranney and Peter Yenne, includes pictures by 10 commercial photographers who worked in the Peruvian Andes in the early decades of the century.


COMPUTER ASSOCIATES INTERNATIONAL (CA,N) Computer Associates International Inc. said yesterday that the quarter's earnings from operations doubled on strong sales of software for mid-range computers.   Earnings from operations in the company's first fiscal quarter, which ended on June 30, rose to $68.9 million, or 41 cents a share, from $30.7 million, or 18 cents, a year earlier.


Central &amp; South West Corp.(CSR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


UNITED TECHNOLOGIES CORP. (UTX,N)
Shares of the United Technologies Corporation fell nearly 6 percent yesterday after the military contractor posted second-quarter earnings that despite rising more than 32 percent were below Wall Street expectations.
Late on Wednesday, after the stock market had closed, United Technologies said it earned $172 million, or $1.18 a share for fully diluted earnings, in the second quarter.
Primary earnings were $1.25 a share.


Knight-Ridder Inc.(KRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


New Jersey Fugitive Captured in Jordan
The Jordanian police said they had captured an American who the authorities in New Jersey say fled with his two young children after strangling his wife in Parsippany-Troy Hills.
The arrest of the fugitive, Mohammad Ismail Abequa, 45, a native of Jordan, came after a weeklong manhunt ordered by King Hussein, a security official said.
Mr.
Abequa's children, Lisa, 6, and Sami, 3, are safe with one of Mr.
Abequa's sisters, the police said.


You Don't Need Statistical Significance to Act on Smoking
To the Editor:
When Philip Morris, at considerable (tax-deductible) expense, ran full-page ads in major newspapers to provide the "truth" about the harmful effects of secondhand smoke, it was not to educate the public in the arcane science of statistical analysis.
Rather, it was to induce inaction in governments and businesses in creating more smoke-free public places and to induce action to reverse smoking restrictions.


Art in Review
'Color'
James Danziger Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through July 29
Bold or muted, realistic or expressive, photographic color is the subject of this unusually satisfying summer show.
Included are photographers known for their work in a variety of genres, from fashion to portraiture, with many represented by unexpected images.


Crawford &amp; Co. (CRD.B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COLGATE-PALMOLIVE CO. (CL,N)
The Colgate-Palmolive Company surprised Wall Street yesterday by reporting disappointing second-quarter revenues in its North American core consumer-products businesses yesterday, prompting an early selloff that leveled off by the end of the day.
The company announced that earnings increased 4 percent, to $147.7 million, or 97 cents a share, from $142.4 million, or 86 cents a share, in the quarter a year earlier.
It took a one-time charge of $5.2 million, or 4 cents a share, for the sale of Princess House, its crystal tableware unit, resulting in net income of $142.5 million, or 93 cents a share.


Olin Corp.(OLN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Broken Finger Puts a Hold On Elliott's Comeback Bid
About the only thing that hasn't happened to Giants offensive tackle Jumbo Elliott is being hit by a truck.
The latest in a series of mishaps occurred Wednesday night when Elliott broke the ring finger on his left hand during a scrimmage.
The good news is that he is very likely to miss only two weeks of training-camp action and will probably not miss the first regular-season game against Philadelphia.
The bad news is that although he will be inactive only two weeks, the bone won't completely heal for five to eight weeks, so Elliott will have to play hurt.
And he is definitely out of the first preseason game against Miami on July 30.


Gillette Co. (G,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Amoco Laying Off 3,800 Within a Year
The Amoco Corporation announced yesterday that it would lay off about 3,800 employees, or 8.3 percent of its work force, in the next year in a reorganization that would eliminate a layer of management.
H.
Laurance Fuller, the chairman and chief executive of the nation's fifth-largest oil company, said that the company had to be radically reshaped to bring its staff and structure, which grew in the 80's during high demand and high oil prices, more in line with the lower prices of the last few years.
He said 700 additional jobs would be cut by 1996.
The three cities that would be affected most by the cuts are Chicago, Tulsa, Okla., and Houston.


Sports of The Times; Keenan Was No Pig in a Poke
IF you knew then, Ranger fans, what you know now, that Mike Keenan would bolt, would you have wanted the Rangers to hire him?
If you knew then what you know now, that Keenan would deliver the Stanley Cup of Your Dreams, would you have wanted the Rangers to hire him?


Creative Executives Hired at 2 Agencies
Two longtime creative executives are changing agencies.
Grey Advertising of New York said yesterday that it had hired Bernie Rosner as a senior vice president and creative director, working on accounts including SmithKline Beecham.
Mr.
Rosner, 52, joins Grey from Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York, where he was executive vice president and group creative director, heading the Ford Motor Company account.
Before that, he worked at Scali, McCabe, Sloves in New York as an executive vice president and group creative director.


Guilford Mills Inc.(GFD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Dean Witter's Earnings Are Up 31.7% in Quarter
Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company reported strong second-quarter earnings yesterday, reinforcing distinct differences that separate it from other Wall Street firms.
"This is a company that people think of in the same category as the other securities firms," said Guy Moszkowski, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein.
"But that is just not the case."


Inside Art
Making Outdoor Sculpture Temporary
This summer, more outdoor sculpture is cropping up on vacant slices of land in Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens than ever before.
Appearances are deceptive, however.
While a rough-hewn work of milled cedar or a chair cast in bronze and raised on a wooden column may seem like a permanent new fixture on the landscape, it is often only in place for a year or so.


Refugees' Plight Is Worsening, Relief Workers Tell U.N.
United Nations officials said today that reports from relief workers in Rwanda indicated that the plight of refugees was worsening with outbreaks of bubonic plague and measles as well as cholera.
Several hundred people are reported to have died of cholera in the refugee camp in Goma, Zaire, which is now holding well over one million people of the four million or more who have fled Rwanda.
In southern Zaire, there are 600,000 more refugees and their number is swelling by 25,000 a day.


4 Blasts Start the End of Jupiter Fireworks
Like the finale of a Fourth of July fireworks show, the collision of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 with the planet Jupiter began its final stage yesterday with a spectacular burst of four gaudy impacts.
The blackened impact sites left by the cometary explosions almost merged with each other after two pieces of Fragment Q as well as Fragments R and S hit Jupiter in close succession, violently churning the planet's atmosphere.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Americans Advance in Federation Cup  Mary Joe Fernandez and Lindsay Davenport won singles matches yesterday as the United States swept Canada, 3-0, and advanced to the quarterfinals of the Federation Cup in Frankfurt.
Fernandez led, 6-0, 4-1, when Helen Kelesi withdrew because of a strained thigh.
Davenport beat Patricia Hy, 6-2, 6-4, in the two-of-three-match team competition.
Top-seeded Spain, Austria and Bulgaria also swept their singles.
Today's quarterfinals pit the United States against Austria, Spain versus Japan, Germany against South Africa and France against Bulgaria. (AP) Upsets at Legg Mason: David Wheaton defeated the No. 7 seeded Ivan Lendl, 2-6, 6-3, 7-6 (10-8), yesterday to advance to the quarterfinals of the $650,000 Legg Mason Tennis Classic in Washington.
In two other upsets, Byron Black of Zimbabwe downed the No. 13 seed Henrik Holm of Sweden, 7-6 (9-7), 6-4, and No. 14 Jason Stoltenberg of Australia topped No. 3 Marc Rosset of Switzerland, 6-2, 6-2.
No. 8 Aaron Krickstein rallied past Sweden's Mats Wilander, 6-7 (4-7), 6-4, 7-6 (7-5).
At night, No. 2 Stefan Edberg was to play No. 15 Jonathan Stark and No. 5 Andre Agassi was to face Bret Steven.
Edberg's match, originally scheduled for the afternoon, started more than four hours late, the result of two rain delays.
Rain stopped play for 75 minutes just after the the Krickstein-Wilander match, and again for more than two hours as the Wheaton-Lendl match ended. (AP) Injured Medvedev Loses: Marc Goellner, helped by an injury to Andrei Medvedev's serving hand, upset the Ukrainian, 7-6 (7-3), 6-2, in the Mercedes Cup in Stuttgart, Germany.
But Goellner, ranked 78th in the world, had no time to celebrate winning his second-round match, which had been halted by darkness on Wednesday.
Later yesterday, Lars Jonsson defeated him in the third round, 7-6 (13-11), 6-3.
Top-seeded Michael Stich advanced to the quarterfinals with a 7-5, 6-3 victory over Horst Skoff. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  1-2 Finish for American Juniors  Two Americans, Sabrina Kelly and Aspen Burkett, raced to a 1-2 finish yesterday in the women's 100-meter final at the International Amateur Athletics Federation's world junior championships in Lisbon.
Kelly won in 11.36 seconds, followed by Burkett in 11.40 and Ghana's Philomina Mensha in 11.43.
Before the day's action in the meet for athletes 21 and younger, the United States track and field federation told the international federation that the apparent world junior 100-meter record set on May 20 by the American sprinter Tim Montgomery would not be submitted for ratification because the track was too short.
The Americans said the time of 9.96 seconds was being withdrawn because the distance Montgomery ran on the Odessa, Tex., track was measured to be four centimeters less than the proper distance.
Subject to I.A.A.F. ratification, the current world junior record will now stand at 10.08 seconds, run by Obadele Thompson of Barbados in El Paso on April 16. (AP) CRICKET  A South African Century, 39 Years Later  South Africa returned to the home of cricket yesterday in London after 29 years.
Kepler Wessels recorded a 105, the first century for a South African at Lord's since 1955, before a capacity crowd that included Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Deputy President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa and Prime Minister John Major of Britain.
South Africa is competing in its first test match against England since touring England in 1965. (AP)


Players Making the Switch From Ice to Cement
Bright orange pucks kept soaring off the cement and whistling past Daniel Berthiaume, the starting goaltender for the New Jersey Rockin Rollers.
After one too many pucks had settled into the net, many of the 6,000 fans who had gathered at Byrne Meadowlands Arena to support their new team turned their hoots from Berthiaume and their eyes toward the player with the big brown ponytail sitting at the end of the New Jersey bench.


Margie Hames, 60; Lawyer Argued Case Tied to Roe v. Wade
Margie Pitts Hames, an Atlanta civil rights lawyer who argued a companion case to the better-known Roe v.
Wade, in which the Supreme Court upheld a woman's right to have an abortion, died on Tuesday night while driving her car in Atlanta.
She was 60.
According to the police there, she suffered a heart attack, and her car went off the road and into a parking lot.
She was pronounced dead at Piedmont Hospital a short while later.


Looking at Criminal Evidence in Simpson Case; The Tabloid Treatment
To the Editor:
"Primal Curiosity" (editorial, July 10), your analysis of murder cases, does not go far enough.
Thousands of murders occur each year; tabloid trials are selective.
I suggest there are two unacknowledged elements to sensational coverage: a status that places an individual outside a circle of media protection, and profitability.


Calls Flood Simpson Line
O.
J.
Simpson's jersey numbers during his long football career -- 32 and 36 -- have become part of a toll-free number set up, his lawyers say, to take tips about the killings of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
The volume of calls to (800) 322-3632 on the first full day was as heavy as 100 a minute, said Robert L. Shapiro, Mr.
Simpson's main lawyer.
Many people could not get through.
Some who did heard only dead air.
A few got a recorded voice thanking them for calling and offering four options.


Alltel Corp.(AT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A list of leading riders for the Tour de France bicycle race in the sports pages on Wednesday misstated the nationality of Vladimir Pulnikov.
He is Ukrainian, not Russian.


Clinton Seeks U.N. Approval Of Any Plan to Invade Haiti
President Clinton is seeking explicit United Nations authorization for any invasion to oust Haiti's military leaders, a decision likely to put any military action there on hold until late August at least, senior American officials said today.
The decision reflects a sense of diminished urgency within the Administration now that the flood of refugees from Haiti has dwindled to a trickle, the officials said.
They said it also reflects Mr.
Clinton's uneasiness about taking unilateral military action even within the hemisphere unless he sees no alternative.


Callaway Golf Co. (ELY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
EASTMAN KODAK CO., Rochester, the film and chemical company, said its dental products group had acquired the brand name and intellectual property of Cook-Waite anesthetics from Kodak's Sterling Winthrop Inc. subsidiary.
Terms were not disclosed.
MED/WASTE INC., Opa-Locka, Fla., a medical waste management concern, signed an agreement with Recovery Corporation of America to acquire its medical-waste hauling contracts for 22 hospitals and a number of medical-waste generators in Florida.
Terms were not disclosed.


Top Democrats to Push Full Coverage
Democratic leaders from the House and Senate met with President Clinton tonight and declared they were ready to push forward with legislation to guarantee health insurance to every American.
In a joint statement, delivered by Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Senate majority leader, the leaders said they will propose bills that meet the President's objectives, although the approach will be "less bureaucratic, more voluntary, and will be phased in over a longer period of time" than the President's original proposal.


Official at Columbia University To Head Child Welfare Agency
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday announced the appointment of Kathryn Croft, a Columbia University administrator, to head the city's Child Welfare Administration, which is the custodian for 47,000 foster children and the investigator of about 50,000 complaints of child abuse annually.
When she takes office on Aug. 29, Ms.
Croft will inherit an agency with a budget of $1 billion and a staff of about 5,600.
Child Welfare is part of the Human Resources Administration, headed by Marva L. Hammons, who joined the Mayor in announcing the appointment.


Swift Transportation Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ashland Oil Inc.(ASH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Carr Puts His Faith in Ford as Celtic Coach
CHRIS FORD got what he wanted, finally.
The Boston Celtics announced yesterday that Ford has been given an extension of his contract, which had one more year to run.
Terms were not disclosed.
"I do feel I have total control of the team on the floor," he said.
Ford asked for the extension near the end of last season.
But his request was denied by PAUL GASTON, the chairman of the Celtics.
M.
L.
CARR took over the negotiations after being being appointed head of basketball operations. (AP)


Hearings Today on Prudential Suits
A panel of three Federal judges will begin hearings today on the biggest lawsuit involving allegations of fraud by Prudential Securities in a case that could determine the legal future for investors in a number of limited partnerships sold by the investment firm in the 1980's.
The hearings in Colorado Springs involve what is known as a multidistrict litigation, which was filed last year.
Such litigation is used to bring together large numbers of cases involving similar claims into a single courtroom to help get them resolved.


Looking at Criminal Evidence in Simpson Case
To the Editor:
Your discussion of the tension rising for the prosecution and the defense in the O. J. Simpson case (news article, July 10) contains two serious misunderstandings about the trial process and its rules of evidence.


Suit Challenges New York's Law Banning Doctor-Assisted Suicide
Two men in the terminal stages of AIDS, a woman dying of cancer and three physicians who care for such patients filed suit in Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday seeking to strike down New York's criminal prohibition against assisted suicide.
The plaintiffs contend that the prohibition violates the 14th Amendment's constitutional protection against state infringement on individual liberty.
Their challenge came 10 weeks after a Federal judge in Seattle struck down Washington's 140-year-old state ban against assisted suicide, likening the freedom of the terminally ill to end their lives to a woman's fundamental right to an abortion.


Two Unbeaten 2-Year-Olds to Test the House of Upsets
They call it the house of racing upsets, the graveyard of champions, where Secretariat lost and even Man o 'War.
It's the Saratoga Race Course, opening for its 126th year on Friday with 34 stakes races in 36 racing days and $5 million in prize money, and with a new doubleheader that may produce the early favorite for next year's Kentucky Derby.
The stars of the doubleheader are two undefeated juveniles trying to launch careers while testing the fates in the house of upsets.
They will both take the stage because the Saratoga schedule now opens with two smash acts: the traditional stakes for 2-year-old fillies, the Schuylerville, featuring the unbeaten Unacceptable, and the Sanford Stakes for 2-year-old colts, featuring the late-running De Niro.


BW/IP Inc.(BWIP,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Art in Review
Dan Christensen
Douglas Drake Gallery  50 West 57th Street  Through July 29
Although the best of Dan Christensen's early spray painting, the work that made his name, can be seen in "1969: A Year Revisited" at the Grey Art Gallery at New York University, a micro-retrospective at Douglas Drake offers evidence of where he has been since that time.


Danaher Corp.(DHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


U.S. Intensifies Effort to Talk the Dollar Up
The Clinton Administration intensified its public campaign today to talk up the value of the dollar, declaring that a higher dollar had crucial benefits for the American economy and that another slide in the American currency would slow global growth.
The President's top economic adviser, Laura D'Andrea Tyson, also said that the White House would not object to another quarter-point increase in short-term interest rates before the end of this year, a move that could bolster the declining currency.


Nucor (NUE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Caterpillar Inc.(CAT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NORTHWEST AIRLINES CORP. (NWAC,NMS)
Northwest Airlines posted strong gains for the second quarter yesterday, just a year after the company narrowly avoided bankruptcy.
Northwest reported earnings of $71.3 million, or 68 cents a share, compared with a loss of $136.2 million, or $2.42 a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Revenue rose to $2.27 billion from $2.1 billion.
It was the company's fourth consecutive profitable quarter.


La Quinta Inns Inc.(LQI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Army Sergeant Convicted in Slaying of a Female Lieutenant
An Army sergeant was found guilty today of murdering a female lieutenant who lived several doors down the hall in the same barracks in Fort Bragg, N.C.
But because the panel of 12 officers and enlisted people had not voted unanimously, the sergeant was spared the death penalty.
After deliberations of just two and a half hours, Sgt. 1st Class Ervin M. Graves was found guilty of premeditated murder and murder while attempting a rape in the shooting death last year of 2d Lieut.
Lisa N. Bryant of Fairfax, Va.


You Don't Need Statistical Significance to Act on Smoking; Olfactory Pollution
To the Editor:
Full-page ads by a tobacco company purport to show that the health effects of secondhand tobacco smoke aren't so bad.
The ads ignore the esthetic effects of drifting tobacco smoke.
Many nonsmokers simply detest the smell of others' smoke.


Rob Reiner Directs A Contemporary Fable
Rob Reiner has made both big, high-profile Hollywood movies ("A Few Good Men," "When Harry Met Sally . . . ") and more offbeat films with funny, knowing, youthful sensibilities all their own ("Stand by Me," "The Sure Thing," "This Is Spinal Tap").
The latter ones are much more interesting, even when, like "North," they're quite literally all over the map.
"North," a playful modern fable about a boy in search of new parents, doesn't always work, but much of it is clever in amusingly unpredictable ways.
Mr.
Reiner's daring is a great comic asset, and it's very much in evidence here.
So evident, in fact, that "North" has the scattershot energy of a Mel Brooks farce: before the audience can be sure whether one gambit really works, this film is on to the next one.
It's hard to resist a comedy that's so full of surprises and so eager to please.


INSIDE
White House Talks Up Dollar
The dollar surged after the Clinton Administration signaled that it did not want to see a lower dollar to pressure Japan on trade.
Page D1.
Argentines Protest Bombing
As the death toll rose to 44, about 150,000 Argentines protested the bombing of a Jewish community center in Buenos Aires.
Page A8.
Power Problem on East Side
After several cables failed, Con Edison turned off electricity to more than 20 apartment buildings on Manhattan's Upper East Side.
Page B1.
Support for Cable TV Bid
Comcast gained crucial support in its bid for the QVC cable television channel from John C. Malone, a leading power in the cable industry.
Page D1.


Quiet Handling of a Nominee's S. &amp; L. Tenure
When President Clinton announced last year that he had picked John H. Dalton to be Secretary of the Navy, he praised the nominee's "true leadership ability" as a Texas businessman.
The resume made public by the White House was impressive: Naval Academy graduate with distinction, service in the Navy on two submarines, former head of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, executive for Stephens Inc., the influential Arkansas investment bank, and, for nearly five years in the 1980's, chief executive of the Freedom Capital Corporation.


Art in Review
'A Floor in a Building in Brooklyn'
Richard Anderson Gallery  476 Broome Street  SoHo  Through July 30
The eight young painters in this exhibition share the same working address: all have studios on one floor of an otherwise empty commercial building in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
Such concentration has a long tradition; this show has been organized by the painter Chuck Close, who began his career in a building on Prince Street occupied entirely by painters.


Diebold Inc.(DBD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ryder System Inc.(R,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


King Lets a Smile Be His Legal Umbrella
With a smile as big as the Manhattan courtroom and a ceremonial bow to the judge that could persuade a Japanese sumo wrestler to sign up with him for a match, the boxing promoter Don King pleaded not guilty yesterday to a Federal criminal indictment charging him with wire fraud involving a false insurance claim.
"Thank you, Your Honor, thank you," King said as he bowed to Federal Magistrate Judge Nina Gershon after she ordered him to remain free on a $250,000 personal recognizance bond.


Solzhenitsyn Reaches Moscow, Warning of 'Serious Trouble'
At long last, after 20 years of exile and a two-month rail trip across the troubled country that expelled him, Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, Russia's mournful sage, returned to his nation's capital tonight.
More than a thousand people, kept quietly at their distance by dozens of armed riot police, waited in the gray rain at Yaroslavl station to greet the 75-year-old writer who has savaged the current state of the country with almost as much intensity as he used when attacking Communism.


Girls Nation, His White House


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Activated Joe Hall, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list and optioned him to Birmingham of the Southern League.
Birmingham released Scott Tedder, outfielder.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Placed Mark Clark, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Jerry DiPoto, pitcher, from Charlotte of the International League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Acquired Shawn Boskie, pitcher, from the Philadelphia Phillies for a minor league player to be named later.
Announced that Milt Hill, pitcher, cleared waivers and was sent outright to Jacksonville of the Southern League.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Recalled Scott Service, pitcher, from Indianapolis of the American Association.
Designated Rich DeLucia, pitcher, for assignment.
Arizona Fall League  PEORIA JAVELINAS -- Named John Stearns, manager; Jim Wright, pitching coach; Mitchell Page, coach; and Randy Roetter and Greg Spratt, trainers.
SUN CITIES SOLAR SOX -- Named Brian Graham, manager; Bill Champion, pitching coach; Garry Templeton, coach; and Mike Herbst and Steve McInerney, trainers.
Football  National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Waived Greg Paterra, running back, and Tom Dohring, offensive lineman.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Released Greg Briggs, safety; Joe Montford, linebacker; and Dean Lytle, running back.
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Shane Bonham, defensive end, and Tony Semple, guard.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Released Christopher Perez, offensive tackle, and Lionel Crawford, wide receiver.
HOUSTON OILERS -- Announced the retirement of Mike Munchak, guard.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Signed Doug Thomas, wide receiver, and Matt Elliott, offensive lineman.
Cut Keith Franklin, linebacker.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Extended the contracts of Don Shula, coach, through the 1996 season, and Eddie Jones, general manager and executive vice president, through 1995 with an option for 1996.
Signed Calvin Jackson, cornerback.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Agreed to terms with Sam Mills and DeMond Winston, linebackers, on one-year contracts.
NEW YORK JETS -- Agreed to terms with Lou Benfatti, defensive tackle.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Agreed to terms with Greg Townsend, defensive end, on a one-year contract.


One Wife, Two Children And a Wardrobe of Dresses
Even if this weren't the season for exploding buses and animals who act human, "Just Like a Woman" would qualify as one of the quirkiest films on screen.
It is a sweet little comedy about the sunny side of transvestism.
Gerald (Adrian Pasdar) is a handsome young American working as a banker in London.
When he hears that his wife and two small children have returned from a trip unexpectedly, he races home in a panic, but he's too late.
His wife has already found women's lingerie, makeup and jewelry scattered around their bedroom and is tossing them out the window.
The hopeless Gerald can't bear to explain that the feminine clothes belong to him.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"1969: A YEAR REVISITED" and "FAGGOTS," New York University, Grey Art Gallery, 33 Washington Place, at Washington Square East, Greenwich Village.
The former, a collection of works made or exhibited in 1969 and indicative of cultural and social trends in the art world at that time; the latter, photographs by Arne Swenson.
Both through today.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 998-6780.
"THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR," Delacorte Theater, Central Park, entrance on Central Park West at 81st Street.
The Shakespeare comedy, transposed to an 1880's Idaho mining town; with David Alan Grier, Andrea Martin, Brian Murray, Tonya Pinkins and Margaret Whitton; directed by Daniel Sullivan.
Performances: today, tomorrow and Sunday at 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 861-7277.
Closing Next Weekend
"THAT'S LIFE," Jewish Repertory Playhouse 91, 316 East 91st Street, Manhattan.
A musical revue, written and directed by Helen Butleroff, about contemporary Jewish life in America.
Through July 31.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 831-2000.
"THE FAMILY OF MANN," Second Stage, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, Manhattan.
A comedy by Theresa Rebeck about the people who create television sitcoms; directed by Pamela Berlin.
Through July 30.
Performances: Monday through Friday, 8 P.M.; Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Police to Get A Phone Line On Corruption
A group of retired New York City police officers announced yesterday that they would establish a hot line for officers to report corruption and offer moral support to whistle-blowers who encounter resistance from the department.
Founders of the nonprofit group, the Concerned Alliance for Professional Policing, said their organization was necessary because too often the Police Department had stonewalled and even punished officers who reported unethical conduct.


Arafat Mixes Appeal for Funds With Attack on Hussein Invitation
Yasir Arafat was both spoiler and supplicant today.
In inflammatory language that angered the Israelis, the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman asserted that they had usurped his role by inviting King Hussein of Jordan to Jerusalem.


The New, Wide-Open Restaurant District
IT has taken 35 years, but Borough President Hulan E. Jack's idea has finally paid off.
On May 18, 1959, he persuaded the New York City Council to rename Fourth Avenue in his borough from 17th to 32d Street.
Upgrading the street's name to Park Avenue South, he argued, would give the area a "psychological lift." Besides, he added, it wouldn't cost anything.


Fingerhut Cos. (FHT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Lassie, With No Computer Trickery
THE chipper new "Lassie," a work of exceptional (if somewhat misplaced) optimism, begins with an aerial shot of green, unspoiled terrain.
Seen from afar is the film's four-legged heroine, scampering across a hilltop as she ecstatically herds sheep.
If Lassie could sing, is there any doubt we'd be hearing "The Sound of Music" at a moment like this?
What a pity that Lassie's not a singer.
She's only a dog.
Only a real live dog.
During a summer movie season replete with optical, digital, computer-generated miracles, many of them aimed at children who would not think it strange to find full-sized dinosaurs chasing them home from school.
Current movie audiences are fully accustomed to seeing impossible phenomena made so mundane that the truly unimaginable feats become old-fashioned ones.
Talk about unimaginable: Can there really be a "Lassie" revival today?


Confession Describes Shootings in Carjacking
Using the clinical language of medicine, a 22-year-old premedical student charged with murder in connection with a carjacking in January told investigators that he shot his two victims in a moment of panic.
The confession, made by the student, Edward L. Summers, on the day of his arrest, was released during a pretrial hearing this week in Rockland County.
In the 49-page transcript, Mr.
Summers told of shooting the two 18-year-old victims with a .22-caliber pistol as they lay face down in a snow-covered field four miles from a Nanuet shopping mall.
He said he cornered them at gunpoint in the parking lot and forced them to drive to the desolate road.





DuPont Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chubb Corp.(CB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lee Enterprises Inc.(LEE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Banks Are Warned on Derivatives
Citing some banks' heavy losses from risky investments, a senior bank regulator issued a legal warning to the industry today that many banks should avoid the potentially volatile securities known as structured notes.
Structured notes are debt securities that make payments based on various indexes of interest rate, options or contracts that lock in future interest rates.
These notes are derivatives, which are financial securities that are based on prices in other markets and may be subject to big fluctuations in value.


CHRONICLE
VINCENZO DELLA TORRE had just finished his night's work as a cook when he felt a sharp jolt: the Andrea Doria had collided with another ocean liner, the Stockholm, about 50 miles off Nantucket, Mass.
"There was a lot of panic," Mr.
Della Torre said.
"It was very foggy. You couldn't see anything. People were screaming."


Art in Review
'To Enchant (Blue)'
Cynthia McAllister Gallery  Bixler Gallery  560 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through July 29
Blue, the most evocative and versatile of colors, is the connecting tissue of this charming group exhibition, and appears in many of its wonderfully worded guises: cerulean, cobalt, azure, ultramarine, Prussian sky and robin's egg.


CMS Energy Corp.(CMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


McDonald's Corp.(MCD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Co-Op Learned Not to Trust; Before Agents Scandal, One Building Got a Surprise
For three days in early 1990, Tom King sat anonymously at a cubicle in the purchasing department of Brown, Harris, Stevens Inc., one of the city's major real-estate management agencies.
Acting on behalf of his fellow residents, Mr.
King was poring over years of receipts and records for their Manhattan cooperative-apartment building.
From the moment Mr.
King got up from his chair for the final time, life at 10 West 66th Street was forever changed.


Abroad at Home; Bosnia Without End
The Serbs of Bosnia would not take yes for an answer.
An international peace proposal offered to let them keep most of the fruits of their aggression and genocide, indeed to legitimize those conquests.
But for people inflamed by the drug of hyper-nationalism, that was not enough.
Over the next 10 days Russia, regarded by the Serbs as their great friend, will try to persuade them to change their mind.
Failing that -- and hope is slim -- the Bosnian conflict will enter a new and freshly dangerous phase.
It will see the United States more deeply involved, militarily and politically.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  AID FOR RWANDANS WITH CHOLERA  The first significant deliveries of food and medicine to treat a cholera epidemic arrived in a Zairian border town where hundreds of thousands of Rwandans are camped.
Governments and aid agencies worked to organize help for the refugees, who are still fleeing Rwanda at the rate of 2,000 an hour.
A1  MILES OF DEATH AND SUFFERING  More than 800 bodies of Rwandan refugees, many wrapped in straw mats or pieces of cloth, were laid out along a three-mile stretch of road from the center of Goma to Munigi, a volcanic expanse where many have been camped.
A1


The C.I.A., Still Unaccountable
R.
James Woolsey, the Director of Central Intelligence, acknowledges some welcome truths about his agency, but still manages to skate around the root cause of many of its problems.
The C.I.A. badly needs reforms, as Mr.
Woolsey says.
The laudable patriotism of many career officers is too often mingled with elitism, arrogance and the protective camaraderie of a college fraternity.
And yes, this old-boy system helps explain the agency's failure over a nine-year period to expose Aldrich Ames, the trusted initiate who betrayed secrets and lives for $2 million from Moscow.
In a speech this week, Mr.
Woolsey vowed to "strip bare and to evaluate" the operations directorate that permitted this scandal.


Judge Rules on Plea Bargain
Steven Hoffenberg, the founder of the failed Towers Financial Corporation in New York who was indicted on fraud charges earlier this year, has lost his battle to force Federal prosecutors to reinstate a plea bargain he negotiated with them last year.
Prosecutors had initially agreed to support a more lenient sentence for Mr.
Hoffenberg in exchange for his cooperation in other investigations.
But they revoked the plea agreement in February, citing what they said was Mr.
Hoffenberg's failure to testify fully and honestly about his business affairs.


More Acerbic Daffiness in a Series From the BBC
Outrageous enough to send shivers up the gelatinous spine of your average television executive, the BBC's "Absolutely Fabulous" is having its American premiere this Sunday on Comedy Central, with a 12-episode marathon beginning at 3 P.M.
Be assured, this is one of the daffiest sitcoms to come out of Britain since "Fawlty Towers." The incurably prim and politically correct are advised to stick with public television's cooking shows.
"Abfab," as the English call it, was created by Jennifer Saunders, once of a British comedy series called "French and Saunders." In addition to writing all the scripts, Ms.
Saunders plays Edina, a 40-ish fashion press agent who clings whackily to the liberated 60's.
Her best friend since childhood, Patsy, played by Joanna Lumley, is a fashion editor who has found job security by sleeping with her publisher.


Cholera Stalks the Rwandan Refugees
Death struck today with a vengeance.
More than 800 bodies of Rwandan refugees, many of them wrapped in straw mats or pieces of cloth, were laid out along a three-mile stretch of road from the center of Goma to Munigi, a volcanic expanse.


Foster (L.B.) Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Home Video
Until recently, Silicon Valley video-game makers have felt little need for partnership with Hollywood film makers.
In most formats games are little more than crude cartoon scenarios in finite settings.
What's more, movie studios are storytellers, stuck with plots that have a beginning, middle and end.
For each of its games, Silicon Valley needs a lot of middles and ends for participants to choose from.
But now in response to CD-ROM technology, the game and film worlds are joining forces.
In the past, games with cartoon characters allowed rudimentary manipulation.
Games of the future, by contrast, will employ digitized moving images and live actors who play out parts in movie settings.


Angered G.O.P. Chief Says the TV Networks Refuse to Sell Time for Health Care Ads
Accusing the major television networks of favoring the Democrats, the Republican Party's national chairman said today that his party's plan to broadcast health care commercials paid for by Ross Perot has been stalled because the networks refuse to sell the Republicans time.
"It galls me no end that the networks will give Hillary Clinton -- not sell her, give her -- two hours on 'Good Morning America' to advocate their idea of health care reform," the Republican chairman, Haley Barbour, said at the opening of his party's summer meeting here.
"Or that NBC will let the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation buy two hours of prime NBC time so that they can do a big puff piece on the Clinton health care plan."


METRO DIGEST
BACKING OFF ON PRIVATIZING SCHOOLS
The Board of Education in Hartford is preparing to hire a profit-making company to manage the city's 32 schools, but fierce opposition from teachers and questions about the financial arrangements have caused the school board to reject the company's bid to take full control.
A1.
Education Alternatives, a Minneapolis company, was operating at a loss.
Then it took over nine Baltimore public schools.
B6.
IMMIGRATION INQUIRY FINDS FRAUD
Elaine Wilson's wedding plans collapsed when colleagues of the prospective groom -- an undercover agent of the Immigration and Naturalization Service -- arrested Ms.
Wilson and two others on charges of participating in a marriage fraud ring aimed at illegal immigrants.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY KINGS COUNTY HOSPITAL IN DISARRAY
The head of the Health and Hospitals Corporation said he would appoint a new executive director to oversee Kings County Hospital Center because it is in danger of losing its medical accreditation.
B3.
INQUIRY INTO TALKS ON CON ED VIOLATIONS
The Speaker of the City Council said a task force would investigate the circumstances surrounding Con Edison's negotiations with the state to settle environmental charges.
B3.
ASSISTED SUICIDE LAW CHALLENGED
Two men in the terminal stages of AIDS, a woman dying of cancer and three physicians who care for such patients filed suit seeking to strike down New York's prohibition against assisted suicide.
B3.
A group of retired police officers said they would establish a hot line to report corruption.
B3.
A Columbia University official is nominated to head the Child Welfare Administration.
B7.
REGION SHIP TRAVELERS BEGIN TO RETURN
Some suntanned, some steaming, passengers from the ill-fated cruise ship Horizon arrived in New York City, their vacations scuttled by an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease.
B4.
The first symptoms hit John Silivanch as he worked in his backyard. B4.
COLLEGE STRUGGLES TO STAY OPEN
Debt-burdened, its enrollment shrinking, its accreditation slated to be revoked, its faculty unpaid for a month, Upsala College will nevertheless remain open for at least another semester while it looks for a way out of its crisis.
B6.
CONFESSION DESCRIBES SHOOTINGS
Using the clinical language of medicine, a 22-year-old premedical student charged with murder in a carjacking told investigators that he shot his two victims in a moment of panic.
B4.
7 SICKENED BY TAINTED MEAT
In what health officials fear may be the first of many cases, six children and one elderly person have become ill in New Jersey from eating tainted hamburger that might have come from the same source.
B4.
LEADING THE SCHOOL FINANCE CHALLENGE
Marilyn Morheuser still believes in the rallying cries of the 1960's.
Why else would she have gone before the State Supreme Court to argue again that New Jersey has failed to do right by its impoverished students?
B9.
Chronicle B8


For Children
'Science City'
Herald Square  Broadway and Avenue of the Americas (at 35th Street)  (718) 699-0005  Recommended ages: 4 and up  Through May 30
Neon-orange tubes, cones and other thingamajigs lure passers-by into this otherwise scruffy triangle, and it's neither art nor theater, but science.
The New York Hall of Science has set up a free, interactive sidewalk museum that reflects what happens above, below and on the city's streets.
A complementary show is up through Sept. 4 at the museum's permanent space in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens.


Wrong Price Of I.B.M. Stock
The stock options table on page D16 today includes an incorrect price for shares of the International Business Machines Corporation.
I.B.M. closed at $62.375, up $6.50 for the day.


Other Voices, Another Health Issue


Dreyfus Corp.(DRY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mostly Mozart to Shrink but Stay
After more than a year of speculation that the Mostly Mozart Festival would be restructured, reduced or even eliminated, Lincoln Center has confirmed that the seven-week festival will be cut back to four weeks in 1995.
It was also announced yesterday that eventually -- perhaps as early as 1996, although plans are not firm -- a four-week Mostly Mozart Festival would complement a broader multidisciplinary summer festival at Lincoln Center.
Saying that he hoped to clear up "widespread and often inaccurate speculation about Lincoln Center's intentions," Nathan Leventhal, the center's president, outlined plans for an as yet unnamed festival that would include newly commissioned music and dance works, imported productions and collaborations among Lincoln Center constituents.
He would not speculate on the festival's budget, other than to say that "it won't be cheap."


7 Reported Ill In New Jersey From Eating Tainted Meat
In what health officials fear may be the first of many cases, six children and one elderly person have become ill this week in New Jersey from eating tainted hamburger that might have come from the same source.
Six of the cases cropped up in Sussex County in recent days, an unusually large cluster that indicated more infections could be reported in the coming days, Dr.
William E. Parkin, an assistant commissioner at the New Jersey Department of Health, said yesterday.


FMC Corp.(FMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Unknowns Of Pop, a Gig To Remember
DOCTOR ZAIUS, a pop-punk trio from Anchorage, is going to play the most important concert of its 18-month career tomorrow night, at Don Hill's in Greenwich Village.
"At this point, this concert is our only shot," said Zall Shedlock, the band's 23-year-old bassist.
"I think, after paying to get to New York, each of us is going to be broke for a while. We'll probably end up spending $3,000 altogether, and that doesn't count the tapes and stickers we had to make."


Ingersoll-Rand (IR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.31
4.78
3.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.31
4.28
3.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.72
4.68
3.21
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.24
7.22
5.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.54
7.54
6.66
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.33
7.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.37
5.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Commencement in July


As It Moves to Privatize Schools, Hartford Is Keeping Some Control
The Board of Education is preparing to hire a profit-making company to manage Hartford's 32 schools, although fierce opposition from teachers and questions about the financial arrangements have caused city officials to reject the company's bid to take nearly full control of the system.
The school board's vote, perhaps as soon as Friday, would make Hartford the nation's first city to hire a private manager for its entire school system.
But instead of having wide latitude to squeeze millions in savings from the budget to pay for improvements to the city's troubled schools, the company, Education Alternatives Inc., will be given control over only a small part of the system's $171 million budget and will be asked to reorganize the schools from within, working with the bureaucracy that is acknowledging its own failure by hiring the company.


General Dynamics Corp.(GD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
LUCI JOHNSON, a daughter of former President Lyndon Baines Johnson, and two other directors of a failed bank in Austin, Tex., have been sued by bank regulators for more than $10 million in loan losses.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation filed a lawsuit last week against Ms.
Johnson; Richard (Cactus) Pryor, a radio commentator, and Carolyn Curtis, an assistant vice president at the University of Texas.


Donald Turner, Lawyer for U.S. And Writer, 73
Dr.
Donald Frank Turner, a legal scholar and economist who was the Government's chief antitrust lawyer in the Johnson Administration, died on Tuesday in a nursing home in suburban Washington.
A Washington resident, he was 73.
The cause was complications of Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


Health Care Bills Bring Benefits For Some Specific Constituents
A hospital in Representative Dan Rostenkowski's neighborhood in Chicago is getting Federal aid for a $580 million construction project.
Representative Charles B. Rangel has secured similar assistance for a hospital on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
And Representative Barbara B. Kennelly of Connecticut has obtained special dispensation for the Hartford Life Insurance Companies.
Those are a few of the little-noticed provisions tucked into health care legislation for the benefit of specific hospitals, drug companies and insurance companies.


Despite 80, 14-Year-Old Keeps Her Head Up
She stood outside the scorer's tent near the 18th green, looking very much like what she is -- a child in an adult's world.
For Rae Anna Staples, 14 years old, the first round of the United States Women's Open was an eye-opening experience, and not an altogether pleasant one.
"That's about the worst I could play," she said.
"I mean, I've shot worse rounds, I guess, but to come to the U.S. Open and shoot 80, that's pretty disappointing."


Restaurants
Do you remember the scene in the movie "Gigi" in which the aging courtesan teaches her niece to eat ortolans?
The bones of the tiny birds crackle horribly in the old lady's mouth but she remains the picture of elegant ease.
Gigi, attempting to imitate her aunt, merely looks uncomfortable.
Every meal I have eaten at Les Celebrites has reminded me of that scene.
Unfortunately, I am always Gigi.
The setting is undoubtedly what brings this to mind.
No restaurant in New York so perfectly recreates another time and place.
Les Celebrites is a precious Art Deco parlor, all lacquer and Lalique.
To those who appreciate the opulence of that ebony and gold period, the intimate room with just 18 tables will seem the last word in luxury.
Those who do not may find the atmosphere slightly suffocating.
Personally, I always have the fear that when I sit back in those well-padded sofas my feet will not quite touch the floor.


Kimberly-Clark Corp.(KMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Weighs Withdrawal From Somalia
Spurred by a rise in violence, the Clinton Administration may decide as early as Friday to withdraw the last American diplomats and marines in Somalia, even as United Nations peacekeepers are questioning their own usefulness there.
Fighting among competing factions in Mogadishu, the capital, has increased in recent days, and earlier this week 2 Malaysian peacekeepers were killed and 11 other United Nations troops were briefly detained.
Clan leaders are stockpiling arms for what American officials say could soon be a full-scale civil war.


How Aid Makes Argentina's Poor Poorer
To the Editor:
"In Argentina, the Poor Seem to Get Poorer" (news article, July 7) observes that while President Carlos Saul Menem "has focused on macro-economic issues, he has neglected new social programs." You do not mention, however, that lending practices of such international institutions as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are as much to blame for the widening gap between rich and poor as the skewed economic policies of the Argentine President.


U.S. Arrests 3 in Immigration Marriage Fraud
Theirs was a prenuptial agreement that left no room for romance.
Elaine Wilson, the authorities said, wanted only one thing from the marriage: her betrothed's money.
And he wanted only one thing in return: to arrest her.
On June 30 they drove together to One Municipal Plaza in lower Manhattan and obtained a marriage license.
Yesterday the wedding plans collapsed when colleagues of the prospective groom -- an undercover agent of the Immigration and Naturalization Service -- arrested Ms.
Wilson, 30, and two others on charges of participating in a marriage fraud ring aimed at illegal immigrants.


U.S. Force and Haitian Refugees: A Nervous Wait
The monotony facing sailors and marines on this United States Navy helicopter carrier steaming near Haiti is reflected, as if in an imperfect mirror, by the tedium that wears on Haitian refugees in the American custodial camp just over the horizon at the Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
More than 8,000 Americans at sea, and about twice that many Haitians in the camp, are waiting for something to happen, preferably something that will let them go home.
If nothing else, their very presence continues to exert pressure on the United States to intervene in Haiti if a political settlement cannot be found.


Cholera Can Be Beaten; Fast Action Is Essential
Doctors treating the flood of Rwandan refugees in Zaire say the camps there may be facing the biggest epidemic of cholera ever.
An estimated million people are huddled in a small area under dire conditions in the harshest kind of volcanic terrain where workers cannot easily dig sanitation trenches, said Bernadette Brusco, a spokeswoman for Doctors Without Borders, which is helping to care for the refugees.


American President Cos.  (APS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the earnings of five health care companies miscalculated the percentage increase in the second-quarter net income reported by the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company.
The increase was 4 percent, not 13.7.


TBWA International In Swedish Venture
TBWA International said yesterday that it had entered a joint venture with the Hallstedt &amp; Hvid Group, an agency holding company in Stockholm, to open an agency called Hallstedt &amp; Hvid/TBWA Sweden in Stockholm.
The new shop, TBWA's first agency in Sweden, has billings estimated at $10 million from clients like Absolut vodka, Beiersdorf and Henkel.
Anders Runer and Thomas Hvid, co-managing directors at Hallstedt, will be co-managing directors at the new agency.


Armco Inc.(AS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a California judge's refusal to follow the state's toughened sentencing guidelines for repeat offenders misstated the severity of the charges against the defendant in some copies.
The defendant, Jeffrey Dean Miss amore, is accused of two felony counts of carrying drugs into a prison farm, but the crimes do not qualify as the serious felonies that would have required a sentence of 25 years to life under the "three strikes and you're out" provisions of the new law.
The article also referred incorrectly to the status of the case.
Judge Lawrence Antolini has announced his intention to sentence Mr.
Missamore to probation instead of an eight-year prison term, but has not yet handed down a sentence.


Union Carbide (UK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Buyouts in the Heart of Texas
The Texas banks might all be owned by people in New York, Charlotte, N.C., and Columbus, Ohio.
The department stores, long ago swallowed by national chains, have few remaining regional distinctions.
But Thomas O. Hicks will gladly testify that one thing in business here has not changed.
Texans still like to do deals with Texans.
As controlling partner in the Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst leveraged buyout firm here, Mr.
Hicks makes a decent living (estimated net worth, $150 million) by not being from New York.


Burlington Northern Inc.(BNI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Times Mirror Co.(TMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


I.B.M. Profit Far in Excess Of Estimates
I.B.M. surprised Wall Street yesterday with second-quarter earnings far in excess of analysts' estimates, attributing the gain primarily to cost reductions.
It was was the third consecutive profitable quarter for I.B.M. after a long series of losses.
I.B.M. shares were buoyed by the news, surging $6.50 to close at $62.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Baldor Electric Co. (BEZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


New York Magazine Rejects Request
Rejecting a request by GEORGE STEINBRENNER, KURT ANDERSEN, the editor of New York magazine, said yesterday that he would not release the tapes and notes of an interview with a Yankee vice president who has denied making controversial remarks attributed to him by the magazine last week.
Citing a widespread journalistic practice of keeping such materials confidential, sometimes even in the face of court orders, Andersen said he was not going to be the one to establish what he called "a pretty horrendous" and "dangerous precedent." Steinbrenner had asked for the release of the tapes and notes in an effort to help determine whether RICHARD KRAFT, the Yankee vice president in charge of community relations, had made the remarks attributed to him.
According to the magazine, Kraft likened youngsters hanging onto basketball hoops in the neighborhood around Yankee Stadium to "monkeys."


Big Board Sets Record for Uncovered Short Sales
Short-selling, commonly viewed as a bet that a stock's price will decline, rose on the New York Stock Exchange last month, but fell on the American Stock Exchange, the exchanges reported yesterday.
The total number of shares sold short on the Big Board and not yet covered rose 2.7 percent, to a record volume of 1.6 billion, the 10th straight monthly increase.
But the number of such shares on the American Stock Exchange dropped 2.8 percent, to 108 million, the second consecutive monthly decline.
The figures cover trades settled by July 15, which means those that were transacted a week earlier.


Foremost Corp. of America (FCOA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mary Lasswell, 89, Novelist, Is Dead
Mary Lasswell, an author whose humorous novels about life in Southern California and Texas were popular in the 1940's and 50's, died on Tuesday in the nursing unit of the Solvang Lutheran Home in Solvang, Calif., where she resided.
She was 89.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, said her husband, Dr. Dudley Winn Smith, a surgeon.


Monitor Gets a New Editor
The Christian Science Church, which lost hundreds of millions of dollars trying to establish a media empire in the 1980's, said today that the editor of its radio division would also take over the helm of its journalistic flagship, The Christian Science Monitor.
The editor, David Cook, will be the first person to hold both posts.
Though the newspaper and broadcasting divisions will keep separate staffs and budgets, they will begin to work together on special projects.


Man in the News: Tony Blair; A Laborite With Elan
As a law student at Oxford University in the early 1970's, Tony Blair wore shoulder-length hair and bell-bottoms and did a kind of Mick Jagger imitation as he performed in a rock band known as the Ugly Rumors.
"Tony was our love machine," one of his band mates once said.
Today Mr.
Blair was elected leader of Britain's opposition Labor Party.
It is a job that, given the dismal standing in public opinion polls of the governing Conservatives, leaves him in a strong position to become Prime Minister at the next general election, which must be held by mid-1997.


DMR Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Blaney Exits Holy Cross To Come to Seton Hall
One month after losing its longtime head basketball coach, P. J. Carlesimo, to the pros, Seton Hall will name George Blaney, head coach at Holy Cross for the past 22 seasons, to replace him this afternoon at a news conference on the school's campus in South Orange, N.J.
Neither Blaney nor Larry Keating, the Seton Hall athletic director, were available for comment on the appointment last night, but Coach Nick Macarchuk of Fordham confirmed by telephone that Blaney, a longtime friend, had the job.


After Scuffle, Italian Lawmakers Revoke Unpopular Decree on Arrest Powers


Art in Review
'1969: Context and Event'
Pace/MacGill Gallery  32 East 57th Street  Through Aug. 30 'Peace, Love and Rock 'n' Roll' 'The Sixties'
292 Gallery  130 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through July 30


Fremont General Corp.(FMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Early Civil Rights Movement, Set to Music
"All God's chillun got shoes" sings the ensemble of Clarence Cuthbertson's "Faith Journey," a musical about the congregation of a black Baptist church in Alabama during the early days of the civil rights movement.
The simple phrase, delivered in exultant harmony, goes to the heart of a complex, uniquely symbiotic relationship between religion and politics.
The sound is pure gospel; the message is social: all God's children may have wings, but for this world they need shoes for marching in protest.
And the song becomes a call from the choir loft to rally in the face of oppression.


I.B.M.'s Strength Buoys the Market
The stock market, having absorbed the momentarily shocking news that Alan Greenspan was still worried about inflation, rose modestly yesterday, thanks mainly to unexpectedly strong profits at once-troubled I.B.M.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 5.18 points, to 3,732.45, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index rose 1.01 points, to 452.61.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 2.26 points, to 715.03.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Avco Financial Services Inc., Irvine, Calif., a unit of Textron Inc., is selling $200 million of notes due in 1999 at 100 to yield 7.25 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
KFW International Finance Inc., a unit of Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell as much as $500 million of debt securities.
*
Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd., Miami, is selling $125 million of 8.125 percent senior notes due in 2004 at 98.521 to yield 8.346 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa3 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P.
Common  *
Boston Chicken Inc. filed a registration statement with the S.E.C. for an offering of two million common shares.
Merrill Lynch will be the lead underwriter.


These Patriots Think They're Contenders
There is Romeo Crennel, the longtime Giants defensive line coach, tutoring his pupils on the ins and outs of a quick jump from the line of scrimmage.
There is Al Groh, the defensive coordinator, and, across the field, Fred Hoaglin, the offensive line coach.
There are so many familiar faces, among them Coaches Ray Perkins, Johnny Parker and Mike Pope, and players Myron Guyton, Bob Kratch, Matt Bahr and Steve DeOssie.
Bill Parcells helped bring all of these former Giants to New England.


No Headline
"We can't do anything, I am afraid. They just die and die and die, and they keep coming and coming and coming." DR.
FLORENCE PARENT, confronted by an outbreak of cholera among Rwandan refugees.  [ A1:3. ]


CHRISTIAN RIGHT DEFIES CATEGORIES
The Christian right, which has been the focus of an intense debate in the Republican Party, is a far more diverse group in terms of geography, politics and even religious doctrine than is generally suggested by either its critics or its most vocal proponents, the latest New York Times/ CBS News poll shows.
Predictably, these Christians are more conservative on social issues like abortion and homosexuality than most Americans and even most Republicans.
But from there, the caricature of Republican Southerners following a monolithic religious agenda breaks down.


Pull the Plug on This Crime Bill
It has always been a close call whether the sprawling and complicated crime bill that is now before Congress was worth supporting.
In its early days the bill's promise of support for local police, its restriction on assault weapons and its attempt to eliminate racial bias in capital cases offset its seedier aspects.
But at this point in its legislative journey, the bill's most valuable provisions are in trouble and its most odious ones seem well entrenched.
The last straw was President Clinton's surrender to the Senate conservatives who oppose a provision to allow minority defendants to introduce statistical evidence of racial bias in the application of the death penalty.
Compromise is always a part of lawmaking, but the abandonment of the racial-justice provision tips the scale.
The crime bill now has too many defects, in practical effect and in principle, to merit support.


Art in Review
Cindy Tower
'Westward Expansion Inward'  New Museum of Contemporary Art  583 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Aug. 7
"Westward Expansion Inward," Cindy Tower's labor-intensive installation at the New Museum, is a fun and busy thing that gets an A for effort and a B+ for being amusing, but otherwise not too high a grade.
A form of installation art as family entertainment, it crowds together cheerful, robustly handmade paintings of (and on) trees, as well as sculptures, photographs and video, into something rather like a personal national park. (It even begins with a map, drawn in a thick slice of tree trunk.)


Comair Holdings Inc.(COMR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos.(MMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Mystery Illness, the Best Doctor
The first symptoms hit John Silivanch as he worked in his back yard.
Sniffles, a flushed feeling, a scratchy throat.
Several days later Mr.
Silivanch, 43, lay in a bed in Community Medical Center a few blocks from his home with a dangerously high fever and a hospital staff baffled by what was trying to kill him.


Pizza Hut's Double Standard
The Pizza Hut controversy would be a small footnote to the national debate on health care if it did not make a large point: there is plenty of flim-flam and even hypocrisy in the argument advanced by many companies that employer mandates will drive their costs to intolerable levels.
To demonstrate that, the Health Care Reform Project -- a coalition supporting President Clinton's efforts to require employers to help pay for insurance -- developed a TV commercial.
It showed a young man bicycling toward the nation's Capitol to deliver a pizza.
It said that Pizza Hut paid for health insurance for its workers in Germany and Japan, "but for many workers in America, Pizza Hut pays no health insurance. Zero."


Chemed Corp.(CHE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lockheed Corp.(LK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Sa-man-tha! A parade of six 'Bewitched' episodes will offer a night of advertising magic.
THERE are those in advertising who, pondering how their industry is portrayed in popular culture, frown and turn up their noses.
Then there are those who smile and twitch their noses.


CHRONICLE
Coming soon to the global village: the first Global Law School.
That is what New York University School of Law will be calling itself at a ceremony on Monday, when it will announce a $40 million program to draw large numbers of graduate students and faculty members from other countries.


Textron Inc.(TXT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


From Travelers on Cruise, Stories of Disorganization
Some suntanned, some steaming, passengers from the ill-fated cruise ship Horizon arrived in New York yesterday, their vacations scuttled by an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease.
As Federal health inspectors continued to comb the ship in Bermuda for further traces of the potentially deadly bacteria that causes Legionnaires' disease, the Federal Centers for Disease Control said that the number of confirmed cases had risen to 5 and that there were 22 possible cases of Legionnaires' disease among people who had been on previous voyages of the Celebrity Cruises ship.


Shula at Dolphins' Helm For Three More Seasons
Entering the last year of a three-year contract, Miami Dolphins Coach Don Shula agreed to a two-year extension today and said, "I'm healthy and looking forward to this next year of coaching and also coaching in the remaining years of my contract."
That declaration, plus the announcement by H. Wayne Huizenga, the Dolphins' new owner, that Shula would soon buy a minority ownership in the team and become the team's director of football operations if he decides to leave coaching during the term of his contract, apparently quells persistent speculation that Jimmy Johnson would succeed Shula in Miami.


Unisys Corp.(UIS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; A 'Hong Kong problem' may grow at Salomon Brothers.
SALOMON INC. had plenty of difficulties to disclose yesterday as it reported a quarterly earnings plunge of more than $200 million.
But there was one headache the firm didn't discuss.
At Salomon Brothers, the company's brokerage unit, it's called "the Hong Kong problem."
Since March, 10 investors who had been serviced by a broker in Salomon's Hong Kong office have filed arbitration complaints against the firm with the National Association of Securities Dealers.
Among other things, the investors contend that Betty Wu, the broker, sold them inappropriate investments not intended for retail customers, and that she in some cases sold the securities to investors in the United States, where they say she is not licensed to do business.


Flipping for the Champions


James River Corp.(JR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Genuine Parts Co. (GPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Fashion; Lacroix Casts a Spell With Make-Believe
For the second consecutive day during the fall couture showings, an audience surfeited with heat and fashion spontaneously rose to its feet to honor a designer during his traditional walk down the runway after the show.
Yesterday, homage was paid to Yves Saint Laurent, whose clothes were mostly in a classic mode.
Today, it was paid to Christian Lacroix, whose sense of fantasy rose to a new level.
He was pelted with the carnations that covered the programs on the seats; the applause grew rhythmic, a sign of the greatest approval.


Wally Walker Hired to Lead Sonics
WALLY WALKER, who once played for the Seattle SuperSonics, was hired yesterday as the National Basketball Association club's president and general manager.
Walker had been serving as a consultant to the team for the last six weeks.
Walker, 40, played eight seasons in the N.B.A.
He was on two championship teams -- the 1977 Portland Trail Blazers and the 1979 Sonics.
He last played in 1984.
For the last two seasons, he has been a Sonics television and radio commentator.
Terms of the five-year contract were not disclosed. (AP)


Times Board Approves Plant
The board of The New York Times Company gave final approval yesterday for the construction of a $315 million printing and distribution plant in College Point, Queens, to replace the production operations of The New York Times in midtown Manhattan.
The new plant will allow the use of color in advertising and news sections of the daily newspaper for the first time and permit later deadlines in the newspaper's core market in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, chairman and chief executive of the Times Company, said.


Youth Killed at Harlem Nursery
A 13-year-old Bronx youth was stabbed to death yesterday at a Harlem nursery school by an unidentified person who ran away, the police said.
The youth, Reginald Powell, was visiting his stepmother, who works at the Morningside Head Start Center, when the attack occurred.
The police said he was stabbed in the chest about 2 P.M. in a hallway just inside the entrance of the school, which is on the ground floor of the Drew Hamilton Houses at 2430 Seventh Avenue, between 141st and 142d Streets.


BancTec Inc.(BTEC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Arco Chemical Co. (RCM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cable Failures Force Upper East Side Brownout
Scrambling to keep part of its power grid from toppling like a string of dominoes, Con Edison turned off electricity to more than 20 large apartment buildings on the Upper East Side of Manhattan last night.
The apartment houses went dark about two hours after the utility imposed a brownout on a wider area when four feeder cables short-circuited and failed, said Dan Walden, a Con Edison spokesman.
A fifth cable was knocked out of service at 7:15 P.M.


In Simpson Case, an Issue for Everyone
O.
J.
Simpson has never been easy to categorize.
In his public and private lives, he crossed the color line to become what marketers call race neutral.
Now, as a murder defendant, he is creating confusion and divisions among blacks here over his role and symbolism.
From Joe Hicks of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, who insists that race plays no part in the case, to Dennis Schatzman of The Los Angeles Sentinel, a black-run newspaper, who says the case is "all about race," it is hard to find complete agreement.


A New Campaign For Stolichnaya
Carillon Importers Ltd.and its new agency, Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss Inc. of New York, are introducing the first campaign for Stolichnaya vodka since Carillon obtained the brand's distribution rights in the United States.
Carillon previously lost distribution rights to Absolut vodka to the Seagram Company.


Argentines Protest Bombing As Death Toll Reaches 44
With the death toll rising to 44 in the bombing of the Jewish community center here, about 150,000 Argentines demonstrated under a winter rain today, protesting what prominent Jews called the worst massacre of Jews in the Americas in memory.
"We must not let terrorism win its principal goal, which is to corner us in our houses," Ruben Ezra Beraja said, his voice echoing over a somber sea of umbrellas that stretched under a gray sky, forming Argentina's largest demonstration in recent years.


Bible Belt's Signs Woo a Drive-By Congregation
Consider the church sign -- highway haiku for the Bible Belt.
The message may be hard shell, ("In Order to Get to Hell You Have to Step Over Jesus"), welcoming ("Free Faith Lifts Every Sunday") or the Gospel According to Nashville ("Let Jesus Fix Your Achy Breaky Heart").


Illinova Corp.(ILN,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Riley to Join All-Female Team
DAWN RILEY gave herself a deadline: to decide by her 30th birthday, which was yesterday, whether to sign on with BILL KOCH's all-female America's Cup team or to sail with the PACT 95 men's team from Bangor, Me.
She decided to go with Koch's America
camp.
"It basically came down to where I thought I could challenge myself more," she said.
KEVIN MAHANEY's PACT 95 syndicate had offered Riley a position on its boat's pit crew throughout the 1995 races, including a spot on the boat should the team be chosen to defend the America's Cup for the San Diego Yacht Club.
With Koch's team, there is no such guarantee.
Riley is in Newport, R.I, this week with the 23 other women on Koch's America's Cup squad.
The team will sail Matador, Koch's 80-foot maxi-yacht.


BIC Corp.(BIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Corrections
The table of Treasury bills, bonds and notes was omitted from some copies of Business Day yesterday, and in other editions it was erroneously compiled by Tribune Media Services with prices from Tuesday, rather than Wednesday.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the table may write to the Business Editor, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


J. J. Surveyed His Empire Atop 44th St.
To the Editor:
I was intrigued and drawn into your July 10 and 11 front-page articles on the Shubert Foundation and the Broadway theater, from the Shubert brothers, Lee and J. J., who ventured onto the Broadway scene early this century, to today, with the dominant role played by Gerald Schoenfeld and Bernard Jacobs.


American Barrick Resources Corp.(ABX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Texas Legislator Seeking to Soften Assault-Arms Ban
Yet another hurdle to the anti-crime bill arose today when a combative Jack Brooks, the Texas Democrat who heads the House Judiciary Committee, said he would hold up the bill until other members agreed to weaken the proposed ban on assault weapons.
Both the House and the Senate have passed measures that would ban 19 assault weapons and copycat models.
Mr.
Brooks wants to protect the copycat models, meaning the assault weapons that would be banned could undergo cosmetic modifications and still be allowed.


Parties Count As Much As Matches
Steffi Graf went partying today just before her opening match in the Pathmark Tennis Classic.
Wearing a long summer dress, the world's top-ranked player began the party circuit at the Crossroads Corporate Center only an hour before her second-round match tonight against Nicole Provis of Australia.
And before she was done, Graf had changed into her tennis clothes and had dropped in on five parties at the nearby Sheraton Crossroads Hotel and in tents near the 6,500-seat tennis stadium, where the weeklong exhibition event is being played.


Public-School Contracts Help Company's Profits
Education Alternatives Inc. was founded in Minneapolis in 1986 by John T. Golle, the co-founder of Golle &amp; Holmes Company, which specializes in corporate training programs.
Educational Alternatives provides school management and consulting services as well as a line of educational products.
The company, which became a publicly held corporation in 1991, reported profits of $2.98 million in 1993 on revenue of $30.05 million, up from a loss of $67,000 on revenue of $2.9 million in 1992.


2 Haiti Leaders Are Focus of Drug Inquiry
Federal prosecutors in Miami are pursuing a cocaine-trafficking investigation focused on senior Haitian military and intelligence officials, including the country's powerful police commander, Federal officials and lawyers familiar with the case said today.
In addition, the investigators have been told by two former members of Colombian cocaine cartels that the senior Haitian military leader, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, was part of a group of Haitian officials who helped protect shipments of the cartels' cocaine through Haiti to the United States in the 1980's, the lawyers and officials said.
General Cedras and the police commander, Lieut.
Col.
Joseph Michel Francois, are members of the three-man junta ruling Haiti.


Lightning and Rain Can't Slow Alfredsson
Even as lightning and rain swept across the Indianwood Golf and Country Club today, delaying play in the second round of the United States Women's Open for more than two hours, Helen Alfredsson continued to roll like thunder across the old course.
Alfredsson shot a round of 69 for a four-stroke lead over the rest of the field and a halfway total of 10-under-par 132.
That established a new 36-hole scoring record for the open, breaking the record Patty Sheehan set in 1990 at Atlanta Athletic Club, and it clearly installed Alfredsson as the player to beat this weekend.
With 15 competitors stranded on the golf course by darkness, Alfredsson's nearest pursuer is Laura Davies, who shot her second straight 68 and finished at six under par.
Michelle Estill (68) and Sheehan (71) both finished at five under par.


Mattingly's Chase Overshadowed by Yankees' Offensive Display
Don Mattingly did not have a chance.
Four fans waved placards with the number 2,000 scrawled on them because they knew it could be Mattingly's memorable night.
All he needed was two measly hits against the Angels to elevate himself into prestigious company.
But he faltered in his pursuit of history tonight and was seriously overshadowed by waves and waves of offense from his teammates.
While Mattingly was hitless in four at-bats and did not become the sixth player to accumulate 2,000 hits with the Yankees, there were several other players who made Andrew Lorraine's first major league start miserable and continued to make the road trip memorable.
Mike Stanley bashed two homers, Jim Leyritz clubbed a three-run blast, Wade Boggs slapped four hits and Bernie Williams, who also had four hits, opened the game with a homer to begin the onslaught as the Yankees strolled to a 12-3 victory at Anaheim Stadium.


Costly Errors Lurk in Some Mortgages
A small mistake on a mortgage statement can add up to thousands of dollars over the years.
Just ask Larry D. Powers, president of Consumer Loan Advocates, a nonprofit mortgage auditing firm in Lake Bluff, Ill.
"We have found that 18 percent of all loans in error have errors in excess of $5,000," he said.
"We've had one for $32,000 and another for $22,000."


It's Thrice The Thrills By Thome For Indians
Indians 9, White Sox 8
Jim Thome hit three of Cleveland's six home runs and Albert Belle homered for the fourth straight game and 30th time this season as the Indians stopped Chicago, 9-8, last night at Jacobs Field, ending the White Sox's five-game winning streak.


SOUTHWESTERN BELL CORP. (SBC,N)
The Southwestern Bell Corporation said yesterday that second-quarter operating earnings rose 14.1 percent on strong results in its cellular and international businesses.
The regional telephone company, which is based in San Antonio, said it earned $385.5 million, compared with $338 million from operations in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Last year's second-quarter net results included a $43 million charge to refinance long-term debt, reducing net income to $294.4 million, so net income in this year's quarter was up 30.9 percent.


Bridge; A strong foursome from the New York area breezes to the Grand National Team semifinals.
As some 2,000 competitors began play here in the American Contract Bridge League's Summer National Championships, four teams battled today in the semifinal stage of the Grand National Team Championship, which began at the grass-roots level eight months ago.
A favored foursome from the New York metropolitan area breezed through the previous two days of play and may be headed for victory.
Jim Cayne and Alan Sontag, both of Manhattan, David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., defeated a strong Californian squad by 40 imps in the quarterfinal stage Thursday night.
In today's semifinal they face a Texas group consisting of Seymon Deutsch, Bob Wolff, Bob Hamman, Chris Hamman and Hemant Lall.


Pizza Hut Defends Its Insurance Plans
Throughout the debate over national health insurance, the hottest issue has been how to pay for it.
Today, that question boiled down to the cost of pizza.
At a Senate hearing today, Allan S. Huston, president of Pizza Hut, a division of Pepsico Inc., said that requiring employers to pay for their workers' insurance would mean lost jobs, lower wages and closed businesses.


Earnings Rebound At Apple
Apple Computer, showing evidence of a financial and technological comeback, reported today that stronger sales of its new Power Macintosh computers led to a 15.5 percent increase in revenue for its third quarter and higher-than-expected profits.
In the corresponding quarter last year, Apple reported a loss because of charges it had taken for a corporate revamping.


Central Park Honor for Jacqueline Onassis
New York City plans to rename the Central Park Reservoir in honor of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis -- a tribute that was applauded yesterday by the joggers, walkers and hangers-out on the banks of the sparkling lake in the middle of the city.
Central Park, and particularly the 1.57-mile path around the Reservoir, where she often strolled or jogged half-hidden behind dark glasses, was an important part of Mrs.
Onassis' life.
Indeed, the last time she was seen in public before her death on May 19 was during a last walk in the park.


Stock Prices Stalled In Sluggish Trading
Stock traders listened with interest yesterday to Alan Greenspan's second day of Congressional testimony and noticed the subsequent rise in the dollar in European currency markets.
But the dollar's strengthening against the German mark did little to lift the stock market, where leading indexes closed up but essentially unchanged in sluggish trading.
Bond prices dropped slightly, helping to limit stock advances.


Simms Fades Back and Throws Barbs at Tagliabue
Perhaps the strongest aspect of Phil Simms's character when he was a player was his honesty.
He always said what he thought and was highly respected for that.
And in forced retirement, that hasn't changed.
Simms, responding to remarks by the National Football League's commissioner, Paul Tagliabue, in which he suggested the salary cap had little to do with Simms being released by the Giants, today lashed back at the commissioner, saying he "has no idea what the hell he's talking about."


An Alternative to Snail Mail for Investors Who Are Plugged In and Booted Up
When the Intel Corporation announced record earnings on Monday afternoon, investors who wanted every detail did not have to wait a month or more to get a quarterly report in the mail.
They did not even have to wait to read the news in Tuesday's paper.
All they had to do was to boot up their PC's and log into one of the electronic services where, for the first time, Intel's information was available on line.


Jupiter's Comet Spectacular Ends With a Fiery Flourish
Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 concluded its spectacular week of death throes yesterday with the fiery plunge of the last of its large fragments into the planet Jupiter.
The impact and explosion of Fragment W offered a particularly good show to observers in Australia and at the South Pole, as well as those in the Australia-based Kuiper Airborne Observatory -- a C-141 cargo jet with a hole in its fuselage to accommodate a 36-inch astronomical telescope.
The last big impact, which occurred about 4 A.M.
Eastern daylight time, was marked by a bright flash.


Plan to Create MTV Rival Is Under Antitrust Scrutiny
The Justice Department has begun an antitrust inquiry into an effort by five of the world's biggest recording companies to start a music video channel for cable television that would compete with MTV.
The inquiry is believed to center on whether the companies might prevent MTV from using their videos or might charge excessive licensing fees on artists under contract with their studios.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article on Wednesday about an explosion that destroyed a Jewish community center in Buenos Aires mistranslated the names of two organizations that used the building.
They are the Delegation of Argentine Jewish Associations and the Argentine Jewish Mutual Aid Association; they are not Israeli.


LABATT JOINS IN BIDDING FOR MADISON SQUARE GARDEN
John Labatt Ltd., the majority owner of the Toronto Blue Jays baseball team, the Toronto Argonauts football team, Toronto's Skydome stadium and the Sports Network has joined the bidding for Madison Square Garden.
The news, first reported in The Toronto Globe and Mail yesterday, was confirmed by the company.


Mets Spoil Comeback Party for Strawberry
Jeff Kent has been playing for two months with a right arch in almost constant pain where muscle has pulled away from bone.
Jason Jacome, his manager said, "didn't have real good stuff."


In Performance; POP: NEW MUSIC SEMINAR
Sharing a Formula Tested By the Smashing Pumpkins  Brownie's
When Catherine, an alternative rock band from Chicago, performed its first New York concert on Wednesday at Brownie's in the East Village, it spent the better part of the short show haranguing music business representatives in the audience.
In the upside-down world of alternative rock, however, pretending to hate the business is the best way to get it to come to you.
And Catherine certainly has all the ingredients that go into making a good alternative rock band.
It may even have too many.
It produced its five-song album "Sleepy" (TVT) with Billy Corgan, who leads Chicago's biggest current success story, the Smashing Pumpkins.
It also shares a bottom-heavy rock esthetic with the Smashing Pumpkins; Mark Rew sings in a raspy, self-mocking growl reminiscent of Kurt Cobain.
And as proved by the band's bad jokes on Wednesday, it has trouble communicating directly with its audience, in the manner of Mr.
Corgan and Mr.
Cobain.
Catherine played few songs with many parts.
Songs usually began as slow, winsome rock ballads and after a screeching guitar solo, turned into heavy rockers and finally all-out noise made by three guitars squealing, scraping and clanging in unison.
Catherine's music was as ambivalent as the band's relationship to success: it seduced and then repelled.
NEIL STRAUSS


Coleman Decision Near
The police in Detroit said they would decide on Monday whether to file charges against Nets forward DERRICK COLEMAN, who has been accused of raping a 22-year old woman at a hotel last week.
Deputy Chief BENNY NAPOLEON said he would make a review this weekend of evidence in the case, including forensic reports on blood samples taken from Coleman and on semen found on the woman's dress.


Clinton Plan's Backers Set Out on Bus Cavalcade
The Clinton Administration took its high-stakes health care gamble on the road today, using a bus trip, a Hollywood actress and a rock group to try to rekindle the cozier moments of last year's Presidential campaign.
It hopes to ignite popular support as the complex issue heads for a floor debate on Capitol Hill.
Ignoring scattered boos and hand-painted signs opposing abortion rights and "rationed health care," a crowd of 10,000 cheered as more than 100 supporters of universal health coverage set off in four buses on a 3,384-mile cross-country trek carefully staged and financed by supporters of the President's plan.
Their goal is to court Americans who have been watching the debate at a distance.


No Headline
The only adequate remedy available to provide the plaintiff the rights guaranteed to her by the Equal Protection clause is her immediate admission to the Corps of Cadets at the Citadel. -- JUDGE C. WESTON HOUCK.  [ 6:1. ]


Blackout Laid to Cable Failures and Heat
A series of failures in underground electrical feeder cables and a transformer, along with unusually warm weather, caused the power shortages that blacked out a number of large apartment buildings on the Upper East Side on Thursday night, Consolidated Edison officials said yesterday.
They added that the incident had been "very unusual" and did not portend further electrical problems for New York City this summer.
"This was an isolated case in one network in a small part of Manhattan that occurred as a result of a number of random events," said Richard D. Mulieri, a company spokesman.


Citadel Is Ordered to Admit A Woman to Its Cadet Corps
Calling its exclusion of women unconstitutional, a Federal judge ordered The Citadel today to break its 152-year-old all-male tradition by immediately admitting Shannon Faulkner, the 19-year-old woman who has waged a yearlong battle to enroll in the military college.
In the opinion, Judge C. Weston Houck of Federal District Court said that excluding women from the college's Corps of Cadets violated the equal protection provisions of the 14th Amendment.


Hot Town, Summer in the City, Still Looking for a Shadow
To the Editor:
Your July 11 photo spread showing people seeking respite from the heat at water's edge may be appealing to anyone spending these torrid days in New York's concrete canyons, but there is another way for city dwellers to enjoy a bit of relief.


Falsely Demonizing the Trade Pact
Ralph Nader, arch-consumer advocate, and Patrick Buchanan, arch-conservative, rarely agree.
But both believe that the world trade pact that the U.S. and 116 other nations recently signed and is now before Congress would be a mistake.
This political odd couple is mainly worried about a new institution, the World Trade Organization, that would oversee fair-trade rules.
Mr.
Nader and Mr.
Buchanan see the organization as a threat to U.S. sovereignty -- subjecting health, safety and environmental laws to overthrow by secretive tribunals in which the U.S. would carry no more weight than, say, Sri Lanka.
The Clinton Administration retorts, correctly, that the Trade Organization has no legal power to change U.S. law.
Moreover, the trade pact itself would do far more good than bad -- adding hundreds of billions of dollars to the U.S. economy over the next several years.
Still, the criticisms contain a kernel of truth that deserves to be acknowledged.
The World Trade Organization is neither flawless or harmless.


Refugees' Return Home Called Only Real Solution to Crisis
The huge amounts of food and medical assistance now on the way to refugee camps in Zaire to help control malnutrition and epidemics will be enough for only a couple of months, say relief officials who insist that only the rapid return of the refugees to Rwanda will avert an even grimmer crisis.
Because of overcrowding, medical care for the more than two million refugees in Zaire can help only temporarily to stem a cholera epidemic that is ravaging the camps, officials of Unicef say.


Stu Jackson in N.B.A.
STU JACKSON left the Wisconsin basketball program yesterday to take a front-office job as general manager and vice president of basketball operations with the Vancouver expansion team, which begins play in the National Basketball Association in the 1995-96 season.
Assistant Coach STAN VAN GUNDY was promoted to succeed Jackson at Wisconsin. (AP)


At Last, Rwanda's Pain Registers
The two million terrified Rwandans who have fled to neighboring countries are now dying at the rate of one a minute.
For lack of safe water and sanitation facilities, cholera threatens the makeshift camps that have sprung up around the Zairean town of Goma.
President Clinton, who yesterday called it the worst humanitarian crisis in a generation, has finally begun to respond with the energy this widening disaster demands.
Obviously, as Mr.
Clinton stressed, the first need is to assure the survival of Rwandans, most of them Hutus, who have formed human rivers flowing across frontiers.
He promises that an aerial armada, flying round the clock from Italy to Entebbe airfield in Uganda, will airlift food, water and medicine to various camps.
Crossing another important threshold, the President is sending U.S. troops to monitor the humanitarian operation.


Roaming Among Stocks, Bonds and Cash
Asset allocation funds can shift among stocks, bonds and cash, and the ones that performed best over the last three years have taken full advantage of their liberal charter.
Most of the winners use a value approach to picking stocks, scouring the world for issues they consider cheap relative to what they believe the companies are worth.
Many are contrarian, and some, very opportunistic.
Sogen International, for example, was helped last year by its big position in gold, and both Sogen and Merrill Lynch Global Allocation built big cash cushions in 1994 that sheltered them from stock and bond declines.


Inquiry Finds 'Star Wars' Tried Plan to Exaggerate Test Results
Federal investigators have concluded that "Star Wars" officials conducted a deception program in the 1980's as part of a plan to make the Soviet Union think the ballistic missile-defense project was far more advanced than it was.
A report by the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, said Star Wars officials secretly planned to rig a series of four tests that aimed to hit a missile with another missile, by putting bombs on the targets so that a near-miss would appear to be a direct hit.


N.A.A.C.P. Belongs in Superfund Debate
To the Editor:
A July 10 news article on the relationship between the National Assocation for the Advancement of Colored People and the Alliance for a Superfund Action Partnership is inaccurate.
The alliance aims to help minority and other communities that have been threatened by the hazards of uncontrolled toxic waste.


Players in N.B.A. Granted an Appeal
The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit yesterday granted the National Basketball Players Association an expedited appeal of a lower court loss to the N.B.A. that kept intact the salary cap, college draft and right of first refusal.
The union argued that a fast hearing was needed because training camps start in early October.
Last month, the N.B.A. sued the union in United States District Court to persuade the court that its labor stalemate was not a court issue.
The union countered by contending that the disputed policies violated antitrust law.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column last Saturday about the cardiovascular surgery undergone by the wife of President Francois Mitterrand of France misspelled her first name.
She is Danielle Mitterrand.


Steering Clear of a Trap In Generational Giving
UNLIKE most Americans, who suffer an acute attack of manana syndrome when confronted with the need for estate planning, you have prepared a will, perhaps even trust documents.
Congratulations.
Now you can rest assured that your assets will go to your heirs, including grandchildren, not the Government.
And if there is a family business, it will not have to be sold to pay taxes.


CHRONICLE
George Burns, the comedian and entertainer who is a youthful 98 years old, was released from Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles yesterday.
He had been admitted for observation on July 13 after a fall in a bathtub in his Las Vegas, Nev., home, The Associated Press reported.
As a result, Mr.
Burns had to cancel an engagement at Caesars Palace.


Corrections
A picture caption on Thursday about an appeal to King Hussein of Jordan by the family of a murdered New Jersey woman, seeking the return of her husband and children from Jordan, misidentified the man at the right.
He was W. Michael Murphy Jr., the Morris County Prosecutor, not Onder Yarlug, a family member.


Did U.S. Err On Rwanda?
As it has finally spun into an epic catastrophe, the cycle of violence that began in Rwanda nearly four months ago has raised an agonizing question: should the United States have done more sooner to halt the death and destruction?
From President Clinton and his deputies, the answer today was an emphatic no.
Even as they sent United States troops on a quarter-billion-dollar mission to cope with the consequences of tribal fighting, they insisted that it would have been wrong to risk American lives to try to halt that fighting after it broke out in early April.


2d-Quarter Profit Down 28% at Bankers Trust
Tough trading conditions and a drop in customer demand for derivative securities and risk-management services contributed to a 28 percent drop in second-quarter profits at the Bankers Trust New York Corporation.
Bankers Trust, the nation's seventh-largest banking company, said yesterday that it earned $181 million, or $2.09 a share, in the quarter, down from $251 million, or $2.90 a share, a year earlier.


Business Digest
Companies
Paine Webber will spend $180 million to bail out a mutual fund battered by its holdings in derivatives.  [ Page 1. ]


Argentine Blast Tied to Lebanon
A Lebanon-based Islamic group called the Partisans of God has taken responsibility for the car bomb that killed at least 46 people in this city's traditional Jewish neighborhood, the Argentine authorities said today.
Without giving more details, Argentina's State Intelligence Secretary, Hugo Anzorregui, said he had received the information from Israeli intelligence officials here.


Paine Webber to Bail Out a Fund Battered by Complex Investments
The Paine Webber Group disclosed yesterday that it would spend $180 million to bail out a mutual fund battered by its holdings of the highly technical and often risky Wall Street securities called derivatives.
The rescue effort comes on top of $88 million the big brokerage firm spent last month to stabilize its mutual fund and to reimburse customers burned by what was advertised as a safe and secure investment.


Mattingly's Chase Overshadowed by Yankees' Offensive Display
Don Mattingly did not have a chance.
Four fans waved placards with the number 2,000 scrawled on them because they knew it could be Mattingly's memorable night.
All he needed was two measly hits against the Angels to elevate himself into prestigious company.
But he faltered in his pursuit of history tonight and was seriously overshadowed by waves and waves of offense from his teammates.
While Mattingly was hitless in four at-bats and did not become the sixth player to accumulate 2,000 hits with the Yankees, there were several other players who made Andrew Lorraine's first major league start miserable and continued to make the road trip memorable.
Mike Stanley bashed two homers, Jim Leyritz clubbed a three-run blast, Wade Boggs slapped four hits and Bernie Williams, who also had four hits, opened the game with a homer to begin the onslaught as the Yankees strolled to a 12-3 victory at Anaheim Stadium.


Clintons Ask Senate Leader To Insist on Coverage for All
President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton appealed to the Senate majority leader on Thursday to stand firm for the idea of health insurance for all Americans, rather than make concessions before debate begins, two leading Democrats said today.
The Clintons came away from the Thursday meeting encouraged to believe that Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, would do as they urged, said the two Democrats, who have been closely involved in developing health care legislation.


Auto Makers' New Idea: Focus on Used-Car Sales
The nation's auto makers, historically obsessed with offering the freshest shapes and the most advanced gadgets, are increasingly shifting their attention to something older: the booming used-car market, estimated at twice the size of the new-car market in the United States.
For shoppers, the change will mean more well-maintained, low-mileage, recent-vintage cars that are laden with accessories.


In Performance; POP: NEW MUSIC SEMINAR
Remember the Early 1980's? Remember Violent Femmes?  Roseland
The Violent Femmes, who played on Thursday night, are an odd band, a leftover from rock's new wave of the early 1980's.
The band has all sorts of new-wave affectations; everything it sings is ironic, and it has an interest in discarded elements of American musical pop culture, the B-side phenomenon.
But it still has a young audience: at Roseland, mosh pits opened up all over the crowded dance floor, and men and women were thrown toward the stage.
People were there to have a good time.


Saratoga Opening Day Not Sweet for Favorites
They opened the 126th season of racing at old Saratoga today, and the legendary graveyard of favorites buried two more perfect records: De Niro, the 2-year-old colt being touted for next year's Kentucky Derby, and Unacceptable, the prize 2-year-old filly, are no longer undefeated.
Maybe it was the mud, or the tight turns, or the curse of Saratoga, where even Secretariat was outrun and where Man o 'War lost for the only time in his career.
Whatever it was, it immediately bushwhacked the two prize pupils in the juvenile class of 1994 before a crowd of 20,820 watching the start of the five and a half weeks of racing in the countryside.


Kidder Executive Quits
The No. 2 executive at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company resigned, the latest person at the brokerage firm to be brought down by a $350 million trading scandal.
Page 35.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CARPENTER TECHNOLOGY CORP., Reading, Pa., the country's largest producer of specialty metal long products, announced that it had closed on its acquisition of the stock of Certech Inc. and its affiliated companies for an undisclosed price.


It's Thrice The Thrills By Thome For Indians
Indians 9, White Sox 8
Jim Thome hit three of Cleveland's six home runs and Albert Belle homered for the fourth straight game and 30th time this season as the Indians stopped Chicago, 9-8, last night at Jacobs Field, ending the White Sox's five-game winning streak.


Blaney Bringing Experience To the Hall
After P. J. Carlesimo resigned on June 23, Seton Hall Athletic Director Larry Keating said he wanted to hire a new basketball coach quickly and "hit a home run" with a big-name choice.
As it turned out, he did not meet either goal.
The 29-day search ended today with the introduction of George Blaney, formerly of Holy Cross, who signed a five-year contract.


Hot Town, Summer in the City, Still Looking for a Shadow
To the Editor:
Your July 11 photo spread showing people seeking respite from the heat at water's edge may be appealing to anyone spending these torrid days in New York's concrete canyons, but there is another way for city dwellers to enjoy a bit of relief.


Mott Haven Gangs Clash Over a Turf Called Heroin
Two months ago, Federal agents indicted 17 members of a gang that ran a sophisticated drug operation in the South Bronx, forcing heroin dealers to pay rent in order to sell on designated street corners.
But even as the agents were preparing to crack down, the authorities say, another gang was stepping in to fill the void left by the first, taking over the intricate system of extortion and enforcing it through robberies, carjackings and killings.


Thrilling, Dangerous: Betting on Currencies
YOU finish the newspapers, heave a sigh and call your broker.
"The yen's done rising," you say.
"It's the dollar's day now. Let's take a shot." You lean back, confident you've parsed the currency news as deftly as the billionaire financier George Soros . . .
It's a nice daydream -- but keep it that way, warned Maria Scott of the American Association of Individual Investors.
Despite the yen's enticing recent rise, currency plays are too risky and complex for nearly everyone, "even for economists."


Stock Prices Stalled In Sluggish Trading
Stock traders listened with interest yesterday to Alan Greenspan's second day of Congressional testimony and noticed the subsequent rise in the dollar in European currency markets.
But the dollar's strengthening against the German mark did little to lift the stock market, where leading indexes closed up but essentially unchanged in sluggish trading.
Bond prices dropped slightly, helping to limit stock advances.


Tending The Roots Of Salsa
IF you think that Latin music is something chanted by brown-robed monks in the cold stillness of a monastery, or that Arsenio is only the name of a talk-show host, Ramon Rodriguez and Louis Bauzo will set you straight.
They'll tell you that the music is the brassy, percussive Afro-Cuban hybrid forged in New York's Puerto Rican clubs, and that Arsenio was the blind Cuban guitarist credited with being one of its fathers.


Earnings Rebound At Apple
Apple Computer, showing evidence of a financial and technological comeback, reported today that stronger sales of its new Power Macintosh computers led to a 15.5 percent increase in revenue for its third quarter and higher-than-expected profits.
In the corresponding quarter last year, Apple reported a loss because of charges it had taken for a corporate revamping.


Mets Spoil Comeback Party for Strawberry
Jeff Kent has been playing for two months with a right arch in almost constant pain where muscle has pulled away from bone.
Jason Jacome, his manager said, "didn't have real good stuff."


Engine Inventor Accused of Fraud
To the self-chilling beverage can and the speed-boosting horseshoe the Federal Government would now add the Coates Rotary Valve Cylinder Engine, developed and promoted in the last four years by George J. Coates, a New Jersey inventor.
Like the beverage can that can't, and the speedy horseshoe that wasn't -- both features of earlier unrelated schemes that cost public investors dearly -- the Coates engine is now described by securities regulators as a device chiefly useful for generating cash for its inventor.


Irma Shorell, 69, Cosmetics Executive
Irma Shorell, a skin-care specialist and retired cosmetics executive, died on Monday in her home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
She was 69.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Kimberley Journal; The Revolution Won, Workers Are Still Unhappy
Second only to the African National Congress, South African labor unions provided the political muscle that overturned apartheid and the brains that now govern the country.
So naturally the black women who toil over knitting machines for 50 cents an hour in Taiwanese-owned sweater factories here expected the election of Nelson Mandela to bring payback time -- a union shop, better wages and a little respect.


Koppell Says He Won't Challenge His Opponents' Petitions
Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell said yesterday that he would not use the arcane points of New York State election law to try to eliminate one of his three challengers from the ballot, guaranteeing a tough four-way primary race for the Democratic nomination.
At the same time, State Senator George Pataki, who won the backing of the Republican convention to run for governor, took the first step yesterday toward challenging the efforts of his sole Republican opponent, Richard Rosenbaum, a former State Republican chairman, to have his name placed on the primary ballot.
Looking for Flaws
Mr.
Koppell's announcement came several days after he began scrutinizing the nominating petitions filed by his three opponents, looking for flaws that could have disqualified them.
His actions had started to emerge as a campaign issue, with his opponents criticizing him as undemocratic and a traitor to his earlier stands in favor of electoral reform.


Do You Recognize Me? I'm a Jet, You Know
The Jets' future has been redefined -- once again -- and thus many of the veterans among the 80 players who report tonight will be shaking hands with, and lining up alongside, strangers.
But they will be doing it with excitement.
They take the field in training camp at Hofstra University in Hempstead, L.I., for the first time tomorrow.
That is when the boyish-looking rookie coach, Pete Carroll, will bring new enthusiasm to this team of failed promise: In 34 seasons, it has been unable to post a winning record 26 times, including last year, when it went 8-8.


A Growing Business Takes The Corporate Plunge
For seven years Johannes Schwartlander ran a San Francisco marble and granite business as a sole proprietorship.
But as the company grew, he decided he needed the liabilty protection of a corporation.
"I didn't want to be a corporate face," Mr.
Schwartlander said.
"But when we had so many employees and started installing marble panels 10 stories up, I realized that if five years later something fell down I would be responsible."


Mexican TV Picks Its Political Shots
When the leftist presidential candidate Cuauhtemoc Cardenas visited the national university here not long ago, the turnout was a highlight of his campaign.
Spread before him like a great tempestuous lake, thousands of supporters shook their fists, chanted his name and cheered his call for a more democratic country.
But to millions of Mexicans who learned of the event from Televisa, the country's main television network, Mr.
Cardenas might as well have been speaking to a garden club.
When his appearance was shown on the nightly news, he had no visible audience at all.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 CLINTON ORDERS RWANDA AIRLIFT  President Clinton ordered the Pentagon to mount an enormous airlift of relief supplies to eastern Zaire to save Rwandan refugees.
Planes will fly around the clock to airfields near refugee camps.  1  DEBATING THE ROLE OF ONLOOKER  News analysis: As the refugee catastrophe spins into an epic scale, the bloodshed in Rwanda has raised an agonizing question: should the United States have acted sooner to halt the death and destruction?
Dr. Harry Harris, researcher in human biochemical genetics.
Dorothy Collins, singer.
Robert Rodriguez, former New York City Councilman.
Sports 28-32  Baseball: Mets topple Giants.  31  Mattingly grows nostalgic.  31  Basketball: Seton Hall introduces Blaney.  32  Column: Smith on Strawberry.  29  Football: Simms fires barbs at N.F.L. commissioner.  29  Jets return under Carroll.  31  Golf: Alfredsson consolidates her lead.  32  Hockey: Rangers and Blues open talks over Keenan.  32  Horse Racing: Opening day at Saratoga.  29  Sports People 32  Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  At last, Rwanda's pain registers.
Falsely demonizing the trade pact.
Hot stuff.
Rooms for the few.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: The numbness factor.
Russell Baker: The Beethoven defense.
Timothy E. Quill: The care of last resort.
Thomas J. Burnside: The great Texas bank robbery.
Bridge 15 Chronicle 20 Crossword 10


Steering Clear of a Trap In Generational Giving
UNLIKE most Americans, who suffer an acute attack of manana syndrome when confronted with the need for estate planning, you have prepared a will, perhaps even trust documents.
Congratulations.
Now you can rest assured that your assets will go to your heirs, including grandchildren, not the Government.
And if there is a family business, it will not have to be sold to pay taxes.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about wheelchair-bound youngsters who asked senators to increase research money misidentified their disease.
It is osteogenesis imperfecta, not Paget's disease.


CHRONICLE
Should a bit of a breeze happen to waft down from Massachusetts this weekend, there's a good chance that part of it will be candle-blowing from Nantucket Sound, where the Kennedy clan plans to celebrate the 104th birthday of Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy.
Although the official day was yesterday, the party is to be held today at the family compound in Hyannis Port, The Associated Press said.
Mrs.
Kennedy will receive 104 pink roses from her sole surviving son, Senator Edward M. Kennedy.
Her daughter Jean Kennedy Smith, the United States Ambassador to Ireland, has invited 20 mothers from Ireland and 20 from Northern Ireland to the Embassy in Dublin in honor of Mrs.
Kennedy's work with disabled children.


Ringling Circus Expanding Its Territory
And now, ladies and gentlemen and children of all ages, America's newest international export: the circus.
The Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus announced yesterday that for the first time it would create two circus units to tour South America and Asia.
It is also reshuffling its management team for this entry into international markets, the largest expansion in the company's history.
Traditionally, other countries have exported circuses to the United States.
"But we have one of the greatest brand names in the world, and we want to take that identity globally," Kenneth Feld, the circus's 45-year-old president and chief executive, said in an interview.


U.N. Says Zairians Seek Payoffs From Aid Flights
As more international relief flights began to reach the hundreds of Rwandans dying of cholera here today, the United Nations said local Zairian officials were trying to extort cash payoffs to permit planes to land.
One senior relief worker said that in addition to limiting the number of flights, airport officials were seeking $2,000 "under the table" for each plane that comes in.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the New York City pension system's investments in tobacco stocks referred incorrectly to Eastman Kodak's involvement in the tobacco industry.
Although a former subsidiary, Eastman Chemical, produces material for cigarette filters, the company is no longer affiliated with Eastman Kodak.
In some editions the article also misidentified one company in which the pension system has invested.
It is RJR Nabisco, not RJR Reynolds.


Did U.S. Err On Rwanda?
As it has finally spun into an epic catastrophe, the cycle of violence that began in Rwanda nearly four months ago has raised an agonizing question: should the United States have done more sooner to halt the death and destruction?
From President Clinton and his deputies, the answer today was an emphatic no.
Even as they sent United States troops on a quarter-billion-dollar mission to cope with the consequences of tribal fighting, they insisted that it would have been wrong to risk American lives to try to halt that fighting after it broke out in early April.


Hot Town, Summer in the City, Still Looking for a Shadow; I.D. Cards for Pools
To the Editor:
I offer a simple solution to the problem of violence in New York City's pools.
Everyone over the age of 12 should have a photo identification card in order to use the pool.
The card could be purchased at a nominal fee the first time someone goes to swim.
A birth certificate or driver's license would serve as proof of name.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.30
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.36
4.31
3.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.76
4.72
3.22
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.27
7.24
5.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.56
7.54
6.70
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.36
8.35
7.43
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.38
6.39
5.81
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Q &amp; A
Taxing Pension Payouts  Q. I have been told that about 75 percent of a distribution from a qualified employer-sponsored pension plan can be eaten up by taxes.
Is that true?
MARIANNE LAKATOS, Santa Monica, Calif.


Navy Nominee Has Right Job Credentials
To the Editor:
"Political Correctness Infects the Pentagon" (Op-Ed, July 11) by James Webb, former Secretary of the Navy, inaccurately describes the qualifications of Vice Adm.
Richard C. Macke, who has been nominated as Commander in Chief Pacific.


Sports of The Times; At Home, At Peace, At Shea
DARRYL STRAWBERRY, for reasons of his continuing recovery from substance abuse and just plain sanity, only wants to talk about baseball these days.
Baseball, scrubbed down and swept clean of all extra baggage, like Strawberry's recent bout with substance abuse, his rejection at the hands of the Los Angeles Dodgers, his spiritual rebirth with the San Francisco Giants.


U.N. Agency To Investigate Type of Illness
The World Health Organizations is sending teams of epidemiologists to Rwanda, Uganda and Zaire to determine how much of the diarrheal illness killing people there is due to cholera and how much to other causes.
Results of the tests are expected by Monday, a spokesman for the United Nations agency in Geneva said, and should help doctors develop a treatment strategy for the thousands of cases expected in coming days.


The Pool Is Too Green
The swimming competition at the Goodwill Games in St.
Petersburg, Russia, has been postponed because the pool was filled with greenish water.
The 16-day event begins today and swimming was to have been the day's showcase event, featuring a 50-meter showdown between the world record holder TOM JAGER and the Olympic champion, ALEKSANDR POPOV.
All events will be held tomorrow.
The water at the pool went from brownish-black Thursday to a swamp-like green yesterday.
Swimming officials said the problem was in the pool's filtration system. (AP)


Observer; The Beethoven Defense
California, which is in the vanguard of practically everything, has started using classical music as a teen-ager repellent.
Apparently nothing works like a dose of Beethoven quartet for driving a horde of teen-agers out of your neighborhood, unless it's a Bach fugue.
All the masters are powerful juice, however: Haydn, Mozart, Wagner, Brahms . . .
The pity is they can't be sprayed out of a can.


An Alternative to Snail Mail for Investors Who Are Plugged In and Booted Up
When the Intel Corporation announced record earnings on Monday afternoon, investors who wanted every detail did not have to wait a month or more to get a quarterly report in the mail.
They did not even have to wait to read the news in Tuesday's paper.
All they had to do was to boot up their PC's and log into one of the electronic services where, for the first time, Intel's information was available on line.


Rooms for the Few
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani insists there is "nothing wrong" in special New York City apartment deals granted to 14 people who worked for his election or work for him now.
He may even believe that.
But clearly there is an odor to these transactions that the Mayor should want to dispel.
Instead he feeds suspicion with unconvincing denials.
The favors to Mr.
Giuliani's aides were dispensed by William Koeppel, a wealthy real estate executive and Giuliani fund-raiser who enjoys hob-nobbing with political big shots.
During the campaign last year he gave several Giuliani workers special deals on apartments, in which they paid no rent for the first weeks or months they lived in his buildings on the Upper East Side of Manhattan -- the high-rent district.


Aide Is Said to Contradict Bentsen About Whitewater
Contradicting public statements of Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, the Department's top lawyer has told Congress that she briefed Mr.
Bentsen about discussions between White House and Treasury officials on their investigation of the Whitewater case, people involved in the inquiry said today.
Mr.
Bentsen has insisted since early March that he never participated in or knew of any of the discussions between Treasury and White House officials that deeply embarrassed the Administration when they were disclosed five months ago.


Some Days a Nap Is the Hardest Work You Want to Do


Plan to Create MTV Rival Is Under Antitrust Scrutiny
The Justice Department has begun an antitrust inquiry into an effort by five of the world's biggest recording companies to start a music video channel for cable television that would compete with MTV.
The inquiry is believed to center on whether the companies might prevent MTV from using their videos or might charge excessive licensing fees on artists under contract with their studios.


Dr. Harry Harris, 74, Researcher in Genetics
Dr.
Harry Harris, a prominent researcher in human biochemical genetics, died on Sunday at the Dunwoody Medical Facility in Newtown Square, Pa., a suburb of Philadelphia.
He was 74 and had lived at Dunwoody Village, a retirement community, since leaving the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine three years ago.
The cause of death was complications from small strokes suffered three weeks ago, said his wife, Muriel.


Judge in Simpson Case Goes by the Rules
Judge Lance A. Ito, soon to become the most closely watched judge in the country as he presides over the O. J. Simpson trial, has two main standards for handling high-profile cases.
"Rule 1: Be cautious, careful and when in doubt, keep your mouth shut," he says.
"Rule 2: When tempted to say something, take a deep breath and refer to Rule 1."


A Growing Business Takes The Corporate Plunge
For seven years Johannes Schwartlander ran a San Francisco marble and granite business as a sole proprietorship.
But as the company grew, he decided he needed the liabilty protection of a corporation.
"I didn't want to be a corporate face," Mr.
Schwartlander said.
"But when we had so many employees and started installing marble panels 10 stories up, I realized that if five years later something fell down I would be responsible."


PRESIDENT ORDERS PENTAGON ACTION TO AID RWANDANS
President Clinton ordered the Pentagon today to mount an enormous, urgent airlift to funnel relief supplies from around the world into Africa in an attempt to control the catastrophe facing more than a million Rwandan refugees now in Zaire.
The American relief mission, which White House officials said was designed to mobilize a worldwide effort, was described by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, as "a race against time." But with every minute tolling another death at the cholera-stricken camps in Zaire, officials said it would take several days to mobilize the airlift fully.


For the Abbey, a New Director and Old Problems
The Abbey, Ireland's 90-year-old official national theater, is in trouble again.
In 1991, short on cash and eager for an infusion of theatrical imagination, it turned to Garry Hynes, an iconoclastic young director from the western province of Galway.
Ms.
Hynes immediately outraged the Dublin establishment with eccentric productions that included O'Casey's "Plough and the Stars" played by a bald-headed cast.
Artistic and budgetary differences led to her departure at the end of last year.


Hot Town, Summer in the City, Still Looking for a Shadow; Still No Public Toilets
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, as part of his attack on quality-of-life crimes in New York, has said he wants to crack down on public urination.
Does the Mayor believe people urinate in the streets by choice?


Boutros-Ghali Makes Plea for Aid to Refugees
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali delivered an emotional appeal today, calling on people around the world to give help to the hundreds of thousands of Rwandan refugees who are hungry and sick in camps along the border and within the war-torn country.
"This disaster, which is unfolding before our eyes, is our collective responsibility," Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said in an address to representatives of about 150 nations gathered here.


Simon Play to Close
"Laughter on the 23d Floor," a comedy by Neil Simon, is to close after the evening performance on Aug. 27 at the Richard Rodgers Theater, 226 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
The Aug. 27 performance of the play, which was directed by Jerry Zaks and stars Nathan Lane, will be its 320th regular performance; it had 24 previews.


Hot Town, Summer in the City, Still Looking for a Shadow; Horses Aren't Coping
To the Editor:
Your July 10 news article on how New York animals are coping with the heat leaves out one animal that is so heartbreakingly visible and in great peril.
I assume the carriage horse might have been overlooked because of your past support for better treatment of these pitiful animals.


Senator Hugh Scott, 93, Dies; Former Leader of Republicans
Hugh Scott, a moderate Republican from Pennsylvania who served in Congress for 34 years, the last 7 of them as Senate minority leader, died Thursday in a retirement home in suburban Falls Church, Va.
He was 93.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said his secretary, Janet Horgan.


Beliefs
The debate about the religious right has taken a turn from the political to the personal.
"Dear Abe," Pat Robertson recently wrote Abraham H. Foxman, director of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, which in June had issued a 193-page report condemning the religious right, "it is painfully obvious that you are a deeply troubled individual who has somewhere along the way lost your Judaic roots only to seek in radical secularism what only God can give you. Please know, Abe, that I will pray earnestly that you may indeed meet personally the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob."


Hot Stuff
What do they see, the thousands of tourists now thronging New York City, when they peer from their perches atop the Empire State Building, the Statue of Liberty and the World Trade Center?
They see below them, enveloped in the kind of heat and humidity one associates with rubber plantations and Bette Davis running amok, the place of every shopper's dreams.
They see Bargain City!
As the dollar falls, so their spirits rise and send them flying through every department store, discount house and markdown rack in town.
They're filling the hotels, too, and flooding SoHo and Greenwich Village and the South Street Seaport.
And everywhere they go they're bringing money with them.
How nice for New York!
How nice for them!


Blaney Bringing Experience To the Hall
After P. J. Carlesimo resigned on June 23, Seton Hall Athletic Director Larry Keating said he wanted to hire a new basketball coach quickly and "hit a home run" with a big-name choice.
As it turned out, he did not meet either goal.
The 29-day search ended today with the introduction of George Blaney, formerly of Holy Cross, who signed a five-year contract.


In Performance; POP: NEW MUSIC SEMINAR
In Her Own Words, a Singer Tours Torch, Funk and Soul  New Music Cafe
When Dionne Farris was a member of Arrested Development, her job was to slip sound bites of melody in between the raps.
But at the New Music Cafe in TriBeCa on Wednesday, she easily held the stage on her own.


Reports Link Italy Leader's Firm to Scandal
Two Italian news magazines are reporting that witnesses have implicated the company owned by Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi in a recently uncovered network of corrupt business practices.
The witnesses, who are officials of the auditing unit of the Italian Treasury, known as the Finance Guard, have reportedly confessed to magistrates in Milan the details of a widespread illegal system whereby Finance Guard auditors regularly pocketed illegal payments from private corporations in exchange for turning a blind eye to fraudulent bookkeeping practices and tax reporting methods.


In Performance; POP: NEW MUSIC SEMINAR
The 1970's Appropriated And Reformed Into Fashion  Supper Club
Acid Jazz, an English movement that in theory mixes dance music and jazz, has been slowly bubbling in the pop underground for the last several years.
It has created a product that was neither jazz nor acid, and its synthetic pleasures have regularly been scuttled by an inordinate amount of musical incompetence.
Galliano, one of the movement's most popular groups, played on Thursday night, and the band had clearly been working on its pop craft and showmanship.


Fed Nominee Gives Views on Rates
Janet L. Yellen, President Clinton's nominee to the Federal Reserve Board, dispelled some of the mystery surrounding her views on interest-rate policy today but did not take a clear position on whether she would support further increases in interest rates this year.
The views that Ms.
Yellen sketched out at her confirmation hearing before the Senate Banking Committee today suggested that she might be slightly less willing than her future colleagues to raise rates to curb inflation, but would still fall within the mainstream at the central bank.


Navy Chief Settles Old Debt, $17,900, to Savings and Loan Bailout Agency
John H. Dalton, the Secretary of the Navy, settled an old debt to the agency overseeing the savings and loan bailouts by paying the Federal Government about $17,900 last week, a Navy spokesman said today.
The spokesman, Adm.
Kendell Pease, said the agency, the Resolution Trust Corporation, had demanded earlier this year that Mr.
Dalton pay about $27,000 he owed in connection with a loan he had taken out in the 1980's to buy a condominium in San Antonio that he rented out.
Mr.
Dalton had not repaid the loan and lost the condominium through foreclosure, said Admiral Pease and other Clinton Administration officials.


Do You Recognize Me? I'm a Jet, You Know
The Jets' future has been redefined -- once again -- and thus many of the veterans among the 80 players who report tonight will be shaking hands with, and lining up alongside, strangers.
But they will be doing it with excitement.
They take the field in training camp at Hofstra University in Hempstead, L.I., for the first time tomorrow.
That is when the boyish-looking rookie coach, Pete Carroll, will bring new enthusiasm to this team of failed promise: In 34 seasons, it has been unable to post a winning record 26 times, including last year, when it went 8-8.


INSIDE
Murder Trial in Jordan
A Jordanian man accused of strangling his wife in New Jersey, then fleeing to Jordan with his children, will be tried in Jordan and could face execution, an official said.
Page 21.
New Whitewater Revelations
A Treasury lawyer said she had told Secretary Bentsen of talks between White House and Treasury officials about the Whitewater case.
Page 9.
Citadel Told to Admit Woman
A Federal judge ordered South Carolina's military college to break its 152-year-old all-male tradition and admit a 19-year-old woman.
Page 6.


Lessons in the Rubble of the Coliseum Deal
For a decade, it survived design flaws, political miscalculations and years of litigation.
But in the end the collapse last week of a plan to build a huge office and retail center at the site of the New York Coliseum was brought about by two overriding forces: the dramatic changes in New York City's economy and the weight of years of bitter negotiations that left the parties mired in mistrust and inflexibility.
The demise of the project, which Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the developer and publisher, had intended to call Columbus Center, has left a trail of recrimination, with Mr.
Zuckerman and the owner of the site, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, blaming each other for the debacle.


Stu Jackson in N.B.A.
STU JACKSON left the Wisconsin basketball program yesterday to take a front-office job as general manager and vice president of basketball operations with the Vancouver expansion team, which begins play in the National Basketball Association in the 1995-96 season.
Assistant Coach STAN VAN GUNDY was promoted to succeed Jackson at Wisconsin. (AP)


Taking Paper Losses
To the Editor:
Re "A Good Time to Turn Paper Losses Into Tax Benefits" (Your Money, July 9): Readers who follow your advice risk being denied their loss.
If you can sell shares of stock on a mutual fund at a loss you cannot claim the loss if you bought shares of the same stock or the same fund within 30 days before or after the sale.
See Internal Revenue Code, section 1091(a).
STEVEN BERKOWITZ  New York, July 13, 1994


Today's Germans Atone for the Holocaust; Sending Troops Abroad
To the Editor:
A largely overlooked event facilitated last year's deployment of German peacekeeping troops to Somalia, which triggered the legal challenge of the Social Democrats and the Federal Constitutional Court's July 12 interpretation of Germany's ability to send troops overseas (front page, July 13).


Sports of The Times; At Home, At Peace, At Shea
DARRYL STRAWBERRY, for reasons of his continuing recovery from substance abuse and just plain sanity, only wants to talk about baseball these days.
Baseball, scrubbed down and swept clean of all extra baggage, like Strawberry's recent bout with substance abuse, his rejection at the hands of the Los Angeles Dodgers, his spiritual rebirth with the San Francisco Giants.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
No Lack of Enjoyment, Or People, at Mostly Mozart  Avery Fisher Hall
If the Mostly Mozart Festival is indeed fading, one would never know it from the robust crowd, happy and attentive, that heard the Tokyo Quartet and two guests play Mozart, Beethoven and Brahms on Thursday.
In format and content, this was not the most glamorous and digestible of programs; yet people -- lots of people -- loved it.
In the end, people speak loudest.


Protest at Yankee Stadium
Eager to make a public protest over comments attributed to a Yankee vice president, Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Coalition announced yesterday that it would picket Yankee Stadium today and tomorrow, even though the Yankees will be playing in California.
"The stadium may be empty on the inside, but there will be a crowd outside," said Linda Brown, the coalition's spokeswoman.
"The Yankee management will get the message."


Fed Nominee Gives Views on Rates
Janet L. Yellen, President Clinton's nominee to the Federal Reserve Board, dispelled some of the mystery surrounding her views on interest-rate policy today but did not take a clear position on whether she would support further increases in interest rates this year.
The views that Ms.
Yellen sketched out at her confirmation hearing before the Senate Banking Committee today suggested that she might be slightly less willing than her future colleagues to raise rates to curb inflation, but would still fall within the mainstream at the central bank.


Engine Inventor Accused of Fraud
To the self-chilling beverage can and the speed-boosting horseshoe the Federal Government would now add the Coates Rotary Valve Cylinder Engine, developed and promoted in the last four years by George J. Coates, a New Jersey inventor.
Like the beverage can that can't, and the speedy horseshoe that wasn't -- both features of earlier unrelated schemes that cost public investors dearly -- the Coates engine is now described by securities regulators as a device chiefly useful for generating cash for its inventor.


E. Coli Bacteria Sicken Five More in New Jersey
Five more people in New Jersey were reported ill yesterday from a dangerous strain of E. coli bacteria, usually found in tainted hamburger meat, bringing the total number of cases this week to 12.
One of the new victims is a 21-month-old infant who is in intensive care, a state health official said.


A Promoter Of Wrestling Is Acquitted
Vincent K. McMahon, who brought professional wrestling into the entertainment mainstream, was acquitted today by a jury in Federal District Court here of charges that he conspired to distribute steroids to his wrestlers.
The verdict produced hugs and tears among the 48-year-old Mr.
McMahon, his wife, Linda, and his lawyers and cheers from wrestling fans who have faithfully attended the 18-day trial.


Kidder's No. 2 Executive Quits
Edward A. Cerullo, the powerful No. 2 executive at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, yesterday became the latest person to be brought down by the $350 million trading scandal that has engulfed the brokerage firm since April.
Mr.
Cerullo, who is 44, resigned in advance of the release of an internal investigation that is expected to blame him and other Kidder officials for failing to provide proper supervision of Joseph Jett, the former head of the firm's government-bond trading desk, who was accused of creating hundreds of millions of dollars in phony profits.


2d-Quarter Profit Down 28% at Bankers Trust
Tough trading conditions and a drop in customer demand for derivative securities and risk-management services contributed to a 28 percent drop in second-quarter profits at the Bankers Trust New York Corporation.
Bankers Trust, the nation's seventh-largest banking company, said yesterday that it earned $181 million, or $2.09 a share, in the quarter, down from $251 million, or $2.90 a share, a year earlier.


2 Universities to Pay U.S. $1.6 Million in Research Fraud Case
Two universities have agreed to pay the Federal Government $1.6 million to settle charges that they helped cover up scientific misconduct by a faculty member, the Justice Department said today.
The department said that it was the first time that an 1863 law, the False Claims Act, had been used to recover money in a case of research misconduct, but that more cases against universities may be pursued under the act.


Mollen Commission Ends, but Life Goes on for Staff
For two years, the Mollen Commission staff investigated the darkest secrets of the New York City Police Department.
Yesterday, while listening to Beatles tapes, the staff packed corruption files into cardboard boxes and took down photographs of Babe Ruth and Joe DiMaggio.
The last day of the panel's existence was a time for some to worry about finding a new job.
Others were in a playful mood, laughing about all the prank calls they received and the "disinformation map" they put on the wall to fool internal police investigators who used to come by to find out what the panel was investigating.


Rangers and Blues Open Talks on Keenan
The Rangers and the St.
Louis Blues have opened talks to settle their differences over compensation for the Blues' signing of Coach Mike Keenan, according to a hockey executive familiar with the discussions.
The talks come even as Commissioner Gary Bettman is reviewing documents from the dispute in advance of a hearing he has scheduled Monday in Manhattan.
The Rangers say Keenan violated his five-year contract with them when he walked out on July 15.
Keenan has charged that the Rangers breached his agreement by not paying a $620,000 bonus check by July 14.
Keenan then quickly signed with St.
Louis for five years last Sunday.


Coleman Decision Near
The police in Detroit said they would decide on Monday whether to file charges against Nets forward DERRICK COLEMAN, who has been accused of raping a 22-year old woman at a hotel last week.
Deputy Chief BENNY NAPOLEON said he would make a review this weekend of evidence in the case, including forensic reports on blood samples taken from Coleman and on semen found on the woman's dress.


Heath Care Developments
YESTERDAY  Democratic leaders continued work on legislation that can satisfy President Clinton's health care goals and still command a majority in Congress.
CONGRESS  President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, have urged the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, to stand firm for the idea of health insurance for all Americans, largely financed by employer payments, rather than make concessions before debate begins, two prominent Democrats said.
They said the Clintons were encouraged to think he would.
Democratic leaders say they have a chance to pass such legislation in the House -- as long as their supporters believe the effort is being pressed in the Senate as well.
THE WHITE HOUSE  Mrs.
Clinton went to Portland, Ore., to kick off a cross-country bus trip organized by supporters of national health insurance.
"If we do not guarantee health insurance to all Americans, then we have failed all Americans," she told passengers.
LOBBYISTS  Allan S. Huston, the president of Pizza Hut, told the Senate Labor Committee that requiring employers to pay for workers' health insurance would mean lost jobs, lower wages and closed businesses.
He conceded that the company offers health benefits to workers in several foreign countries but said the company was able to expand its business faster without them.
But Senator Edward M. Kennedy, the Massachusetts Democrat who heads the committee, told Mr.
Huston, "You think you ought to get a free ride in the United States of America."


Prudential Is Pressed On Refunds
Certain purchasers of limited partnerships from Prudential Securities may get a second chance to get their money back, even though they waived their right to seek compensation for losses resulting from fraud.
The administrator of the compensation fund that was established for investors in Prudential partnerships is opposing the firm's efforts not to pay claims of some investors who had signed forms releasing the firm from liability, according to the fund's most recent quarterly report.


'Absolutely' Not Guilty, A Confident Simpson Says
His voice forceful and animated, his shoulders squared as he faced the bench, O. J. Simpson pleaded "absolutely, 100 percent not guilty" when formally arraigned today in Superior Court on twin charges of first-degree murder.
The arraignment, the point at which the accused in a case officially responds to charges, was the last major judicial step before Mr.
Simpson goes to trial in the June 12 killings of his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend Ronald L. Goldman.


Families Grasp for Answers As Army Murder Trial Ends
The private pain of two families spilled into public today when relatives of an Army officer slain here last year and the wife of a sergeant found guilty of murdering her told a military court how their lives had been shattered by the killing.
"We have no more Christmas," said Emily Bryant, the mother of Lisa N. Bryant, a 21-year-old second lieutenant who was shot to death the night of July 10, 1993.
"I will be unable to hold those babies I promised to take care of. But I am thankful that I had her for 21 years."


In Performance; POP: NEW MUSIC SEMINAR
Japanese Borrow From Around the World  Irving Plaza
During Psycho Night, the New Music Seminar's third annual evening of Japanese pop and rock music, which took place on Wednesday, bands borrowed pop idioms from everywhere except Japan.
Gontiti, S.O.B. and the Blue Hearts were cultural sponges, soaking up Brazilian bossa nova, British hard core and American rockabilly.
The music was not always original, but the perspective was.


Simms Fades Back and Throws Barbs at Tagliabue
Perhaps the strongest aspect of Phil Simms's character when he was a player was his honesty.
He always said what he thought and was highly respected for that.
And in forced retirement, that hasn't changed.
Simms, responding to remarks by the National Football League's commissioner, Paul Tagliabue, in which he suggested the salary cap had little to do with Simms being released by the Giants, today lashed back at the commissioner, saying he "has no idea what the hell he's talking about."


In Performance; POP: NEW MUSIC SEMINAR
British Alternative Rock Leans Back to the 60's  Wetlands
In England, alternative rock evolves more rapidly than it does in the United States.
This is mainly because of the influential weekly music magazines there, which tend to blitzkrieg young bands with glowing articles for a few months or a year and then discard or denigrate them.
In recent summers, the British rock exports of choice have been either bands with buzzing, droning, noisy guitars and timid singing, or groups that combine rock riffs, rave-music dance beats and maracas and tambourines.
This year, the music is a combination of the above.
It merges buzzing guitars and rave beats, but it also reaches back to the 1960's to add a little soul to its sound.


Kidder's No. 2 Executive Quits
Edward A. Cerullo, the powerful No. 2 executive at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, yesterday became the latest person to be brought down by the $350 million trading scandal that has engulfed the brokerage firm since April.
Mr.
Cerullo, who is 44, resigned in advance of the release of an internal investigation that is expected to blame him and other Kidder officials for failing to provide proper supervision of Joseph Jett, the former head of the firm's government-bond trading desk, who was accused of creating hundreds of millions of dollars in phony profits.


Corrections
An article on July 15 about lawsuits concerning sexual harassment in schools misidentified a San Francisco lawyer handling one case.
She is Maria Blanco, not Mary Blanco.


Boutros-Ghali Makes Plea for Aid to Refugees
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali delivered an emotional appeal today, calling on people around the world to give help to the hundreds of thousands of Rwandan refugees who are hungry and sick in camps along the border and within the war-torn country.
"This disaster, which is unfolding before our eyes, is our collective responsibility," Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said in an address to representatives of about 150 nations gathered here.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Claimed Bob Melvin, catcher, off waivers from the New York Yankees.
Transferred Andy Allanson, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list to the emergency 60-day disabled list.


Public &amp; Private; The Numbness Factor
In the instant city of displacement and death that has sprung up almost overnight in Goma, Zaire, there are now more Rwandan refugees than there are people living in Detroit.
This statistical comparison is an old journalistic trick to make the unimaginable comprehensible, to make the other side of the world seem like the town next door.


Will New York Accept Its Personal Credit Card?
It sounds like a David Letterman routine: New York, New York, the city that was tottering on the brink of bankruptcy 20 years ago, is considering creating its own credit card.
But Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he had instructed city officials to look into the possibility of entering a partnership with a bank or credit-card company to offer a New York City card -- with some of the proceeds from sales going to the city treasury.


PRESIDENT ORDERS PENTAGON ACTION TO AID RWANDANS
President Clinton ordered the Pentagon today to mount an enormous, urgent airlift to funnel relief supplies from around the world into Africa in an attempt to control the catastrophe facing more than a million Rwandan refugees now in Zaire.
The American relief mission, which White House officials said was designed to mobilize a worldwide effort, was described by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, as "a race against time." But with every minute tolling another death at the cholera-stricken camps in Zaire, officials said it would take several days to mobilize the airlift fully.


When Folk Idioms Are Retrieved, Studied And Made Modern
Since 1984, the American Dance Festival has invited 16 or more foreign choreographers to work and study each summer at its annual session on the Duke University campus here.
The program has been so successful that selected alumni have recently been invited back and commissioned to do new works.
Achmad Fauzi from Indonesia, Pewan Chow from Hong Kong and Monica Runde from Spain presented premieres on Wednesday night, and for all their geographic differences, the choreographers worked in surprisingly similar ways.
The quality of movement may have varied (Mr. Fauzi's springboard was a Javanese dance idiom), but in each case, a strong formal structure was used to dramatic purpose.
The results were polished if less than profound.


Hot Town, Summer in the City, Still Looking for a Shadow; Din Over Kennedy
To the Editor:
There is another aspect to the deal to build a new terminal at New York's Kennedy International Airport besides making it a showpiece for overseas travelers (news article, July 14).
Most of these overseas flights travel over dense residential areas, and during the summer it is not unusual for traffic to continue through the night, regardless of local noise-abatement ordinances.
An environmental impact study should address how Kennedy will handle 2.5 million more passengers without further deteriorating the quality of life for those in its takeoff-arrival patterns.
ROBERT O'GORMAN  Floral Park, L.I., July 15, 1994


Dispute at Sikh Temple Results in Five Arrests


Costly Errors Lurk in Some Mortgages
A small mistake on a mortgage statement can add up to thousands of dollars over the years.
Just ask Larry D. Powers, president of Consumer Loan Advocates, a nonprofit mortgage auditing firm in Lake Bluff, Ill.
"We have found that 18 percent of all loans in error have errors in excess of $5,000," he said.
"We've had one for $32,000 and another for $22,000."


Thrilling, Dangerous: Betting on Currencies
YOU finish the newspapers, heave a sigh and call your broker.
"The yen's done rising," you say.
"It's the dollar's day now. Let's take a shot." You lean back, confident you've parsed the currency news as deftly as the billionaire financier George Soros . . .
It's a nice daydream -- but keep it that way, warned Maria Scott of the American Association of Individual Investors.
Despite the yen's enticing recent rise, currency plays are too risky and complex for nearly everyone, "even for economists."


Robert Rodriguez, 43, Politician And Affirmative-Action Official
Robert Rodriguez, a leader of New York's Hispanic community and former New York City Councilman from East Harlem-South Bronx, died on Sunday at the apartment of a friend in Albany.
Mr.
Rodriguez was 43.
The cause was a heart attack, the Albany County Coroner's office said.
Mr.
Rodriguez, who had been working for the State Department of Civil Service in Albany, was using the apartment of the friend, State Assemblyman Angelo Del Toro, a Democrat of Manhattan, while Mr.
Del Toro was in New York City during the legislative recess.


Saratoga Opening Day Not Sweet for Favorites
They opened the 126th season of racing at old Saratoga today, and the legendary graveyard of favorites buried two more perfect records: De Niro, the 2-year-old colt being touted for next year's Kentucky Derby, and Unacceptable, the prize 2-year-old filly, are no longer undefeated.
Maybe it was the mud, or the tight turns, or the curse of Saratoga, where even Secretariat was outrun and where Man o 'War lost for the only time in his career.
Whatever it was, it immediately bushwhacked the two prize pupils in the juvenile class of 1994 before a crowd of 20,820 watching the start of the five and a half weeks of racing in the countryside.


METRO DIGEST
TAKEOVER OF NEWARK SCHOOLS READIED
The New Jersey Education Department said that it was prepared to take control of Newark's troubled schools.
It issued a damning report that portrayed a district where officials sit aloof in comfortable offices while students struggle through badly taught classes in filthy buildings and ultimately fail in great numbers.
Page 1.
Whatever the problems in the Newark schools, lack of money isn't one.
News analysis, page 24.


Rwanda Relief Agencies
American Red Cross, Rwanda Relief, P.O.
Box 37243, Washington, D.C. 20013; (800) 842-2200.
AmeriCares, Rwanda Relief, 161 Cherry St., New Canaan, Conn. 06840; (800) 486-HELP.


Protest at Yankee Stadium
Eager to make a public protest over comments attributed to a Yankee vice president, Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Coalition announced yesterday that it would picket Yankee Stadium today and tomorrow, even though the Yankees will be playing in California.
"The stadium may be empty on the inside, but there will be a crowd outside," said Linda Brown, the coalition's spokeswoman.
"The Yankee management will get the message."


Beliefs
The debate about the religious right has taken a turn from the political to the personal.
"Dear Abe," Pat Robertson recently wrote Abraham H. Foxman, director of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, which in June had issued a 193-page report condemning the religious right, "it is painfully obvious that you are a deeply troubled individual who has somewhere along the way lost your Judaic roots only to seek in radical secularism what only God can give you. Please know, Abe, that I will pray earnestly that you may indeed meet personally the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob."


Ringling Circus Expanding Its Territory
And now, ladies and gentlemen and children of all ages, America's newest international export: the circus.
The Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus announced yesterday that for the first time it would create two circus units to tour South America and Asia.
It is also reshuffling its management team for this entry into international markets, the largest expansion in the company's history.
Traditionally, other countries have exported circuses to the United States.
"But we have one of the greatest brand names in the world, and we want to take that identity globally," Kenneth Feld, the circus's 45-year-old president and chief executive, said in an interview.


Hartford's Board of Education Approves a Privatization Plan
The Board of Education voted tonight to begin contract negotiations with a for-profit company, Education Alternatives Inc., to help the board manage the city's 32 public schools.
Under the board's guidelines for the negotiations, Education Alternatives would manage the physical aspects of the system, from maintenance to supplies to transportation and security.


Prudential Is Pressed On Refunds
Certain purchasers of limited partnerships from Prudential Securities may get a second chance to get their money back, even though they waived their right to seek compensation for losses resulting from fraud.
The administrator of the compensation fund that was established for investors in Prudential partnerships is opposing the firm's efforts not to pay claims of some investors who had signed forms releasing the firm from liability, according to the fund's most recent quarterly report.


SOUTHWESTERN BELL CORP. (SBC,N)
The Southwestern Bell Corporation said yesterday that second-quarter operating earnings rose 14.1 percent on strong results in its cellular and international businesses.
The regional telephone company, which is based in San Antonio, said it earned $385.5 million, compared with $338 million from operations in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Last year's second-quarter net results included a $43 million charge to refinance long-term debt, reducing net income to $294.4 million, so net income in this year's quarter was up 30.9 percent.


Where Money Is Not Issue but Administration Is Seen as a Problem
Whatever the problems in the Newark school system, a simple lack of money isn't one of them.
In fact, the district that Education Commissioner Leo F. Klagholz moved today to assume control of spends as much per pupil as a Princeton or Glen Ridge.


Easing a Hospital's Suburban Trek; St. Joseph's Uses Computers to Expand Into Land of Malls
Beyond a message on the glowing desktop computer screens, there are few clues that the clean and quiet fourth-floor offices of the Medical Center at Willowbrook here are connected by an eight-mile-long umbilicus to St.
Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center in grim and gritty downtown Paterson.
Willowbrook is in mall country, named in fact for the giant mall one block away, a land of squat glass office towers, wide boulevards and parking lots as big as all outdoors.
Red brick is definitively not the building material of choice.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
In Memory of Cage, Conch Calls And Toy-Piano Virtuosity  St. Paul's Chapel
A great unholy din filled St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University on Thursday night, on the occasion of the world premiere of Wendy Mae Chambers's "Twelve  " for 12 percussionists.
This percussion extravaganza was written as a memorial to John Cage, who died on Aug. 12, 1992.
It combined some of the indeterminate techniques of Cage's mature period with the severe rhythmic regularity of his early works.
The result was, oddly enough, fuller and more vigorous than anything in Cage's output: a tribute that momentarily transcended its subject.


Rangers and Blues Open Talks on Keenan
The Rangers and the St.
Louis Blues have opened talks to settle their differences over compensation for the Blues' signing of Coach Mike Keenan, according to a hockey executive familiar with the discussions.
The talks come even as Commissioner Gary Bettman is reviewing documents from the dispute in advance of a hearing he has scheduled Monday in Manhattan.
The Rangers say Keenan violated his five-year contract with them when he walked out on July 15.
Keenan has charged that the Rangers breached his agreement by not paying a $620,000 bonus check by July 14.
Keenan then quickly signed with St.
Louis for five years last Sunday.


STOCK PLUNGES AFTER LOWER INCOME PREDICTION
The share price of the McDonald's Corporation plunged $2 yesterday in heavy trading after some investment analysts predicted lower earnings following the release of the company's second-quarter report on Thursday.
The stock closed at $26.25 on a volume of 5,632,600 shares on the New York Stock Exchange, more than five times the daily average volume.
On Thursday, the shares had fallen 12.5 cents.
McDonald's was lowered from a near-term above-average rating to a near-term neutral rating by Merrill Lynch yesterday, which cited erosion in same-store sales.


Players in N.B.A. Granted an Appeal
The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit yesterday granted the National Basketball Players Association an expedited appeal of a lower court loss to the N.B.A. that kept intact the salary cap, college draft and right of first refusal.
The union argued that a fast hearing was needed because training camps start in early October.
Last month, the N.B.A. sued the union in United States District Court to persuade the court that its labor stalemate was not a court issue.
The union countered by contending that the disputed policies violated antitrust law.


New Jersey Prepares a Takeover Of Newark's Desperate Schools
The New Jersey Education Department said today that it was prepared to take control of Newark's troubled schools.
It issued a damning report that portrays the district as badly mismanaged by officials who sit aloof in comfortable offices while students struggle through badly taught classes in filthy buildings and ultimately fail in great numbers.
Officials of the Newark district, the state's largest, have 20 days to respond to an order from Education Commissioner Leo F. Klagholz that requires them to demonstrate in court why there should be no takeover.
Newark officials vowed again today to resist state control, meaning the long, complicated process of takeover could drag on for another year.


The Pool Is Too Green
The swimming competition at the Goodwill Games in St.
Petersburg, Russia, has been postponed because the pool was filled with greenish water.
The 16-day event begins today and swimming was to have been the day's showcase event, featuring a 50-meter showdown between the world record holder TOM JAGER and the Olympic champion, ALEKSANDR POPOV.
All events will be held tomorrow.
The water at the pool went from brownish-black Thursday to a swamp-like green yesterday.
Swimming officials said the problem was in the pool's filtration system. (AP)


Today's Germans Atone for the Holocaust
To the Editor:
In 1935, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, a young Lutheran pastor who would eventually be murdered just weeks before the total defeat of the Nazis in the aftermath of the attempt on Hitler's life on July 20, 1944, told his students in the subversive seminary of the Confessing Church that "only those who cry out for the Jews may also sing Gregorian chant."


Lightning and Rain Can't Slow Alfredsson
Even as lightning and rain swept across the Indianwood Golf and Country Club today, delaying play in the second round of the United States Women's Open for more than two hours, Helen Alfredsson continued to roll like thunder across the old course.
Alfredsson shot a round of 69 for a four-stroke lead over the rest of the field and a halfway total of 10-under-par 132.
That established a new 36-hole scoring record for the open, breaking the record Patty Sheehan set in 1990 at Atlanta Athletic Club, and it clearly installed Alfredsson as the player to beat this weekend.
With 15 competitors stranded on the golf course by darkness, Alfredsson's nearest pursuer is Laura Davies, who shot her second straight 68 and finished at six under par.
Michelle Estill (68) and Sheehan (71) both finished at five under par.


Dorothy Collins, 67, Singer Known for 'Your Hit Parade'
Dorothy Collins, a singing star of the popular 1950's television show "Your Hit Parade" and a Tony nominee for the Broadway show "Follies" in 1971, died on Thursday at her home in Watervliet, N.Y.
She was 67.
The cause was heart failure, said her daughter, Melissa Holgate.


Fine Hand for Stripping and Refinishing
WOODWORK can go bad, even if dutifully cared for.
Rehabilitating it is rather like refinishing furniture, but on a grander scale.
Stripping old finish and applying a new one are not always necessary.
Washing may be sufficient.
If the house is an antique, stripping may not be desirable.
Have a restoration expert examine antique woodwork before starting rehabilitation.


Warren Shaffer Studio Rachel L. Rashes and Iain M. Brown
Rachel Lynn Rashes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan M. Rashes of Jamaica Estates, Queens, is to be married today in Lake Bomoseen, Vt., to Dr.
Iain Michael Brown, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Brown of Manchester, England.
Rabbi Solomon D. Goldberg, who officiated at the wedding of the bride's parents 28 years ago, is to perform the ceremony at the home of Dorothy Rosen, the bride's maternal grandmother.
The bride, 24, graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in clinical psychology from the University of Manchester.
She is a clinical psychologist for the Mancunian Community Health N.H.S.
Trust, a clinic in Manchester.
Her father is a partner in Salon, Marrow &amp; Dyckman, a New York law firm.
Her mother, Elaine Rashes, is a supervisor of special-education classes in public schools in Woodhaven, Rockaway and South Ozone Park, Queens.


Working Conditions and Repetitive Strain Disorders
To the Editor:
Regarding repetitive strain disorders, Robert J. Ullinger asked, "Whatever happened to the good old days when doctors . . . determined the nature and the parameters of physical conditions?" (Letters, June 26).
Perhaps we can get a clue from the arrogant attitude of Dr.
Ronald C. Bingham, writing in the same issue.
As one who suffers from such a condition -- which makes almost any use of my hands painful, from opening a door to buttoning a shirt -- I am shocked by his presumptuous dismissal of this class of disorders as "generally fall(ing) at the minor end of the disease severity spectrum."


A $326 Million Private Toll Road to Spur Growth
THE first private toll road to be built in Virginia in over 130 years is on budget and ahead of schedule, much to the delight of Northern Virginia land owners who expect the road to bring growth through an empty portion of Loudoun County.
The $326 million toll road is called the Dulles Greenway, a 14-mile highway from Leesburg, about 35 miles northwest of the Washington Monument, to Dulles International Airport, where it links with the existing state-owned Dulles Toll Road.
Leesburg is the county seat of Loudoun County, whose population stood at 57,400 in the 1980 census, shot up to 86,100 in 1990 and continued its climb to an estimated 102,100 in April.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  CHOLERA TOLL RISES IN ZAIRE  Cholera struck another camp for Rwandan refugees in eastern Zaire.
At least 7,000 refugees have died in recent days, and doctors say the epidemic may be even more deadly than they had feared.  1  As loved ones die, Rwandans reproach themselves for coming.  10


Data Bank/July 24, 1994
Data Bank/July 24, 1994
Housing Starts
June
May
April
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,351
1,497
1,471
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$56.3
$56.2
$58.3
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$65.5
$64.6
$65.8
Weekly Jobless Claims
July 15
July 8
July 1
In thousands
392
365
344
Steel Production
Thousands of tons, weekly total
1,874
1,892
1,914
Coal Production
Thousands of tons, weekly total
17,546
14,660
18,630
3-Month Treasury Bills
July 22
July 15
July 8
Rate in percent
4.36
4.25
4.35
6-Month Tresury Bills
Rate in percent
4.76
4.68
4.81


Ship Passenger's Death May Have Been From Legionnaire's Disease


Happy End To a Battle Over Housing
The years-long struggle pitting developers against preservationists over the fate of the City and Suburban housing complex has produced an unplanned dividend.
Nearly 700 newly renovated apartments in the landmark buildings -- many with river views -- are coming on the market at modest prices in a neighborhood that has long been short on just that commodity.
The 14 buildings in the complex, bounded by York Avenue, the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive and 78th and 79th Streets, have six floors; all but one are walk-ups.
Most of the studios are renting for $550 to $750 a month, with one-bedroom apartments for $775 to $1,000, including utilities; all are rent controlled or stabilized.
With comparable apartments nearby bringing up to $200 more, tenant advocates have welcomed the renovations and new neighbors.


A Stylish Newcomer in Montauk
NOT long ago, Montauk meant fishermen's hangouts, pizza parlors, fried fish, all-you-can-eat breakfast buffets, lobster on the dock and rustic watering holes.
But now a new wave of restaurants, epitomized by the recently opened Caswell's, is washing over Montauk.
The stylish newcomer on the site of the former Montauk Clam House looks like a transplant from East Hampton, with its sponge-painted walls, sleek granite bar, airy beauty and French doors' opening out to a brick patio and ocean views.
Tables are topped with shining silver, fancy-folded napkins and a single rosebud.


Ms. Van Nostrand And Mr. Rice
Molly Van Nostrand, a daughter of Yvonne and Kingdon Van Nostrand of Bay Shore, L.I., was married on Friday to Carl Demarest Rice, a son of Mary B. Rice-Whittemore of Castine, Me., and Dr.
Charles B. Rice of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Charles Lennon performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bay Shore.
Mrs.
Rice, 29, graduated from the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill and is studying for a master's degree in speech and language pathology at New York University.
She is a former professional tennis player who was a quarterfinalist at the All-England Tennis Championships at Wimbledon in 1985, 1986 and 1987.
Her parents are tennis instructors at the Eastern Athletic Clubs in Melville, L.I.
Mr.
Van Nostrand is the world champion in the 60 and over division.


War Fever Over Haiti
President Clinton, feeling less pressure from refugees and sensing opposition at home, is having second thoughts about the urgency of invading Haiti.
First, he wants a new, Desert Storm-style United Nations resolution that he hopes can persuade Gen.
Raoul Cedras and his cronies to leave on their own.
Yet the U.N. strategy, which would authorize member countries to use "all necessary means" to restore President Aristide to power and disarm his opponents, also relies on the logic of a military solution.
Meanwhile, U.S. forces conspicuously practice invasion preparations off the Haitian coast and White House and State Department aides pepper the airwaves with pointed warnings.
Federal prosecutors investigate drug charges against Haitian military leaders in ways that are certain to recall the indictment of Manuel Noriega that became a key justification for the 1989 invasion of Panama.


DPL Inc.(DPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Streetscapes/409 Edgecombe Avenue; An Address That Drew the City's Black Elite
THE 1917 apartment house at 409 Edgecombe Avenue, just south of 155th Street, is 13 stories tall, unusual in a sea of more modest buildings half its height.
It was designated as a city landmark a year ago because from the 30's to the 50's it was the address of choice for some of New York City's black elite.
After a generation of decline, it is now near a city-sponsored co-op conversion.


The Heart Of the Zulu Kingdom
THE battlefield of Isandlwana has not changed much since the day in 1879 when the British redcoats suffered one of the most humiliating defeats of their imperial history.
Seated on the crag the Zulus named Isandlwana -- meaning "like a little house," although most visitors agree it looks more like a sphinx -- you look down upon a wide, golden plain that rolls away into the heart of the Zulu kingdom.
Except for a narrow road and a telephone line, there are few modern distractions from the tale of battle David Rattray is narrating for a spellbound audience.
There seems to be nothing Mr.
Rattray does not know about the celestial swath of land that the Europeans called Natal, the Zulus called KwaZulu, and the all-accommodating new Government calls KwaZulu/Natal.
He knows the bugs and bushes, the geology and the weather patterns, the language and the lore, but best of all he knows the history of battles.
Many of the major battles of frontier South Africa, battles that still echo in contemporary politics, transpired within a few hours' drive of Fugitives' Drift Lodge, the comfortable guest house Mr.
Rattray built on his father's farm.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 24, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
2
5
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
3
23
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A small boy learns a deadly secret.
4
6
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
5
9
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer pursues his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
6
5
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $6.50.) A model young woman is abducted.
7
4
HONOR AMONG THIEVES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Saddam Hussein plots to steal the Declaration of Independence.
8
5
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers and dope smugglers.
9
14
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
10
3
STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Warner, $6.50.) The problems of a Florida Congressman.
11*
1
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
12
102
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
13
10
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A former naval officer versus a woman who heads a terrorist conspiracy.
14
4
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Bantam, $6.50.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
15
6
DARK APPRENTICE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) A "Star Wars" novel.
16*
1
A SIMPLE PLAN, by Scott Smith. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Madness besets a man who plans to pocket a fortune on which he stumbled.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
28
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
559
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
10
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) Mood-changing medications.
4
12
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
5
75
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
6*
28
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
7*
11
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A young woman's mental illness.
8*
1
O.J.
SIMPSON: American Hero, American Tragedy, by Marc Cerasini. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) The life of the legendary football player who has been accused of murder.
9*
9
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
10
1
A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.) Encounters with celestial beings as recorded by people in the present and in the past.
11*
2
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
12
8
FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated in Vietnam.
13
6
THE LONGEST DAY, by Cornelius Ryan. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $11.) The Allied assault on Normandy, June 6, 1944.
14*
145
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
15*
38
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
16*
14
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
175
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
8
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
3
37
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
4
181
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 9, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Giant Play: Baseball Fights AIDS
The boldest, the most progressive and important play of the baseball season is this: The San Francisco Giants have become the first major professional sports organization to identify itself with the battle against AIDS.
"It doesn't feel bold," said Manager Dusty Baker.
"It feels like reality. Baseball is no utopia isle of perfection. It's not separate from society, man. We are real people with the same problems, hurts and fears as anyone else."


American Home Products (AHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SURFACING
ACCESSORIES  Packing light: Bolstered by the chic cachet of the Prada backpack, mini-backpacks of all sorts, often no bigger than handbags, have become a summer rage. (Bill Cunningham/The New York Times)


Rare Terns Flourishing On Tiny Isle
THE world's largest breeding colony of endangered and threatened sea birds may be headed for its most productive season ever.
At the colony, on Great Gull Island, 17 miles northeast of Montauk Point, 60 temporary human residents -- ornithologists and volunteers -- have this year counted 12,000 chicks hatched by 7,500 pairs of common terns and 1,500 pairs of roseate terns.


'Into a Dry Martini'
To the Editor:
Regarding the origin of the line "Why don't you get out of those wet clothes and into a dry martini?", discussed by Sander Vanocur in "Benchley's Martini" (letter, July 12), here is what I learned while researching "The Movie Dialogue Quiz Book":


Florida Progress (FPC,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Flavor and Drama of Whole Roasted Fish
FISH for dinner usually means fillets or steaks in the saute pan or, in summer, on the grill.
Americans, it is often said, have an aversion to whole fish.
All those bones.
But when it comes to flavor, nothing compares to cooking fish on the bone.
Many kinds of fish, like smelts, baby bluefish or butterfish, are too small to bother boning.
Tiny whitebait are traditionally floured, deep-fried and eaten intact -- head, bones and all.
And to serve to a party of six or more, a whole fish is not only delicious, it is dramatic to serve.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $400,000
40 West 24th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,900-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, eat-in kitchen, high ceilings, renovated kitchen and bath; maintenance $960, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $425,000, 38 weeks on market (Brokers: Bascom &amp; Sears; Douglas Elliman)


Jennifer C. Rader, Dwight L. Dennis
Jennifer Caroline Rader, a daughter of William Donald Rader of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Joan Sperry Rader, was married yesterday to Dwight Lee Dennis, a foster son of Sandra and Dr.
Samuel S. Smith of Springfield, Ohio.
The Rev.
Richard H. Stearns performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Dennis, 24, is to begin teaching special education at the Elmwood Alternative Center in Springfield in the fall.
She graduated from Wittenberg University.
Her father owns William D. Rader &amp; Associates, a marketing company in Greenwich.
Her mother was a chairwoman of the Republican Party in Connecticut.


Co-ops Anxiously Await Bribery Details
MARTIN KARP is baffled.
He doesn't know if his co-op was a victim in the wide-ranging scandal involving scores of apartment managers and superintendents, who allegedly received millions of dollars in kickbacks and bribes from vendors.
His 258-unit co-op, at 250 East 87th Street in Manhattan, has used the Charles H. Greenthal Company as a managing agent for the last two years; the firm has employed two agents who have been indicted; neither, though, worked for his building.


BEST SELLERS: July 24, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
2
2
21
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
3
5
THE CROSSING, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) A young American comes of age traveling with a she-wolf into Mexico's mythic sierra.
4
6
102
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
5
4
15
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
6
5
5
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
7*
1
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A woman tries to cope after an act of violence destroys her perfect family life.
8
7
13
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
9
8
4
THE WATERWORKS, by E.L.
Doctorow. (Random House, $23.) Life in the New York City of 1871 as witnessed by a jaded newspaperman.
10
9
11
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Peruvian Andes.
11
10
3
DOWNTOWN, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $24.) A woman learns about life and the ways of men in Atlanta during the 1960's.
12
12
11
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A young doctor stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
13
1
THE HOMING, by John Saul. (Fawcett, $21.50.) The daughters of a young widow, who is returning to her hometown to remarry, are stalked by an evil force.
14
11
140
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
15
13
5
Q-SQUARED, by Peter David. (Pocket, $22.) All creation is at stake when an old enemy asks for help from "Star Trek"'s Captain Picard.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the White House during the first year of the Clinton Administration.
2
2
63
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
3
31
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
4
5
20
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
5
4
7
D-DAY, JUNE 6, 1944, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) An account of the Allied invasion of Normandy 50 years ago.
6
6
10
STANDING FIRM, by Dan Quayle. (HarperCollins/Zondervan, $25.) The former Vice President recalls his life, especially during the Bush years.
7
9
6
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
8
10
12
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the country singer.
9
13
2
MOON SHOT, by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton with Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict. (Turner, $21.95.) How Americans reached the moon in July 1969.
10
11
28
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
11
7
5
ALL MY OCTOBERS, by Mickey Mantle with Mickey Herskowitz. (HarperCollins, $23.) The legendary Yankee recalls the 12 World Series in which he played.
12
8
4
DAVE BARRY IS NOT MAKING THIS UP, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $20.) A collection of humor pieces by the Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist.
13
14
14
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
14
95
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
15
14
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
13
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
61
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
13
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of designs.
4
4
27
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 9, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BIRD ARTIST, by Howard Norman. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) An adulterous affair and a murder propel this tragic novel of a hamlet in Newfoundland, where everybody knows everybody and the weather is unspeakable.
CALLED OUT, by A.G.
Mojtabai. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) An abstract, intelligent novel, ostensibly about a jet crash in a small town, that renders the reactions of the witnesses to a random disaster in beautiful, somber prose.
LAST GO ROUND, by Ken Kesey with Ken Babbs. (Viking, $21.95.) It's circa 1911 in this ructious neo-dime western, a novel that dares to be as phony as the real thing, its prairie-flat characters ornamented with episodic plot, inflated atmosphere and impossible prowess.
A MAN ON THE MOON: The Voyages of the Apollo Astronauts, by Andrew Chaikin. (Viking, $27.95.) The 25th anniversary of the Apollo 11 landing is marked by this detailed and candid account of man's race to the moon, an event now enshrined in contemporary American mythology. 9 HIGHLAND ROAD, by Michael Winerip. (Pantheon, $25.) An unobtrusive, nonjudgmental illumination of two years in the lives of the mentally ill in a group home on Long Island, by a reporter for The New York Times.
ROOMMATES: My Grandfather's Story, by Max Apple. (Warner, $19.95.) An enthralling novelistic memoir of the infinitely durable Herman (Rocky) Goodstein, who at 93 accompanied Mr.
Apple to college.
THE SHADOW OF THE PANTHER: Huey Newton and the Price of Black Power in America, by Hugh Pearson. (Addison-Wesley, $24.) A deromanticized portrait of the celebrated Black Panther Party leader, with attention both to his brilliance at organizing and to his reliance on criminal brutality.
THESE SAME LONG BONES, by Gwendolyn M. Parker. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) With an unusual combination of lush metaphor and narrative restraint, this first novel spins a tale of race and power as a black businessman struggles to transcend his daughter's death.
THE WAGES OF GUILT: Memories of War in Germany and Japan, by Ian Buruma. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) An examination, by an impressively informed and empathetic journalist, of the ways in which the cataclysms of our century have shaped national identity.
A WHOLE NEW LIFE, by Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $20.) The record of a distinguished writer, struck with an agonizing and paralyzing cancer at 51, who learned in the hardest possible way who he was and who he had to become.
WOMEN'S WORK.
The First 20,000 Years: Women, Cloth, and Society in Early Times, by Elizabeth Wayland Barber. (Norton, $23.) A fascinating history and prehistory of the making of textiles, a craft, exclusive to women (including queens and goddesses), that preceded and made possible civilization itself.


Lake Powell
To the Editor: Regarding your article on Lake Powell ("Houseboating Through a Realm of Rock," May 22): Sabra Chartrand conceded that current environmental and cultural concerns would "perhaps" prevent the damming of Glen Canyon.
This is an enormous understatement.
Glen Canyon was the largest and most spectacular slickrock canyon system on the Colorado Plateau, a deep, remote, enormous expanse of wilderness.
Now under a thousand feet of water and mud in its main channel, it has been reduced to a boat pond and motor resort (treated, as the author pointed out, with contempt by resort owners who have been tossing boat batteries in its waters for years).
Many of us who know and love the Colorado Plateau's wilderness feel very bitter about the atrocity known as "Lake Foul," and about the damming of a place whose very wildness and remoteness made it politically defenseless back in the early 60's.
To extoll the beauties of the cliffs of Lake Powell without considering what lies underneath the waters, the mud and the engine batteres is akin (using a well-worn analogy) to touring a purposely flooded cathedral and admiring the accessibility of its ceilings.


One Hat Enough for Carroll as He Restyles Jets' Look
There are X's, and there are O's.
And for Pete Carroll, the Jets' rookie head coach, there is more.
When Carroll takes the field today in Hempstead, L.I., for the team's first preseason practice, he will be a coach hoping to be a combination orchestrator, cheerleader and group-therapy guru.


Saluting the Negro Leagues
The annual All-Star Game on July 12 was not the only celebratory event at baseball's midseason break.
On July 16 the main gallery of the new Negro Baseball Museum opened in Kansas City, Mo.
The museum stands just a block from the former Paseo Y.M.C.A. where the Negro National League began in 1920.
Loosely organized in the years after the Civil War, the Negro Leagues had their heyday from 1920 through 1948, before folding around 1960.
At present the museum includes a photo gallery and nostagia wall featuring recreations of league uniforms.


A Tough Client, An Angelic Host And a Simple Soul
Forrest Gump  Tom Hanks, Robin Wright, Sally Field Directed by Robert Zemeckis PG-13 142 minutes


Lawn Care: Keep Those Clippings
THE grass keeps growing.
On goes the mowing.
Those who may have hoped that this weekly ritual would wane this summer, to allow sufficient time for the tennis courts, sailboats and beaches, have learned that lawns will be lawns.
The ritual must go on.
Meanwhile, back at the mowers, things are changing.
Growing numbers of homeowners are learning each year that there is a bright new ethic about lawn care: "Don't Trash Grass."


ABOUT SPAM
So patriotically fired was I by "The United States of Spam" that I went out and bought a can to bring in the glorious Fourth.
I sliced, fried and ate it in less time than it took to consume Judith Stone's 34 questions.
A 35th question: What is the fat content of this tinned icon of American popular gastronomy?
MARTIN W. HUTNER New York, N.Y.


Stopping Drug Dealers' Movable Feast
The Hotel Regina, a dilapidated single-room-occupancy hotel on the corner of 13th Street and Third Avenue, has long attracted its fair share of drug dealers, say neighbors and the police.
But some neighbors say the problem has only worsened since Federal agents took over the Kenmore Hotel, the large S.R.O. at 145 East 23d Street.
On June 8, the Government took control of the Kenmore, which officials called "a virtual supermarket for crack cocaine." All Kenmore residents who could not prove legal occupancy were told to leave.
But they were given lists of other accommodations, including the Regina, at 202 East 13th Street, said Charles Dworkis, who heads East Side Volunteers Against Crack.
He said the Regina was already one of his group's "focal points."


Kendall International (KEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A View From the Rim


At Home in Lithuania
Lithuania for $10 a night?
To earn extra money, a number of residents in the small Baltic nation have gone into the bed-and-breakfast business.
And a new book, "Lithuania Bed &amp; Breakfast," by Genevieve Zalatorius, an American journalist living in Lithuania, lists more than 150 host residences in 23 cities, from metropolitan Vilnius to Anyk sciai, a tiny town in a pine forest.
Prices are $5 to $30 a person a night, including a breakfast that usually consists of eggs, bread and coffee.
Each residence is described in detail, from the number of rooms to the occupations of family members.


Rebellion Of Greens Is Brewing In the West
The politics of environmentalism is once again provoking outrage in the West, where anger among farmers and ranchers crystallized a generation ago in the Sagebrush Rebellion.
But this time it is environmentalists who are rebelling, fielding a third-party slate in New Mexico.


Rush-Hour Recitals for a Chinese Violinist
Chen Chong was a leading violinist in a major symphony orchestra in his native China.
Now he plays in the subways of New York City.
The Cultural Revolution in China under Mao Zedong swept away every expectation to which he clung.
But his devotion to making beautiful music carried him through persecution, delivered him to America and has blossomed nearly two decades later into such a striking, unanticipated flower that beggars empty their tattered cups into his violin case.


DQE (DQE,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


World Bank, At 50, Vows To Do Better
Marking its 50th anniversary, the World Bank vowed this week to be more selective about where it handed out loans and more sensitive to the environmental effects of its projects.
It also promised to put more emphasis on human development programs rather than huge dams and power plants.
At a news conference at the World Bank's headquarters in Washington, the president of the bank, Lewis Preston, issued a "vision" statement detailing where the world's biggest lender intends to go in this new era dominated by free markets.


. . . And Pony Show
ANNA SEWELL'S "BLACK Beauty" -- a Dickensian fable told from a horse's point of view ("Oh, lovely, lovely oats!") -- will reach movie screens for the fifth time on Friday.
The new film version was directed and written by Caroline Thompson, who has written the screenplays for "The Secret Garden" and "Edward Scissorhands," among others.
The book, published in 1877, traces one horse's life from birth in Norfolk, England, to training at a comfortable country stable, to a career at the stable of a wealthy, cruel family, and then to the mean streets of London, where Beauty becomes a dray animal.


War and Peace


Lawn Care: Keep Those Clippings
THE grass keeps growing.
On goes the mowing.
Those who may have hoped that this weekly ritual would wane this summer, to allow sufficient time for the tennis courts, sailboats and beaches, have learned that lawns will be lawns.
The ritual must go on.
Meanwhile, back at the mowers, things are changing.
Growing numbers of homeowners are learning each year that there is a bright new ethic about lawn care: "Don't Trash Grass."


Yankee Official Quits
The New York Yankees' vice president for communications resigned amid an uproar over racial remarks attributed to him in a magazine article.
SportsSunday, Section 8.


IN SHORT: FICTION
A WRITER'S LIFE  THE TALE MAKER  By Mark Harris. Donald I. Fine, $21.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
WASHINGTON HEIGHTS Synagogue's Treasures Find a Safe Harbor
When an artillery shell crashed through the roof of an old synagogue in the Croatian port of Dubrovnik in the beginning of 1992, the congregation knew it was time to find a safe haven for its sacred treasures.


NEW YORK LEADERS FEAR HEALTH BILLS WILL COST BILLIONS
Elected officials, hospital administrators and union leaders in New York are increasingly fearful that health care legislation may cost hospitals in the metropolitan area billions of dollars a year, jeopardizing thousands of jobs in the city's leading industry.
At special risk here and elsewhere are teaching hospitals and those that serve many poor people, because they depend most heavily on Federal payments that would be cut in the bills now before Congress.


Glorious Goodwood
IN 1801, the third Duke of Richmond and Gordon had a very good idea.
He laid out a racecourse on his vast estate in what today is West Sussex, allowing the Sussex Militia to hold its annual race, a tradition that was endangered when the fickle Earl of Egremont, the previous host, unexpectedly withdrew his support.
They came.
They raced.
The Duke was pleased.
The next year he added a small wooden stand for his friends, who watched as the Duke's horse, Cedar, went down to defeat in a race with Trumpator, owned by the Prince of Wales.
A tough loss, but perhaps a shrewd move.


Penny Rothstein, Michael Sherman
Penny Lauren Rothstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley N. Rothstein of Jericho, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Michael Bruce Sherman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Sherman of Hazlet, N.J.
Cantor Marvin Antosofsky officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Sherman, 27, teaches kindergarten at Baylis Elementary School in Syosset, L.I.
She graduated from Hofstra University, from which she also received a master's degree in elementary education.
Her father retired as the chief financial officer at Bestform Foundations, a lingerie manufacturer in Long Island City, Queens.
Her mother retired as a first-grade teacher at Public School 152 in Woodside, Queens.


Rachel S. Shapiro, David B. Axinn
Rachel Sandra Shapiro, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Shapiro of New York, is to be married today to David Bruce Axinn, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Axinn, also of New York.
Rabbi Morton Leifman is to officiate in New York at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America.
The bride, 25, graduated from Wesleyan University and last month received a master's degree in English literature from New York University.
She teaches English at Midwood High School at Brooklyn College, where her father is a science research teacher.
He is also director of the college's Science Talent Entry Program for gifted minority students.
Her mother, Marjorie Shapiro, is a service representative in New York for the New York State Labor Department.


A Night to Link 2 Maritime Cities
The Young Friends of Save Venice meeting at the River Cafe, by the Brooklyn Bridge, July 13.


ABOUT SPAM
You might be pleased to learn that in September 1944, while our ship lay at anchor off Omaha Beach, I caught an octopus (more than three feet wide, spread out) using a hand line, with (what else?) Spam for bait.
HOWARD HOVEY Riverhead, L.I.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Tough City, Gritty Streets, And Rock's Hidden Roots
Did you realize that Elvis Presley recorded "Hound Dog" on 24th Street?
Or that the tenement on Led Zeppelin's "Physical Graffiti" album cover is on St.
Marks Place?


July 17-23: Italian Politics 101; An Ill-Starred Move By the Prime Minister Frees Corruption Suspects
Italy's immensely popular Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, suffered his first major political setback last week when he was forced to withdraw a decree that thwarted prosecutors investigating the country's tangle of political and corporate corruption.
The decree, which changed the rules on preventive detention and released more than 1,100 suspects from jail, brought storms of protest.
It may also have cost Mr.
Berlusconi one-quarter of his popularity, according to his pollster, for making him appear to favor corruption suspects, including his own brother.
At first sight, the big winners seemed to be the anti-corruption magistrates in Milan who have spearheaded the investigations.
Yet in the end, Mr.
Berlusconi's ill-starred decree may only confirm fears that Italy may be sinking back into its accustomed ways.


Levitz Furniture Inc.(LFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Political Notes; Moynihan's Pick for Majority Leader
In the quiet campaign for one of Washington's most visible and thankless jobs -- Senate majority leader -- Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, one of the chamber's most powerful chairmen, has cast his lot with Senator Jim Sasser of Tennessee.
Mr.
Sasser, opposed by Senator Thomas A. Daschle of South Dakota, is generally the choice of the older Democratic members, while Mr.
Daschle tends to run stronger with the young Turks.
Mr.
Moynihan said the 57-year-old Mr.
Sasser's seniority played a role in his choice -- a sensitive one, since Mr.
Daschle is a member of the Finance Committee, which Mr.
Moynihan heads.


Holly Holland, Mitchell Cox
Holly Ann Holland, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John C. Holland of Fairfax Station, Va., was married last evening to Mitchell Morgan Cox, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter R. Cox of Nanuet, N.Y.
The Rev.
Michael Callahan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Cox, 29, is an associate at the Dorsey &amp; Whitney law firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
She and the bridegroom received law degrees from New York University.
Her father is the director of health fitness at the National Defense University in Washington.


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about the Shamrock Stables beneath the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive misidentified Capt.
Josephine Pittari's employer.
She directs the mounted unit for the Parks Department, not the Police Department.


Sun Microsystems Inc.(SUNW,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rain, Rain Won't Go Away During a 7-Hour Mets Day
Sure, you had it all figured out.
You'd go to the Mets' 1:40 P.M. game yesterday, get out sometime between 4 and 5 P.M., go home, collect the missing parties and go out for early dinner.
Wrong.
The start of the Mets' game against the San Francisco Giants was delayed 26 minutes by rain, but that was just a tease.
In the fifth inning, with the Giants leading, 2-1, the rain came again and wouldn't go away.
The game was delayed an hour . . . two . . . three.


Block Off Traffic. Save the Village.
In recent years, the West Village has seen campaigns against brown-bag drinking, public urination, loud radios and a proposed home for former prostitutes, all in the name of protecting the neighborhood's graceful peace and relative safety.
Now some residents are pressuring Federal and state officials to alter the design of the new West Side Highway, to remove access to their neighborhood.
It is called "detachment," not secession, but the mood is not altogether different.


The World; Reason Left In the Dust As Refugees Pick Routes
IN the years of regional turbulence that have followed the cold war, international relief organizations have learned a couple of tragic lessons: unexpected, localized ethnic conflicts can be counted on to create refugee migrations of catastrophic proportions, and there is no way to predict where panicked people will go when the urge to flee overrides reason.
Rwanda has driven these bitter lessons home.
When Hutus fearing retribution for the slaughter of Tutsis began to head into western Rwanda several weeks ago, the staff of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees -- short of money after long crises in Burundi as well as Rwanda -- thought those fleeing would gravitate toward a sanctuary within Rwanda established by French troops south of Lake Kivu.
About 15 aid experts were in position there, anticipating a relief operation that would be run across the Zairian border from the town of Bakavu.


Forced to Go Undercover in the Park


Waikiki Buses Shuttle Guests to Hotels
Visitors to Waikiki can now make the half-hour journey from airport to hotel via Airport Waikiki Express shuttle buses.
Trans Hawaiian Services, a Honolulu-based charter service and package tour company, operates the fleet of minibuses that run between Honolulu International Airport and most Waikiki hotels.
The buses pick up passengers at seven stops throughout the airport.
The pickup points are on the median strip outside terminals, opposite baggage claim areas.
Daily service is provided every 20 to 30 minutes to major Waikiki hotels.
The fare (cash only) is $7 one way and $12 round trip; children 2 to 11 are charged $4 one way and $8 round trip.


Rush Hour
At the intersection of summer and fall, glamour -- big and bright


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: WILLETS POINT Enough Yankees Already. The Mets Have Their Own Plans; Industrial Park To Be Revamped Somewhere Else
Auto shops in buildings made of cinder blocks with plastic roofs perch alongside the dirt road.
The sewers have not drained water in more than a decade, and the dirt road is almost always flooded, forcing drivers to crawl around huge puddles.
Mountains of used tires have formed, overnight and illegally, on street corners.
And amid all this there is the chaos of an unregulated mini-economy.
Equipment spills out of stores onto sidewalks and streets.
Cars swerve to avoid collisions.
A man shows two others how to use a circular saw in the middle of the street.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Halfheartedly Then, Firmly Now: 'Moon Landing Was Worth the Cost"'
This past week marked the silver anniversary of the first human steps on the moon.
To look at the old pictures of people clustered in fromt of televisions or tossing ticker tape onto the heads of the astronaut heros, you might never guess that half of Americans at the time thought that the moon landing wasn't worth the cost.


Record Rainfall Floods Enterprise Zone in Southern China


SPECTATOR SPORT
My fondest memories of R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr. are of my years as a student at Indiana University, in the late 1960's and early 1970's ("Spectator Sport," by Dinitia Smith, July 3).


Allison Gerson, Joseph Milner
Allison Paige Gerson, a daughter of Frances and Elliot Gerson of Philadelphia, is to be married today to Joseph Micah Milner, a son of Edith and Israel Milner of Dresher, Pa.
Rabbi Ira F. Stone is to perform the ceremony at Temple Beth Zion-Beth Israel in Philadelphia.


Lalas Examining His Options in Europe
Defender ALEXI LALAS, one of the more popular players during the United States team's drive into the second round of the World Cup, is involved in talks with three European soccer teams seeking his services.
One of the teams, the newly promoted Italian club Padova, said yesterday that it had signed Lalas on a one-season loan.
But the United States Soccer Federation, through its director of communications, TOM LANGE, denied that a contract had been signed.
The soccer federation owns Lalas's contract.
Padova made its announcement shortly after another team, England's Coventry City, introduced Lalas during a news conference to confirm it had held talks with him about joining the club this season.
Lalas, a former Rutgers University soccer team captain, is also to have talks with German club Bochum in the next few days. (AP)


CRIMES Aaginst NATURE
A couple are in a car smoking marijuana.
The woman is also hopped up on speed.
There is a tap on the window.
It's a cop.
When he opens the woman's door, she whips a knife from her boot and lunges at him, but he subdues her after a brief tussle.
As the couple are carted off to jail, the man mutters, "Someone's gonna get hurt."
The mean streets of Miami and the curse of a Mafia don?
The asphalt jungle of Los Angeles?
Think again.
This urban nightmare happened amid the pristine serenity of Yosemite National Park.


McCaw Cellular Communications Inc.(MCAWA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wilfred Lewis Warren; Historian, 64
Wilfred Lewis Warren, a British expert on King John of England, the widely opposed ruler who was forced in 1215 to sign Magna Carta, the best-known document in British constitutional history, died on July 9 near Belfast, Northern Ireland.
He was 64.
The cause was cancer, The Times of London said.


July 17-23; An Indian Call For Justice


Jury Ignores Judge to Set Award in Suit
A Federal jury here has awarded $500,000 in back pay to a former theater professor who sued Bennington College for dismissing him after he was accused of sexually assaulting a male student.
In making the award to Leroy Logan, the jurors disregarded the instructions of Judge Franklin S. Billings of Federal District Court, who told them they must limit the amount of compensatory damages to the terms of Mr.
Logan's five-year contract, $272,712.
The jury was not asked to rule on whether Mr.
Logan actually assaulted the student.


July 17-23: More Families in Poverty; Out-of-Wedlock Births Reach Record Levels
As Congress debates welfare reform in the coming months, the air will be filled with talk of the relationship between poverty and illegitimacy.
Some, mainly liberals, will argue that poverty and hopelessness lead women to choose to bear children out of wedlock.
Others, primarily conservatives, will assert that high illegitimacy rates spawn poverty and hopelessness.
All will agree that the rate of births to unwed mothers is out of control.


Students of the 'Magic Table' Give Voice to the Written Word
I DON'T know where I'm going when I start to write," Marguerite Duras once said in an interview. "You shouldn't have a subject.
You have to go into the forest; you shouldn't be afraid, and it comes, all alone; stories of love, of foolishness, they come on their own, as if you were walking like a blind man before they arrived."
Many people have the talent to write, said Louise Albert, expressing the thought another way.
But, said Ms.
Albert, a creative-writing teacher, people don't put their thoughts on paper, because they are afraid; fear of the forest and its mysteries, fear of making fools of themselves, holds them back.


The Nation; In the Arithmetic of Health Care, It Pays to Aim for 100%
FROM a distance, or on television, the argument about whether the nation's re-engineered health care system should include universal coverage may sound like just another Washington squabble about numbers: Does it mean that absolutely everybody would have medical insurance?
Or 98 percent of Americans?
Or 95?
Or 91?
No, the dispute goes to both the mind and spirit of the health care issue.
The spirit was tapped when President Clinton suggested to the nation's governors last week that he might settle for 95 percent or so.
That enraged the people who think the nation has a moral obligation to see that everyone has health insurance.


Teachers Learn to Teach Science
GLUING Ping-Pong balls together, may not be everyone's idea of how to spend a summer afternoon, but Barbara Dellon thought it was superb.
Ms.
Dellon, who teaches the fourth grade at the Thomas Jefferson Elementary School in Yorktown Heights, is one of six elementary school teachers taking a three-week "hands-onworkshop" at Philips Laboratories in Briarcliff Manor, the research division of Philips Electronics North America, whose corporate headquarters are in Manhattan.


Sumo Is Icumen In
Wall Street whizzes may imagine they are Masters of the Universe, but English financiers fancy themselves as giant sumo wrestlers.
The brokers in London's Broadgate Development, left, are doing mock battle with 12-foot-tall, 40-pound sculptured rubber sumos.
"You can take on giants," says Tod Cody, proprietor of Cody's, which makes circus props and leases the balloons for $750 a day.
"You can use your aggression, but you have to channel it through these giant soft-rubber figures."


SCEcorp (SCE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Athletics' Van Poppel Handcuffs Orioles
Athletics 6, Orioles 3
Todd Van Poppel pitched seven strong innings and Ruben Sierra and Scott Brosius homered, leading the Athletics over the Baltimore Orioles, 6-3, yesterday at Oakland, Calif.


Manager's Profile
Neal Devlin  Fund: Franklin/Templeton Hard Currency Fund, $55.4 million in assets; 3 percent load.
Manager since November 1993 acquisition from the Huntington funds. (Sponsor: Franklin/Templeton Global Trust, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.).
Born: Feb. 16, 1957; Boston.
Education: B.A., philosophy and economics, Brandeis University.
Last Vacation: A week in Thailand last March.
Fund Performance: Year through June: +10.5% (all currency funds: +9.2%); one year: +10.8% (+8.3%)*
Country Pick: Switzerland, because "it's a net exporter of capital" and "its balance sheet is in good order."  Current Strategy: "Avoiding the U.S. dollar, which has a lot more room to fall because of the high national debt, low savings rate and better investment opportunities abroad."  *Source: Morningstar Inc.


Corrections
An article on June 5 about the island of Sylt, off northwestern Germany, misspelled two German words and defined one German word incorrectly.
In a letter received on June 14, a reader pointed out that Labskaus, not Lobskaus, is the name of a herring dish; apartments are Ferienwohnungen, not Perienwohnungen, and Wattenmeer means shallow sea, not cotton sea.
Efforts to consult the writer delayed this correction.


Q. &amp; A.
Fighting an X-Rated Video Shop Q I live in a small co-op of 18 apartments that has several families with small children.
Just recently, one of the stores on the ground floor of our building was rented to what the real-estate agent called an "electronics" store but which turned out to be an XXX-video-porn shop.
The store is part of a "sweetheart" lease the original sponsor wrote to the co-op.
Do we have any legal rights to ask for the termination of the video store's lease?
What kind of action can we take against the sponsor? . . .
Laura Jaquinto, Manhattan.


Beatriz Wagner, Gerald Stefanski
Beatriz Malaspina Wagner, a senior vice president of Barretto Products, a commodities trading firm in New York, is to be married today to Dr.
Gerald A. Stefanski, the Superintendent of the Dunellen (N.J.) School District.
The Rev.
Eugene J. Roberts is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of the Blessed Sacrament Church in Wickatunk, N.J.
The bride, 56, is also a consultant to the trade and development division of the United Nations.
She graduated from Pace University.
She is a daughter of the late Rosa and Juan de Malaspina.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


'M. Butterfly,' A Richness Of Dramatic Imagination
THE stereotypical male search for the perfect female, according to the established model of the submissive geisha, provides the groundwork for the David Henry Hwang play "M. Butterfly." In the end, the playwright envisions a reversal of male and female roles in the Puccini opera "Madama Butterfly," bringing the play to a stunning dramatic crescendo.
In juxtaposing an opera as notorious for racism as sexism with a play about cultural bias, Mr.
Hwang came up with a metaphor for sexual ambivalence, a contemporary model for abstract theater of illusion and melodramatic plot rife with treason and betrayal.
And it is all derived from a true story.


Playing the Doting Dad As Only Jerry Lewis Can
UPTOWN -- Last Sunday, Jerry Lewis walked into the Pegasus Suite of the Rainbow Room with his daughter, Danielle, in his arms.
Something about 2-year-olds always brings out the inner Jerry Lewis in people.
So, of course, the colleagues, friends and paparazzi who were there for the taping of a cabaret segment for his Muscular Dystrophy Association Labor Day Telethon, went into an overdrive of oohs and ahs accompanied by antic, high-pitched hellos and facial contortions.


Alfredsson's Collapse at Open Gives Sheehan a Major Break
Helen Alfredsson personally welcomed the rest of the field back into the United States Women's Open today.
She did so unwillingly, unwittingly and spectacularly, with a collapse that was very nearly as stunning as her record opening round of 63.
As her astonished pursuers watched in disbelief, Alfredsson imploded.
After playing the first 43 holes here at Indianwood Golf and Country Club in 13 under par, she played the next 11 holes in 8 over.
When her free fall down the leader board was done, and she had played the final three holes in bogey-double bogey-bogey for a 76, Patty Sheehan was left standing ahead of the pack going into Sunday's final round.


Quantum Corp.(QNTM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


It All Began With a Rain Dance on a Sunny Day
Charles Reinhart's career in dance has been one long series of happy, intriguing encounters.
Or so it seems.
"I could tell you stories!" Mr.
Reinhart exclaimed during a recent conversation about his 25 years as director of the American Dance Festival, midway through the festival's busy season of performances, lectures and dance classes in Durham, N.C.
He and the festival have become institutions.
But that is a mantle Mr.
Reinhart wears lightly, even though he has played a major role in the popularizing and legitimization of modern dance.


More War Than Peace
LOVE AND HATRED The Troubled Marriage of Leo and Sonya Tolstoy.
By William L. Shirer.
Illustrated. 400 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Tagliabue Tries to Back Off
National Football League Commissioner Paul Tagliabue, who drew the ire of former Giants quarterback Phil Simms on Friday when he suggested the salary cap had little to do with Simms' release from the team, said today it was inappropriate of him to discuss the issue any further.
"It's unproductive for me to speculate further about the Giants' -- or any other individual club's -- player personnel moves or about an individual players' own career plans," Tagliabue said.
He backed away from statements he made earlier in the week saying that Simms' release had nothing to do with the salary cap.
Simms, among other things, said in an interview with The New York Times that Tagliabue "should be tested for drugs."


SCEcorp (SCE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Contagion of Rebellion
THE PRICE OF NATIONHOOD The American Revolution in Charles County.
By Jean B. Lee.
Illustrated. 388 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $29.95.


Safeguarding Credit Cards
TRAVELERS rely increasingly on credit cards and automatic teller machine cards, but card theft and fraud are rising.
Technology has made it possible to create a counterfeit card even through the original card has never left the owner's pocket.
All the thief needs is the account number, which is then reproduced on a magnetic strip that is affixed to a card with a fraudulent bearer's name.
This means that theft is possible without the card owner's being aware that anything has been stolen.
This is particularly distressing for travelers using credit cards because, after the fraud is detected by a bank -- Mastercard estimates it takes about two days -- additional charges against the account are blocked.
Unknowing, a traveler will then be unable to rent a car, pay for a hotel room or buy a ticket on that card.


Let the Game Go On
To the Sports Editor:
To see a game, let alone a world championship end in penalty kicks, is a tragedy.
The problem is the regulations regarding substitutions.


Mattel Inc.(MAT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Contemporary Variations on a Timeless Hudson Valley Theme
CONSIDERING the view they have of the Hudson, Westchester residents could forget that there is more to the river than their own splendid share of it -- about 300 miles more, in fact.
Shows like "The River That Flows Both Ways," now at the Hudson River Museum, do much to maintain perspective.
But there is something to be learned from modest productions, especially when they are staged upstream.
An example is "Hudson Valley Sampler," on view in the Gallery at Park West here.


Tennis, Everyone? Free Lessons for Children
AS the world's best players tune up for the United States Open, which begins at the end of August in Flushing Meadows, the New York Junior Tennis League is teaching youngsters all over the city to serve, volley and nurture their own tennis dreams.
The league offers free instruction (and lends rackets to those who don't have them) to 36,000 young people, ages 8 to 18, on portable Har-Tru courts at public schools in all five boroughs.


Business Diary: July 17-22
THE ECONOMY Health Coverage for All Americans?
Yes.
No.
Maybe.
Someday.
There's a world of difference between "all" and "most." From the start, President Clinton's mantra has been health coverage for "every American." But those, he discovered, were fighting words; the perfect world he envisioned simply hit too many political potholes.
So last week, ever more isolated in his dreams, he gingerly opened the door to compromise, saying 95 percent coverage may be O.K. at first.
But no sooner had he uttered those words than he was hit with a flood of criticism, and he quickly insisted that he wasn't backing off from universal coverage.
And Hillary Rodham Clinton, holding a child with birth defects, said, "Health reform without universal coverage will not work." Then Democratic leaders grabbed the ball and, after meeting with the Clintons, said they were ready to push for legislation guaranteeing coverage for all.
But not, of course, just yet; full coverage will be "phased in."


Rights Groups In Nigeria Fault Jackson
A diplomatic initiative by President Clinton to help resolve Nigeria's political paralysis has generated protests here by human rights campaigners who say the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, the President's special envoy, may have aligned himself too closely with this country's military Government to be a neutral mediator.
The American Embassy here announced on Thursday that Mr.
Jackson and a delegation of State Department and national security officials were expected to travel to Nigeria in the next few days.
Embassy officials say Mr.
Jackson is acting at Mr.
Clinton's request and hopes to deliver a letter from the President to Gen.
Sani Abacha, Nigeria's military strongman.


Unsuitable Ending
To the Sports Editor:
The world has now seen two separate sporting events this year decided in a manner that is totally different from the way that the sport is played.
First, the 1994 Olympic hockey competition was won by Sweden when a save was made on a penalty shot and last week Brazil won the World Cup when a penalty shot was kicked over the net.


Commercial Property/The Tishman Empire; The Rise, Fall and Rise of a Construction Business
IN many ways, 68-year-old John L. Tishman and his 39-year-old son, Daniel R., have led similar lives.
Each first relegated his love of building things to home woodworking shops.
Each looked at the real estate business that Julius Tishman, John Tishman's grandfather, started in 1898 as something that the "other" Tishmans did, and chose instead to teach school.


Lafarge Corp.(LAF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Spicy Tastes of India
Complex and subtle, Indian cuisine is the topic featured on tours this fall offered by two different companies, Cox &amp; Kings and the Annemarie Victory Organization.
Cox &amp; Kings is offering a 21-day "Splendors of India" tour leaving Oct. 14.
Julie Sahni, a writer and authority on Indian cuisine, will lecture on the culture and history of northern and southern India, and its cuisine.
The tour, which includes all meals, will visit Bombay, Madras and New Delhi.
Visitors will see coconut, banana and pepper plantations on the way to the spice capital of Cochin.
Other highlights include visits to the Taj Mahal in Agra, the Red Fort in Old Delhi and the deserted city of Fatehpur Sikri.


'A Critic and His Wife' At the Emelin Theater
I AM Broadway's biggest critic," Len Oppenheim bellows. Big or no, Mr. Oppenheim could not have had more than 33 nights of work last year, which suggests that the biggest men can have the smallest jobs.
Talk about leisure time.
The critic had enough to write a book, any number of "think pieces" and even get in a bit of squash at the men's club.
Even though John Ford Noonan's revised version of his play, "A Critic and his Wife," at the Emelin Theater is unaccountably set in the "present," it must be taking place once upon a time.


Talmud Lights a Path Toward Farrakhan
To the Editor:
Many criticize Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, for bringing Louis Farrakhan, head of the Nation of Islam, into the tent.
However, a Talmudic teaching opens a door.
"May you get a field and a house and a wife and children" is a blessing, the Talmud says, but a wish for the same things in reverse is a curse! (This describes the problems of, and solution for, the underclass; it is an important part of Mr. Farrakhan's message.)


Giddings &amp; Lewis Inc.(GIDL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


The View From: Mystic; Learning About Creatures of the Sound
ONE-EYED crustaceans, voracious arrow worms, tiny organisms that give off light, snail eggs that look like flying saucers.
Though these creatures may sound like characters in a science fiction novel they all live in Long Island Sound.
"Whenever you go swimming in the sound, you're not alone," said Jim Stone, director of exhibits at the Mystic Marinelife Aquarium.
"You're surrounded by interesting animals and plants."


Eleanor C. Nelson, John H. Barnes
Eleanor Conway Nelson, the daughter of Beverly L. Nelson of Richmond and Lewis P. Nelson 3d of Maidens, Va., was married yesterday to John Howard Barnes, a son of Margaret H. Barnes of Glencoe, Ill., and the late R. Marshall Barnes.
The Rev.
Raymond J. Hanna officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Richmond.
The Rev.
Charles F. Penniman, a cousin of the bride, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Barnes, 27, is a producer in business news at the Cable News Network in New York.
She graduated from Washington and Lee University.
Her father retired as a vice president of Sovran Bank in Richmond.
Her mother is a clinical social worker with the Tucker Psychiatric Clinic in Richmond.


Call It Neo-Baby Doll?
Lolita lives, and so does the swinging London of the 60's.
Then, this was called the baby-doll look, purveyed by a shop named Biba.
The Paris equivalent was the paper-doll cutout style of Andre Courreges.
Now, Anna Sui, top left, is leading the charge, and the new designs are distinguished by the fluidity of the fabric and cut.
While these dresses used to be worn with patent-leather Mary Janes, today's styles are being seen with lace-up boots.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Existing-home sales, June, mils., ann. rate
4.09
4.04
Tuesday
Employment cost index, 2d qtr., pct. chg.
0.7
0.8
Consumer confidence index, July
92.0
90.5
Wednesday
Durable-goods orders, June, pct. chg.
1.1
0.5
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
392
375
Friday
Gross domestic product, 2d qtr., pct. chg.
3.4
3.7
Purchasing managers' index, July
65.6
65.1
This Week's Numbers
Monday
Kansas City Fed conference on monetary policy
Tuesday
Two-year Treasury note auction
Wednesday
Five-year Treasury note auction


Bell Companies Use Regulation To Stop Rivals
Even as the nation's local telephone companies make a final push to compete against long-distance and cable television companies, many of them are using the very regulations that restrict them to block rivals that attack their own businesses.
Just last month, for example, the Bell Atlantic Corporation accused a group of fledgling rivals of offering "illegal" telephone services and demanded that the Federal Communications Commission fine them $1 million for each customer they serve.


C. A. Rheinfrank, Walter S. Bernet
Caroline Adams Rheinfrank, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lamson Rheinfrank Jr. of Kansas City, Mo., was married yesterday to Walter Spring Bernet, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Bernet 2d of Chagrin Falls, Ohio.
Canon George Poffenbarger 3d performed the Episcopal ceremony at the summer home of the bride's parents on Neebish Island, Mich.
The bride, 28, is an assistant director of the day-care program at the Cathedral School for Boys in San Francisco.
She graduated from San Francisco State University.
Her father is the chairman of the BHA Group, an air-pollution control company in Kansas City, and a trustee of Williams College in Williamstown, Mass.
Her mother, Sally L. Rheinfrank, is a trustee of Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.


The Key Issue on North Korea
The announcement on Thursday that despite the death two weeks ago of its absolute ruler, North Korea had agreed to resume high-level talks with Washington on its nuclear program has restored the hint of optimism that was injected into the crisis a month ago.
But Government officials, diplomats and experts say the prospects for real progress in halting the North's suspected nuclear weapons program remain about as clear as the muddy pond bristling with 8,000 radioactive fuel rods at a major nuclear complex in North Korea.


ABOUT SPAM
As a soldier in World War II, I crossed the Atlantic on the Queen Elizabeth ("More Than You Wanted to Know About Spam," by Judith Stone, July 3).
Every morning for the eight days it took to cross, we were served Spam for breakfast.
On the seventh morning, I had my fill and asked the British steward if he couldn't serve us something other than Spam.
He replied: "You Yanks invented it. Now eat it!" MIKEL STETTNER West Orange, N.J.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  For 25 years, Ann Brunswick has traced the health of urban blacks through the lives of her "kids" from Harlem.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Carl Weisbrod has had a lot of tough jobs in the development wars.
Turning downtown around may the toughest yet.


July 17-23: Terrorism in Argentina; Car Bomb Kills 46 People In Buenos Aires
Hitting a city block like a meat cleaver, a car bomb razed a busy Jewish community center in Buenos Aires last week, killing 46 people in the worst attack on Jews outside of Israel since World War II.
Striking at the heart of Latin America's largest Jewish community, the bomb reduced to jagged masonry a building that for 50 years housed the social welfare and political organizations of Argentina's 250,000 Jews.
More than 200 people were injured; dozens more are still missing.
The explosion also destroyed archives that documented one century of Jewish life in Argentina.


Lafarge Corp.(LAF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Straight Out of the City, for a Day on a Fresh Air Farm
Sharice Jones was losing patience.
Of all the dangers and frustrations she had confronted in her 10 years, nothing she had seen on the streets of Brownsville, Brooklyn, had prepared her for this kind of assault.
"Stop it, man, I just tied that shoe!"


Capitalist Country Fair
Mixing business with pleasure and charity, Forbes estate, July 16.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HISTORY  MEDIEVAL LIVES  Eight Charismatic Men and Women  of the Middle Ages.
By Norman F. Cantor.
HarperCollins, $23.


Airport Finds Lot for Limousines
Hoping to stop complaints from people living nearby, La Guardia Airport has established a new holding area for radio cars and limousines in one of its parking lots.
While yellow cabs can wait for fares within the airport, limousines and radio cars had long collected along a strip of Ditmars Boulevard, angering residents who complained of fumes, noise and litter.


Dole in No Rush on Health
Senator Bob Dole put the White House on notice today that Democrats need not be in such a hurry to rush a health care bill through Congress.
"Congress meets every year," Mr.
Dole, the Republican minority leader, said in a luncheon speech at the close of the Republican National Committee's summer meeting.
"What's wrong with going incrementally or sequentially or whatever you call it?"


An Accidental Cellist Adrift? Don't Believe It for a Moment
WITH ANOTHER artist, you might have dismissed it as a marketing gimmick.
With Ralph Kirshbaum, you had to take the experiment seriously, last December, when he applied special stage lighting to his presentation of the Bach cello suites at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, altering the focus and intensity to set a new tone for each work.
Though too subtle to be damaging, the effect proved superfluous in the end, and Mr.
Kirshbaum seldom lays himself open even to so mild a charge.
"Of the cellists in his age group, he speaks the language of music with the least theatrics," said the venerable Janos Starker of the 48-year-old Mr.
Kirshbaum, taking obvious pains not to overstate.
"He is probably the most distinguished player of his generation."


James McKinney and Nina Lewis
Nina Lewis, the daughter of John and Mirjana Lewis of New York, is to be married today to James Troy McKinney, a son of David E. McKinney of Westport, Conn., and Kathryn J. McKinney of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
T.
Guthrie Speers is to perform the Presbyterian ceremony at Waveny House in New Canaan.
The bride is studying for a master's degree in reading and literacy at the Bank Street College of Education.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Brown University.
Her father, the pianist and composer, is the musical director of the Modern Jazz Quartet.
Her mother is a harpsichordist.


Republicans Seeing Hope And Worries In Fall Voting
Scanning a banquet room at the Republican Party's annual summer meeting here today, Tom Slade, chairman of the Florida Republicans, likened the scene to a gathering of expectant parents.
"I am extremely confident -- and scared to death," Mr.
Slade said in a refrain that was repeated again and again by his fellow party members.
They were talking, of course, about Republican prospects in the November elections.


Sleepless in Central Park; In Wake of Crimes, the Police Try Moving Out the Homeless
Long after the last baby carriage was hurried through the twilight and the last runner raced the dark to Fifth Avenue, the homeless of Central Park faded into the quiet of the trees.
The city and its millions were just out of reach, and it was easy to pretend, in the softly beating heart of Manhattan, that the park was safe.
Robin Miller went to bed Tuesday night on an orange air mattress in a dark corner of the park.
She used to sleep easy here, but recently the 40-year-old woman had tossed and turned, and kept a butter knife hidden in her grimy clothes.
She sharpened it on a piece of concrete.


Florida Progress (FPC,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Two Harvard Students Accused of Stealing From Charity Event
Two Harvard College students who ran charity events in 1991 and 1992 to benefit children with cancer have been charged with stealing $132,000 of the proceeds.
The students, Charles K. Lee and David G. Sword, both 1993 graduates,were indicted on Wednesday on multiple charges of larceny involving money missing from "An Evening With Champions," an annual charity ice-skating exhibition that Harvard students have conducted for 23 years.


The LP: A Crayon For the Mind
CURIOSITY AND A NEWLY ACQUIRED compact disk sent me to the cellar storeroom a few days ago.
Ravel's "Daphnis et Chloe" was one of the first records I ever owned, and I can still remember, some 40 years later, my amazement at the beauty of that sound.
My new CD, chock-full of sonic information, has jogged that memory.
Its digital spit and polish knock me out of my seat.
One almost hears valves clicking as the flute parts sing away.
Listening to my ancient long-playing record -- filed under nostalgia and long since packed away -- I can barely hear a thing.
The brass must be in another room, the door closed.
The violins have blankets over their heads.
I loved that old record.
It opened up sounds for me that in provincial Virginia one could barely have imagined.
It roared and glittered in 1953.
In 1994, it mumbles.


A Tough Client, An Angelic Host And a Simple Soul
The Client Susan Sarandon, Tommy Lee Jones, Brad Renfro Directed by Joel Schumacher PG-13 124 minutes


Lawn Care: Keep Those Clippings
THE grass keeps growing.
On goes the mowing.
Those who may have hoped that this weekly ritual would wane this summer, to allow sufficient time for the tennis courts, sailboats and beaches, have learned that lawns will be lawns.
The ritual must go on.
Meanwhile, back at the mowers, things are changing.
Growing numbers of homeowners are learning each year that there is a bright new ethic about lawn care: "Don't Trash Grass."


A Tough Client, An Angelic Host And a Simple Soul
Angels in the Outfield  Danny Glover, Tony Danza, Christopher Lloyd Directed by William Dear PG 105 minutes


Lawn Care: Keep Those Clippings
THE grass keeps growing.
On goes the mowing.
Those who may have hoped that this weekly ritual would wane this summer, to allow sufficient time for the tennis courts, sailboats and beaches, have learned that lawns will be lawns.
The ritual must go on.
Meanwhile, back at the mowers, things are changing.
Growing numbers of homeowners are learning each year that there is a bright new ethic about lawn care: "Don't Trash Grass."


ABOUT SPAM
Margaret Thatcher's recollection of Spam as a wartime delicacy may well be of the days when it first reached Britain in World War II.
My memories, however, during the later days of the war, are of eagerly anticipated meals in restaurants where the waiter would slap a lengthy menu on the table, then, after we had made our selections, come back and announce: "Spam only. There's a war on, you know!"


Corrections
A report in the Good Eating column last Sunday about dining in Queens misstated the date of the last review of the Water's Edge restaurant in Long Island City, as well as the number of stars it received.
Water's Edge was last reviewed on Feb. 21, 1992, not Aug. 4, 1989, and received two stars, not one.


Kellogg Co. (K,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Save Seeds, Swap Them and . . . Who Knows?
ABOUT 10 years ago, after I had moved from Brooklyn to a cottage on Long Island, my father and I walked out to his favorite patch of hollyhocks, which grew alongside an old chicken house at the farm in Maryland, and collected a handful of papery-dry seed pods.
It was August, and the hollyhocks -- deep rose and a pale peach -- were over our heads.
There was really nothing to it, my father said.
Just dig up a patch of ground in late summer and work in compost.
Sprinkle the seeds over the bed, scatter straw on top and let nature take care of the rest.


Off the Road
Sunday.
I'm not on the Long Island Expressway!
This gives me a feeling of accomplishment, a sense of well-being.
A Sunday evening in July, and I'm not on it, I haven't been on it, I'm not going on it.
My life has meaning.
I am filled with something close to joy.
Monday.
I'm still not on the L.I.E.!
For years, the L.I.E. has served as a measure of existence.
In the spring, I wake up and think, Soon.
In the summer, Why?
In the winter, I look around and see I am not on the Long Island Expressway, and I know there is a God.
I've always wanted to write about the L.I.E., but until now it has been too threatening.
I think I'm finally ready to confront my anger.
I used to want to write a piece called "My son, the Long Island Expressway," in which I would defend the indefensible road the way a loyal, heartbroken mother defends her mass-murderer son: "I don't understand. This is not the road I knew at home, always so gentle, so considerate." But at last I'm able to say, "I realize I am a victim and this dysfunctional highway has degraded me." It's time to let go, to reclaim my self-esteem and inner strength.
Empowered, self-actualized, I can stay in New York City.


Flavor and Drama of Whole Roasted Fish
FISH for dinner usually means fillets or steaks in the saute pan or, in summer, on the grill.
Americans, it is often said, have an aversion to whole fish.
All those bones.
But when it comes to flavor, nothing compares to cooking fish on the bone.
Many kinds of fish, like smelts, baby bluefish or butterfish, are too small to bother boning.
Tiny whitebait are traditionally floured, deep-fried and eaten intact -- head, bones and all.
And to serve to a party of six or more, a whole fish is not only delicious, it is dramatic to serve.


Parenting: No Training for a Tough Job
PARENTING is the toughest and most important job in the world, and yet parents are not trained for such a challenging task.
For this reason, Joan Message Barbuto of Wallingford, a recreation therapist and newsletter editor for Masonic Home and Hospital in Wallingford, advocates mandatory parenting courses in the nation's high schools.


Ruth L. Spector, S. N. Schatzman
Ruth Lee Spector, a guidance counselor at the Eugene Maleska Intermediate School in the Bronx, was married last evening to Dr.
Stanley Norman Schatzman, a radiologist at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Rabbi Joel Goor officiated at the United Nations Plaza-Park Hyatt Hotel in New York.
The bride graduated from City College and received master's degrees in education from New York University and in guidance and counseling from Lehman College.
She is a daughter of the late Rose and Paul Spector.


Habitats/Echoes of Nat (King) Cole; A Berkshire Estate With a Special Beat
IN front of a snapping fire on a damp July afternoon, Maria Cole, widow of Nat and mother of Natalie and four other children, sat in a yellow leather Chesterfield settee and explained why she has angst about selling her 111-acre estate here in the Berkshires.
"It kills me but I'm being a realist," she said.
"It gets too lonesome but it's not the size -- I've always liked big houses -- but now the children are grown and all of them are in California, and one is in Florida."


Nicholas Cage, The Sunshine Man
IT WAS WHILE WATCHING AN OLD interview with a deeply drugged Jim Morrison on television several years ago that a light bulb went on over Nicolas Cage's head.
"Morrison was saying, 'I don't think we've done a song yet that conveys pure happiness,' " Mr.
Cage remembered.
"And I thought about myself. I thought, 'I should do that. Something that's not so angst ridden.' "
And so was born what the actor refers to as his sunshine trilogy, a trio of mainstream, big-budget comedies: "Honeymoon in Vegas" in 1992, this year's "Guarding Tess" and "It Could Happen to You," which opens on Friday.
In all three, Mr.
Cage turns his back on the intense outsiders, oddballs and criminals he made his specialty in such movies as Alan Parker's "Birdy," Joel and Ethan Coen's "Raising Arizona," David Lynch's "Wild at Heart" and John Dahl's "Red Rock West," only recently released in theaters.
Instead Mr.
Cage joins the team of regular guys -- decent, socially rooted fellows who, in his words, set "a more positive example."


USX-Delhi Group (DGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Showalter's Way: Win, One Detail at a Time
After Buck Showalter analyzes and analyzes the videotape of another Yankees game that will turn his eyes into a convincing commercial for Visine, after he consumes another room-service meal that does not rival Le Cirque and before he crumples into another hotel bed, he compiles a list of what he wants to accomplish the next day:
*Talk to Mattingly about wrist.


Political Memo; Examining the Broad Brush Cuomo Uses to Paint Rival
Racing to define George E. Pataki before the obscure Republican Senator can define himself, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's re-election campaign is seeking to depict Mr.
Pataki -- and the Republican Party in general -- as devoid of principle and willing to shift with the political breeze.
Central to that strategy is Mr.
Cuomo's suggestion that his challenger has been inconsistent on the crucial issues of abortion, taxes and gun control.
But as is often the case in campaigns, the full truth about Mr.
Pataki is not as simple as Mr.
Cuomo's characterization of him.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
SADE: A Biography By Maurice Lever.
Translated by Arthur Goldhammer.
Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $15.95.
This life of the infamous marquis shows that he came from a family of libertines, and attempts to link all his fictional debaucheries to actual events in his past.
Although these connections cannot be verified, Lynn Hunt said here last year, Sade's lurid career unfolds "with verve and vivid detail."  IF IT BE NOT I: Collected Poems, 1959-1982 By Mona Van Duyn.
Knopf, $15.
A former poet laureate of the United States, the author has created a rich body of work that comprises whimsical, sometimes rhyming poems and somber meditations.
This collection, which incorporates her previous seven books, includes poems inspired by everything from the tribulations of Cinderella to a bout of conjunctivitis.
Knopf has reissued it simultaneously with Ms.
Van Duyn's most recent book, FIREFALL ($11), in which she explores a form she refers to as the "minimalist sonnet." Last year our reviewer, Rachel Hadas, said of both books, "However rich, Ms. Van Duyn's voice is never bland; particularity inflects her love of the world."


Profits, Reruns and the End of 'Next Generation'
LIKE A CHARACTER IN ONE OF ITS science-fiction plots, "Star Trek: The Next Generation" knew from the day it was born the approximate day it would die.
Most television series stay around for their natural life span.
If no one watches, they die fast -- and unmourned.
If lots of people watch, they live until those people stop watching.
And if people never stop watching, they die because the creators have had enough.


The Bronx and the Yankees: Time to Call It Quits
If a relationship isn't working, the two participants must be willing to look at the situation with complete candor and honesty.
They must be willing to realistically assess their current condition and not wallow in nostalgic longings or misguided sentimentality.
And if it is truly beyond repair, they must summon the courage to go their separate ways.
The relationship between the Yankees and the Bronx isn't working.
It hasn't been working for a long time, but as is the case with many relationships in peril, the two participants have been living in denial, unable or unwilling to see how badly things have deteriorated between the two.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals (APD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


What's Long, Short, Cheap and Baggy?
FOR the athletic fashion cognoscenti (mostly boys age 10 and up, plus a few savvy girls), heaven has an address.
It's 1714 Madison Avenue, near 113th Street in Harlem.
There, at a storefront named Olaf's, children wander in, 60 to 75 a day, to buy the athletic shorts of their dreams.
Call the shorts cool.
Call them awesome.
What they are is baggy.
So baggy they hang below the knees.


Folk Hero Just a Guy Called Will
IF Will Rogers "never quit telling folks what damn fools they are," don't think that folks today want to hear it, not in a musical comedy anyway.
It is not likely that "The Will Rogers Follies," the eulogistic musical extravaganza, in a noteworthy Long Island premiere at the Gateway Playhouse in Bellport, is going to risk losing friends and alienating people.
So it holds to a few handy examples of pith ("A man makes a living by what he gets; he makes a life by what he gives").


No Censors Needed on the Data Highway
To the Editor:
We are alarmed at growing restrictions on the information superhighway, particularly the cancellations of feminist discussion groups.
Without free-speech protections of unpopular ideas, women would not have been able to found a feminist movement 25 years ago.


DQE (DQE,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


War-Weary, Arabs in Consensus On Giving Israeli Peace a Chance
When Jordanians refused to heed calls by Muslim militants to observe "a day of mourning" in protest over this week's meeting between the Israeli Foreign Minister and the Jordanian Prime Minister, it signaled a general reluctance among Arabs throughout the region to continue working against peace with Israel.
"It's snowballing. There is no way to stop it anymore or to reverse it," Bassam Abu Sharif, a former senior aide to Yasir Arafat and an early advocate of peace with Israel, said as he watched Jordan's Prime Minister, Abdel Salam Majali, publicly welcome the Israeli Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, on Jordanian soil for the first time.


Turning Around A Troubled School
When Dori Collazo-Baker took over as principal of Castle High Middle School five years ago, it was a vast, unwieldy institution with near-bottom reading scores, little parental involvement, serious security problems and a reputation as the Bronx's most violent junior high.
Now, as she leaves to become Superintendent of School District 1, the 1,400-member student body is split among three minischools, each with its own space and specialty.
Parents choose which suits their children best.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Artists, Even With Floors
DAN WELDEN could have gone to Home Depot for his kitchen-floor tiles.
But then he wouldn't have obtained the nude-riding-a-motorcycle design, at least not on sale.
The nude who will soon grace the floor of Mr.
Welden's house in Noyac was free after Mr.
Welden had furnished the tile and an artist, Bob Curtis of East Hampton, furnished the nude, or rather his rendition of one.
To make his new house more personal, Mr.
Welden, also an artist, invited his artist friends to a tile party.
They were asked to paint his kitchen floor.
He supplied the tiles.
"They supplied the inspiration," he said.
At times there was more inspiration than tile.
"I should have bought more," Mr.
Welden said.
"Once they started they didn't want to stop. Some artists wanted to do five or six tiles." He had 192, and this being the Hamptons, more than 150 artists showed up.


E. M. Vincent, Jessen T. Havill
Elizabeth Mandeville Vincent, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger B. Vincent of Bedford, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Jessen Tait Havill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey B. Havill of Bethlehem, Conn.
The Rev.
Heather E. Cook performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Havill, 22, and her husband, 24, graduated from Bucknell University.
The bride teaches the second grade at the Rappahannock Central Elementary School in Saluda, Va.
Her father is the president of the Springwell Corporation, a corporate finance company in New York.


Old New York
One way to spend a summer afternoon in New York is among the splendidly dressed women, most of them monuments to conspicuous consumption, and well-groomed men, most of them portly, who line the second-floor walls of the National Academy of Design until Oct. 30.
They were citizens of Edith Wharton's world, and today they seem to gaze at their viewers with the arrogance of warlords.
Why not?
This city was their turf, as surely their heritage as Aunt Gertrude's diamond parure.
Another way to spend a summer afternoon in New York, or anyplace for that matter, is to spend it with two novels.
Caleb Carr's "The Alienist" is set in 1896, when Edith Wharton was 34 and living on Park Avenue with her husband, Teddy.
E.
L.
Doctorow's "The Waterworks" is set in 1871, when Mrs.
Wharton, then Edith Jones, was a 9-year-old touring Europe with her wealthy parents.


Changes To Help The Aged
AS the nation's population ages, there has been an increased consciousness of innovations designed to permit an increasing number of older Americans to live comfortably and safely in their own homes well into later life.
They range from new ideas for structural modifications to inexpensive hand-held electronic gadgets that can be readily purchased from a neighborhood store.


Commonwealth Edison (CWE,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Fine Hand for Stripping and Refinishing
WOODWORK can go bad, even if dutifully cared for.
Rehabilitating it is rather like refinishing furniture, but on a grander scale.
Stripping old finish and applying a new one are not always necessary.
Washing may be sufficient.
If the house is an antique, stripping may not be desirable.
Have a restoration expert examine antique woodwork before starting rehabilitation.


John M. Husted Jr., Tracy P. Stern
Tracy Paige Stern, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Stern of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married yesterday to John M. Husted Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Husted of Damascus, Md.
Justice Jerome W. Marks, who retired from the State Supreme Court in New York, officiated at Le Chateau restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.
Mrs.
Husted, 26, teaches the third grade at the Liberty School in Baltimore.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is the vice president of real estate services at the Tri-Tech Group, a construction consultant in Babylon, L.I.
Her mother, Vivien Stern, is the president of VSMP, the Marketing Group, a consulting concern in New York to the entertainment industry.


The Lessons of Japan Airlines
To the Editor:
Ms.
Orlins may not realize just how prophetic she is by referencing the American Automobile industry in her blistering commentary on United Airlines.
In fact the comparison between the American auto industry of the late 1970's and early 1980's and the United States airline industry today is frighteningly accurate.


Beethoven for Younger Listeners
THE Summer Music series has a double-header this week at Harkness Memorial Park in Waterford.
On Thursday evening at 7 a family concert introduces younger listeners to Beethoven as the Connecticut Orchestra performs parts of six symphonies and two concertos, while the Toronto-based Children's Group Inc. stages "Beethoven Lives Upstairs."
The regular 8 P.M.
Saturday program at Harkness offers its audience works by composers ranging from Gabrieli and Tomasi to Scott Joplin played by the New York Brass, a 14-member ensemble whose membership is drawn from the American Symphony, New York Philharmonic and Metropolitan Opera orchestras.
For reservations, call 442-9199 or 800-969-3400.


The Computer Age Bids Religious World to Enter
Every week, Sharon Castellanos turns on her computer and prays.
She's not asking for divine help, as desperate computer users have been known to do when confronted by a suddenly blank screen or balky disk drive.
Rather, it is part of her religious routine as the moderator of an on-line prayer group that meets weekly for an hour of fellowship and prayer on the Compuserve Information Service.
From her home in San Juan, P. R., Ms.
Castellanos exchanges prayer requests and spiritual insights with dozens of like-minded computer users across the nation on the service's Religion Forum.


Did Barneys Overextend Itself? Not Really, It Insists
FOR Barneys New York, the last 10 months have been a time of both celebrated achievements and humbling mistakes.
The family-owned company has made some of the most daring moves in American retailing.
Last September, Barneys opened the largest new store in New York City since the Depression.
Then, just six months later, the company opened an opulent outpost in Beverly Hills, decorated with hand-laid mosaics and filled with pricey designer fashions.
The two big openings capped an audacious five-year expansion that has transformed Barneys from a trend-setting specialist in New York, with one store in downtown Manhattan, into a $450 million-a-year retailing empire with 18 stores, including ones as far away as Tokyo and Singapore.


My Generation Wants a Woodstock We Can Call Our Own; Peace, Love, No Profit
To the Editor:
Frank Rich has it right about Woodstock (column, July 10).
As one who was there at the end of my tender teen-age years, I can testify that the "Three Days of Peace and Music" had a lasting impact on my life -- not for anything that can ever be marketed, but precisely the opposite.


On Location at Usdan


FPL Group Inc.(FPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Naomi Segal, Steven G. Proshan
Naomi Segal, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joshua Segal of Roslyn Heights, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
Steven Gerald Proshan, a son of Sandra Proshan and Dr.
Neil Proshan, both of Princeton, N.J.
Rabbi Bart Shallat is to perform the ceremony at the Pegasus Suite at the Rainbow Room in New York.
The bride, 30, graduated from Princeton University and received a master's degree in Russian studies from Yale University.
She is a business systems consultant in New York.
Her father, the former superintendent of schools in Roslyn, L.I., is an educational consultant, in Roslyn Heights, with PNR Associates.
Her mother, Joyce A. Segal, owns Joyce &amp; Company, an estate sales and appraisal concern in Roslyn.


F. M. McDonald, Patrick DeSouza
Frances Maria McDonald, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel F. McDonald of McLean, Va., was married yesterday to Dr.
Patrick Jude DeSouza, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Domingos X. DeSouza of New Hyde Park, L.I.
Msgr.
Philip J. Reilly performed the ceremony at St.
Dominic's Roman Catholic Church in San Francisco.


Most Fund Investors Say Low Risk Is the Best Bet
MUTUAL fund investors aren't too keen on taking risks, which may account for some of their disgust when funds that were promoted as "low risk" blew up on them earlier this year.
In its just released 1994 Mutual Fund Fact Book, the Investment Company Institute mapped out the results of a survey of investors' risk tolerance.
Against taking risks were 41 percent of the investors surveyed, ranging from those who avoided all investments they considered risky -- dubbed "apprehensive independent" -- to those who were adverse to risk but willing to consider it as part of their financial plan -- "conservative directed" investors.


An Energetic Deputy Helps Remake the Pentagon
His boss is a quiet, avuncular mathematician who prefers to focus on one issue at a time.
He is loud, brash and confrontational and loves to juggle any number of complicated issues at once.
But the Deputy Defense Secretary, John M. Deutch, and the Secretary, William J. Perry, are kindred souls.
Between them, they are making the Pentagon over in their own technocratic image.


The Executive Computer; Microsoft's Operating System Rivals Get a Boost, Sort Of
A decade is a long time in computer years, so it's easy to forget that when the I.B.M.
PC was introduced at the outset of the 80's, Microsoft's MS-DOS was but one of several operating systems offered for the new machine.
Today, so dominant are MS-DOS and its associated program, Windows, that it's not always apparent that there are still several viable alternatives.
Those alternatives got a boost eight days ago when the United States Department of Justice and Microsoft signed a consent decree requiring the company to halt its longstanding practice of requiring computer manufacturers to pay a licensing fee on each machine sold, whether or not it contained DOS or Windows.
In the past, such so-called O.E.M. customers have had little incentive to install another company's software because they would have to pay Microsoft anyway.


Robot Set to Explore a Volcano That's Too Dangerous for Humans to Enter
A gangly eight-legged robot called Dante II is preparing to descend into the dark interior of an active Alaskan volcano in an effort to extend the reach of humans into places too dangerous for them to go.
Plans call for the walking robot to spend five days in the crater of the volcano, Mount Spurr, 80 miles west of Anchorage.


Also-Ran Also a Hero By Staying In the Tour
Riding on desire and dedication, Francis Moreau made it through one more Tour de France stage today and at last knows that he will finish the race tomorrow in Paris.
His father would have been pleased.
Moreau's 113th place among the 117 remaining riders doesn't matter.
Nor does the fact that he has not come close to any sort of victory in this Tour, his fourth.
All his father hoped was that Moreau would finish the race.


Levitz Furniture Inc.(LFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Life Is Near For Old State House
THE Old State House in Hartford was once described by a state historian, Arthur Van Deusen, as Connecticut's "single most important building."
Single most important or not, the graceful brick and brownstone structure designed by the Revolutionary War era architect Charles Bulfinch, has suffered many perilous moments in its nearly two centuries of history.
On several occasions, its very existence was in jeopardy, the latest in 1975 when Hartford was riding the crest of redevelopment.


Rio Takes Steps to Curb Crimes Against Tourists
CRIME and the perception of crime have kept foreign tourists, especially Americans, away from Rio in the last decade.
Last year the city had about 40,000 American visitors, one-third the 1987 level of 120,000.
The drop is Rio's problem, not Brazil's.
This year, for example, about one million foreign tourists are expected to pack the hotels and beaches of northeastern Brazil, largely Argentines and Europeans.
And with Brazil opening its doors to imports, more and more business travelers are flying to Brazil, but they are disembarking in Sao Paulo.
The nation's financial center has become the nation's air transportation hub as airlines like Scandinavian Airlines System, Swissair and Japan Airlines largely skip Rio.


Girl Scout Camp Program Reaches Out to Homeless Troops
THE popular image of Girl Scouts troops of middle-class girls in uniform, selling cookies, making crafts and going camping -- is not an inaccurate picture.
But it is an incomplete one.
Since the early 1980's, the Girl Scouts in Westchester and Putnam Counties have been reaching out to girls from less traditional backgrounds, running troops out of housing for the homeless and residential treatment programs.
While the organization has attempted to retain its traditional goals -- particularly that of instilling self-esteem -- it has also adapted to the times.
Some of the old merit badges, like the one for learning to be a hostess, have been retired, supplanted by new patches, like one that certifies an awareness of "alcohol and chemical dependency." Girls, many of whom are left alone for part of the day, are taught personal-safety skills.
Leaders work with younger children -- the Daisy and Brownie Scouts, ages 5 to 8 -- on first aid, fire safety and how to make a phone call.
Older girls -- Juniors and Cadettes, ages 9 to 13 -- talk about teen-age pregnancy, AIDS, stress and career plans.


Twist Afleet Gets Top Marks in Test
Racing's house of upsets made it three for three today when Twist Afleet upset the favorites to win The Test, the first Grade One stakes of the Saratoga season for 3-year-old fillies.
They have run three stakes races in the first two days of the 126th season at Saratoga, and no favorite has made the winner's circle yet.
In the Sanford on opening day, the undefeated 2-year-old colt De Niro ran third behind Montreal Red.
In the Schuylerville, the undefeated 2-year-old filly Unacceptable ran second behind Changing Ways.
And the march of the long shots continued today when Twist Afleet outran Penny's Reshoot and Heavenly Prize and won for the fourth time in a row.


Schlumberger Ltd.(SLB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Q and A
Horatio Nelson's Flagship
Q.
The Patrick O'Brian novels about the adventures of the seaman Jack Aubrey and his companion, the surgeon Stephen Maturin, have my wife and me eager to tour Nelson's H.M.S.
Victory.
Where is it and how do we get there? -- Brian Lee Gibbs, Hartwood, Va.


Blood on the Map
MIGRATIONS By Milos Tsernianski.
Translated by Michael Henry Heim. 274 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $22.95.


A Short Solution
To the Sports Editor:
I very much agree with the critics who contend that the present system for resolving a tie in the final game of the World Cup makes no sense.
I have a suggestion that might resolve the dilemma.


McCaw Cellular Communications Inc.(MCAWA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rail Proposal Pits Backyards vs. Trains
LIVING alongside railroad tracks has had its drawbacks for residents on Parkway Road here, although many, like Joseph and Lillian Kelly, have learned over the years to make the best of things.
When their children were young, the Kellys, now retired, built a sandbox and swing set on an unused portion of railroad land that cut past their backyard.
Several doors away, Claire Esposito and her mother cleared a scraggly section of the railroad right-of-way for a vegetable garden.
Like the other homeowners living on this block of one- and two-family homes and small apartment houses, the Kellys and Espositos sought to improve the unsightly strip of railroad-owned land that edged their tidy properties.
Some screened the view of passing trains with evergreens; others replaced the brush on the right-of-way with patios and barbecues.


Station's Sculpture: Time, Always Running, Running
With tens of thousand of commuters herding through every day, Pennsylvania Station is a challenging site for a piece of sculpture.
The potential audience is enormous, but it dashes by with scant time for art appreciation.
Enter Maya Lin, the designer of the Vietnam war memorial in Washington.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority's Arts for Transit program chose her to create a piece for the newly renovated Long Island Rail Road terminal.


Food at All Hours, and a Sense of Family
FORGET about the jug of wine, the loaf of bread and thou.
At any of Stamford's many diners, it's a turkey club, a side of fries and those loud, laughing teen-agers in the booth next to you.
"Moving Forward for People" is Stamford's motto and there's a downtown renaissance in its Columbus Park nightclub scene.
But once 5 P.M. hits, the town still seems to crawl, the lights dim.


Apostolos Gerasoulis, Xiaolan Zhang
Xiaolan Zhang, the daughter of Professors Xiezhen Chen and Jiaxiang Zhang of Nanjing, China, is to be married today to Dr.
Apostolos Gerasoulis, a son of Chrysauge Gerasoulis of Ioannina, Greece, and the late Elias Gerasoulis.
The Rev.
Anthony N. Pappas is to perform the ceremony at St.
George Greek Orthodox Church in Piscataway, N.J.
Ms.
Zhang, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a computer consultant in Iselin, N.J., at the Oracle Corporation, a computer software company.
She graduated from Nanjing University and received a master's degree in computer science from Rutgers University.
Her father teaches astronomy at the Purple Mountain Observatory in Nanjing, China, where he is also the director of the minor planet research center.
Her mother teaches astrophysics at the observatory.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Julie Krone; A Jockey With Environmental Concerns
TODAY is Julie Krone's 31st birthday, and she hopes that better days are ahead after an accident last Aug. 30 that almost ended her career as a jockey and another spill on July 16, in which she was only slightly injured.
She is the most successful female thoroughbred rider in racing history.
Before the latest mishap, at Belmont Park in New York, where a stunned crowd watched as she fell and suffered a bruised left leg, she had put together a victory streak after a brief slump that had some of her supporters worried.


Lurid! Licentious! Collectible!
AMERICA'S postwar boom brought with it an official style and an official narrative.
The mood was optimistic.
The cars, the kitchen appliances and even the people were shiny and bright.
After a depression and a world war, the vision of a split-level suburban house and a happy nuclear family took up permanent residence in the national brain.
All endings were happy ones.
Officially, there were no shadows.
Well, forget all that.


The Goodwill Games Begin: Now Let the Fans Show Up
The first Goodwill Games after the end of the Cold War began today with a bow to the winning side.
Directly beneath the golden spires of the historic Peter and Paul fortress, 7,000 tons of sand were trucked in to give the banks of the Neva River a glint of Malibu.
On it, deeply tanned, swimsuit-clad female beach volleyball players from the United States routed paler members of the Russian team.
Beach volleyball is not yet an Olympic sport, but the match served as an attention-grabbing teaser for this made-for-television sports extravaganza that is a wholly owned subsidiary of Ted Turner.


Phelps Dodge Corp.(PD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


July 17-23; Astronomers Feast on Jupiter's Show
Never in recorded history had human beings seen anything like it: a fiery bombardment of Jupiter that even backyard sky-watchers with small telescopes could see.
For the entire week that ended on Friday, huge chunks of a disintegrating comet, Shoemaker-Levy 9, smashed into the giant planet every few hours, sending aloft fireballs as large as the earth.
The 21 largest pieces of the comet, some of them nearly two miles in diameter, all hit the back side of Jupiter, and none of their impacts could be observed directly, except by the spacecraft Galileo, which will reach the planet next year.


Mattingly Rises to His 2,000th Occasion
The Yankees were ahead by six runs in the seventh inning, they were coasting toward another victory on their best road trip ever to the West Coast and it was enough of a rout for fans and players to yawn away the final three innings.
But they did not because Don Mattingly was chasing a significant career milestone.
Four lonely fans in the upper deck at Anaheim Stadium waved numerical placards of 2,0,0 and 0 to spotlight his challenge.
Mattingly, who blooped a single off Brian Anderson in the fifth inning, was trying to become the sixth player to accumulate 2,000 hits with the Yankees and Russ Springer was trying to stop him.


Nancy L. Evans, Kurt J. Miller
Nancy Lauren Evans, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Evans of New York, was married last evening to Kurt John Miller, a son of Marcia Miller of Coram, L.I., and H. Lincoln Miller Jr. of St.
Petersburg, Fla.
Cantor David Benedict officiated at the Essex House in New York.


Person Reported to Be Joining Spurs
The free-agent forward CHUCK PERSON, released by the Minnesota Timberwolves after last season, has agreed to terms with the San Antonio Spurs, according to The San Antonio Express-News.
Person, a 6-foot-8-inch small forward, will fill the $1.1 million salary slot left by DALE ELLIS, meaning that Ellis will not return to the Spurs, the newspaper reported. (AP)


Ronny H. Meth, Jeffrey Hersch
Ronny H. Meth, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Meth of Roslyn, L.I., is to be married there today to Jeffrey Stuart Hersch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira Hersch of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Joseph P. Sternstein is to officiate at Temple Beth Shalom.
The bride is the supervisor of pension administration at Coltec Industries, an industrial equipment manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Albany.
Her father is a professor emeritus in electrical engineering at City College in New York.


My Generation Wants a Woodstock We Can Call Our Own
To the Editor:
As a young person who paid $221 for a ticket to go to Woodstock '94, I read Frank Rich's "Peace and Love, '94 Style" (column, July 10) with interest.
Mr.
Rich makes the point that commercialism has swallowed the real meaning of Woodstock simplicity, unity, peace and flowers.
But he misses the point of why my generation is so excited about this event.


Debra J. Lakow and Eric J. Dorfman
Debra Jayne Lakow, the daughter of Phyllis and Gerald Lakow of New Rochelle, N.Y., is to be married today to Eric Jon Dorfman, a son of Judy and Joel Dorfman of Allendale, N.J.
Rabbi Beth Singer is to officiate at the Puck Building in New York.


F.Y.I.
Whither the Bugs?
Q.
What accounts for the relatively small population of airborne insects in New York City (one of the great, unsung pleasures of living here)?


You Too Can Be a Successful Criminal!
BRUCE EASLEY is enjoying the kind of attention first-time authors dream about.
"Donahue" built a show around his money-making ideas.
"Geraldo" and "Jerry Springer" are calling, and so are "Prime Time Live" and "Dateline NBC." A Hollywood agent says a movie deal is in the bag.
Indeed, Mr.
Easley's how-to book does stand out on the shelves of Barnes and Noble and other chains.
Entitled "Biz Op: How to Get Rich with Business Opportunity Frauds and Scams," it provides step-by-step instructions for running con games aimed at housewives and retirees.
"I'm selling the American dream," Mr.
Easley says without shame, or humor.
"This is going to allow a lot of people without a lot of money to go into business for themselves, or at least dream about it." (Mr. Easley claims to have benefited from the scams he describes.)


Tech Notes; The Fax as Portable Peepshow
THE cellular phone, which has grown smaller and more portable since its introduction more than a decade ago, has liberated the deskbound by the millions.
But another necessity of modern office work, the fax machine, has been much less able to tag along.
Compared with telephones that fit in a shirt pocket, portable fax machines are closer in size to a laptop computer -- which may be one reason why there are only an estimated 10,000 of them in use.
So how about a paperless pocket-sized device that can be connected to cellular phone for receiving and viewing faxes?


SPECTATOR SPORT
The reactionary right doesn't seem nearly so intimidating now that we know its chief hack bears such a close intellectual (and physical!) resemblance to Al Bundy of "Married . . . With Children." ROBERT MIDLER Arlington, Va.


New Front in the Big-Store War
The advance of mega-stores into New York has reached the Upper East Side, where work crews have started converting the base of a 16-floor warehouse into a large Toys "R" Us store.
And as with other big stores proposed around the city, the latest project is stirring debate.
Some residents are fighting the conversion of the Manhattan Storage Company's old Morgan Warehouse at 80th Street and Third Avenue, contending that it is illegal and that its scale will overwhelm their neighborhood.
Proponents say that the project meets the zoning code and will enhance the area.


Fine Hand for Stripping and Refinishing
WOODWORK can go bad, even if dutifully cared for.
Rehabilitating it is rather like refinishing furniture, but on a grander scale.
Stripping old finish and applying a new one are not always necessary.
Washing may be sufficient.
If the house is an antique, stripping may not be desirable.
Have a restoration expert examine antique woodwork before starting rehabilitation.


Port Jefferson's Role To Help the Coast
After reading "Brookhaven Attacks Coastal Plan"  [ May 29 ]  I believe some additional comments are necessary.
First, Brookhaven was not the only local government or organization to comment on the program.
Our village commented and expressed concern over several aspects of the program.
In addition, we understand that representatives of Danford's Inn-Bayles Dock, a private marina; the Port Jefferson Civic Association, and the Bridgeport-Port Jefferson Ferry Company chose to comment as well.
Unfortunately the tone of the article implied that Mr.
Kassner of Brookhaven Town's Environmental Protection Department was alone in his concerns.


A Tough Client, An Angelic Host And a Simple Soul
Woodstock  Joan Baez, Joe Cocker, Jefferson Airplane, many others Directed by Michael Wadleigh R 240 minutes


Flavor and Drama of Whole Roasted Fish
FISH for dinner usually means fillets or steaks in the saute pan or, in summer, on the grill.
Americans, it is often said, have an aversion to whole fish.
All those bones.
But when it comes to flavor, nothing compares to cooking fish on the bone.
Many kinds of fish, like smelts, baby bluefish or butterfish, are too small to bother boning.
Tiny whitebait are traditionally floured, deep-fried and eaten intact -- head, bones and all.
And to serve to a party of six or more, a whole fish is not only delicious, it is dramatic to serve.


Superintendent Hopes to Unite Divided District
After months of bitterness, Community School District 1 has a new superintendent, Dori Collazo-Baker, a principal from the Bronx.
Ms.
Collazo-Baker says her first task is "to build trust and mend broken relationships to bring the community around to the issue of educating all our children."
On Wednesday, at a festive public meeting complete with champagne, flowers and applause, the board voted 6 to 1, with 2 abstentions, for Ms.
Collazo-Baker to succeed William Ubinas, the innovative, controversial leader ousted in March.


Shannon River
To the Editor: Having returned in June from my fourth boating adventure on the Shannon River, I can attest that it is every bit idyllic as Robert Emmett Ginna Jr. states in his article "Down the Storied Shannon" (June 12).
The Shannon's passage from use for commercial shipping, coupled with the excellent navigational marking system, create ideal conditions.
It amazes me that I've never met any other Americans on the river, while the Dutch, Germans and other Continental Europeans dominate the rental boat market, owing perhaps to the overcrowded nature of many navigable European rivers.


Mutual Funds; Riding the Currency Roller Coaster
THE weak United States dollar has been a boon to one class of mutual funds: those that invest in foreign currencies.
The currency funds, which invest in short-term, fixed-income securities denominated in one or more foreign currencies, rose 9.2 percent, on average, for the year through June, with the biggest winner, Fidelity Yen Performance, up 13.8 percent.
That compares with a 6 percent loss for the world bond group, according to Morningstar Inc.


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (CIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The World; Pollution in Canada? Believe It.
FRAMED by three oceans, carved by the receding sheets of ice age glaciers, the world's second-largest country has great forests, crystal lakes and the bountiful granary of an endless prairie.
Canada: the very name calls up visions of snow-whitepeaks jutting into a clean blue sky, of wolf and moose and mink roaming the woods and plains as they did for eons before the British and French fought at Quebec to see who would reign over this vast land.


CHILREN ARE ALONE
The names of the girls, families, teachers and schools in this article are pseudonyms.
The Times does not ordinarily employ fictional devices, but for her book, written in collaboration with the American Association of University Women, the author promised to protect the children's identities.
For the same reason, The Times was unable to photograph the subjects and instead asked Lynda Barry, an artist known for her appreciation of adolescents' sensibilities, to visualize the story.
ME!
ME!
ME!" APRIL WELCH, A 13-YEAR-OLD African-American girl, leans forward in her seat, waving her hand frantically in an attempt to catch the attention of her math teacher, who has just asked for the proper way to say "two over five."


'One Last Ride' Staged By a New Company
ON a recently heard political commercial, a voice makes a reference to gambling (and other social issues like welfare), beseeching listeners to "save our compassion for those who deserve it."
In "One Last Ride," which the newly formed National Stage Company is presenting in its East Coast premiere at the Blooming Grove Theater, the playwright, Patrick Cupo, means to sensitize audiences to the addicted gambler as one of society's maligned victims of compulsive behavior.


USX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Buying a Convertible? The Sky's the Limit
The convertible market has gone from the drought conditions of the late 1970's -- no American car maker offered a convertible from 1977 to 1981 -- to the flood of nearly 50 foreign and domestic offerings available today.
Convertibles can be had in a wider range of prices and styles than ever before, making wind-in-the-hair driving possible for almost everyone.
The Suzuki Samurai, for instance, is the least expensive droptop sold in the United States, with a base price of $10,019.
Decidely not for everyone is the car at the other end of the spectrum, the Rolls-Royce Corniche IV, which currently sets a buyer back $269,000 -- including the gas-guzzler tax but not counting an additional luxury tax of $23,900.


Corrections
An article on page 14 of the Travel section today, about Goodwood Racecourse in England, includes an outdated reference to Lure, the American horse that was to take part in the Sussex Stakes this Wednesday.
After the section went to press, Lure was withdrawn from the race because he had been vaccinated against an equine virus last year and might test positive.


Moira E. Kunkel, M. C. Wertheimer
Moira Elizabeth Kunkel, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joel W. Kunkel of Trumbull, Conn., was married there yesterday to Michael Charles Wertheimer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Wertheimer of Garrett Park, Md.
The Rev.
Thomas Lynch performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Wertheimer, 26, graduated from Georgetown University in Washington, where she is studying for a law degree.
Her father is an attending physician in the emergency room at Bridgeport (Conn.) Hospital.


Buying a Convertible? The Sky's the Limit
The convertible market has gone from the drought conditions of the late 1970's -- no American car maker offered a convertible from 1977 to 1981 -- to the flood of nearly 50 foreign and domestic offerings available today.
Convertibles can be had in a wider range of prices and styles than ever before, making wind-in-the-hair driving possible for almost everyone.
The Suzuki Samurai, for instance, is the least expensive droptop sold in the United States, with a base price of $10,019.
Decidely not for everyone is the car at the other end of the spectrum, the Rolls-Royce Corniche IV, which currently sets a buyer back $269,000 -- including the gas-guzzler tax but not counting an additional luxury tax of $23,900.


Legionnaires' Disease Is Cited in Death
The death of a Long Island man on Friday may be the first fatality from the outbreak of Legionnaires' disease among passengers who traveled on the cruise ship Horizon, health officials said yesterday.
The results of an autopsy on Pasquale Cantone, 68, of West Babylon, will not be available for two weeks, said officials at Good Samaritan Hospital in Islip, L.I.
But one of Mr.
Cantone's doctors, who is a specialist in infectious diseases, said it appeared likely that Mr.
Cantone died of Legionnaires' disease, a virulent form of pneumonia.


Shouting Into the Wind
The wind at least is free, nonpolluting, uncontroversial.
You would think.
But in England, a country with plenty of wind, some of the country folk are up in arms about windmills.
Country Guardian is the name of their protest group.
It is battling proposed wind farms, where up to a couple hundred windmills 100, or even 200, feet high could be built on pristine natural sites.
Not that the group is opposed to wind power per se.
"We're all in theory favoring wind," says Robert Woodward, the group's press officer.
"The old-style family windmill was fine."


Fruit for Thought
First there is the cherry, and then there are the pits.
A lesson I learned early in life, thanks to my best friend and next-door neighbor, Anne Stutz, and our two imaginary playmates, Karen and Leslie.
Together we raided the cherry tree in Anne's backyard, an activity that yielded swift and certain punishment but left us undeterred.
We weren't bad.
We were just incapable of resisting the siren call of that gnarled tree.
Appraising the white clustered bloom of its spring bud, we were Famous Naturalists who could, at any moment, transmogrify into Famous Tourists ("Today it's cherry blossom time in Washington, D.C.") or Famous Farmers surveying our crop.
Inevitably we were Hansel and Gretel, surviving on wild berries in the woods.
This led directly to Young George Washington telling the painful and hideous truth.


ABOUT SPAM
From a nutritional perspective, Spam encompasses much of what is bad about the American diet.
A two-slice serving contains approximately 10 grams of fat and well over half a gram of sodium.
BARRY S. KENDLER Associate Professor of Biology Manhattan College Bronx


Veteran Skater's Warning: Stay Out of the Street
To the Editor:
The New York Times has done a disservice to the people of New York by printing Amy M. Spindler's breathless article about commuting on Rollerblades (July 17).
Stepping out into New York City traffic on a pair of skates is not only dangerous, it's just plain stupid.
Like swimming with alligators, it's what you don't see that you have to worry about.


Corrections
A picture caption on June 26 about the Timberhill Ranch in Cazadero, Calif., misidentified buildings in the background.
They are a pool house, on the left, and a flower barn, where flower-arranging for the ranch is done, on the right; the buildings are not guest cottages.


'Wanted' Posting
No need to run to the post office.
"Wanted" posters are now on line.
The Air Force Office of Special Investigations made Internet history on June 24 when its computer crime officers posted a "Fugitive Sought!" message to several news groups.
The Air Force and the Okaloosa County, Fla., sheriff's office are trying to track down Edward Jon Zakrzewski, an Air Force sergeant who allegedly killed his wife and two daughters.
The posting included a description of his car, a blue 1992 Geo Prism, and his license number, and noted that he had Internet access.
His on-line ID: zakrzews.
If you have information about him, contact the Air Force at masseyd@eglin.af.mil or (904) 882-2152/5565, or the Okaloosa sheriff at (904) 651-7400.


Kellogg Co. (K,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Nueva Basque Cuisine of San Sebastian
SAN Sebastian is a small, elegant seaside resort that feels frozen in time.
This turn-of-the-century Basque village of 175,000 inhabitants is built around an enchanting scallop-shaped bay, protected by mountains from the ravages of the Atlantic.
Expansive sandy beaches, a fishing port, wide promenades and an exuberant old town of cobbled streets lined with lively bars make it an ideal summer destination.
It is just a 45-minute drive south of the French Basque towns of Bayonne and Biarritz.
Before Europeans began flocking to the Costa del Sol in Spain, they came to San Sebastian -- also known by its Basque name, Donostia -- made fashionable by wealthy Spaniards in the 1880's.
Most of the buildings date from the late 19th century, for this ancient site has burned to the ground more than a dozen times.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Activated Jerome Walton, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Designated Steve Pegues, outfielder, for assignment.
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Tim Bishop, outfielder.


In Macau, a Theater Makes a Comeback
The Dom Pedro V theater in Macau, built in 1859, has reopened after a three-year renovation.
The building, which has a red tile roof and an arched portico with Ionic columns, was a center for touring opera companies and soloists in its heyday at the turn of the century.
It was last used for a burlesque revue in 1986.
The Orient Foundation, a preservation organization based in Macau, restored the building.


Sun Microsystems Inc.(SUNW,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coach Has Solved This Case Before
It is 1977, and George Henshaw is a coach at Florida State University.
Seventeen years before Henshaw would become the offensive coordinator of the New York Giants and be in the center of a quarterback duel between Kent Graham and Dave Brown, there were Wally Woodham and Jimmy Jordan.
Henshaw has an impressive resume, working for some of the best offensive minds in the game.
Now, his boss is Coach Dan Reeves.
At Florida State, it was Bobby Bowden, and the controversy was who should start, Woodham or Jordan?
Both were freshmen and it was an emotional duel, especially since both grew up in Tallahassee, Fla., and even went to the same high school.
Eventually the staff went to a rotating system -- the hot hand theory of football.


Angel Island
To the Editor: In "Picnics and Historic Sites on West's 'Ellis Island'," (June 5) Ann K. Ludwig did an excellent job describing Angel Island's myriad attractions and scenic beauty.
Since the article was written, however, our Angel Island Company, the concessionaire that took over last August, has upgraded the island's amenities, and I would like to add information.


Conversations/Ivan Velez Jr.; A Writer Dreams of Comic Epics And a Closet-less Culture
IVAN VELEZ Jr. is a writer -- not of best-selling novels or how-to manuals, but of comic books.
Someone else does the drawing, but he concocts the scenarios, and the scenarios he concocts are different from the old-fashioned -- as in Bam!
Pow! -- stories.
One recent long-running series was called "Tales of the Closet," about gay and bisexual teen-agers and their problems.
Nontraditional heroes are popular in the booming comic-book marketplace: Last year DC Comics, the oldest publisher of comic books, began distributing Mr.
Velez's works and other titles from his publisher, Milestone Media.
Recently, Mr.
Velez talked with James Barron of The New York Times about his characters and his aspirations.
Q.
How did you get into writing for comic books?


Service Agencies Stung
WITH United Way of Westchester and Putnam's recent announcement that it had failed to meet its annual campaign goal for the third time in four years, nonprofit groups in the area found themselves struggling to make up the difference.
On June 30, the local United Way reported that it had raised $14.2 million during its 1993-94 campaign -- exceeding last year's total by about $34,000, but still falling short of its most recent $14.5 million goal.


Yankee Official Resigns in Dispute Over Racial Remarks
Embroiled in controversy for a week during which he insisted that he never called black youths "monkeys," a Yankees executive has resigned, the team announced yesterday.
"I've made up my mind to resign," the executive, Richard Kraft, said in a statement released by the Yankees.
"It's my personal decision. It's the right thing to do for my health and for the Yankees."


They Don't Write 'Em Like . . .
To the Editor:


Beth D. Levi, Duff G. Campbell
Beth Dina Levi, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David B. Levi of Cambridge, Mass., is to be married today to Duff Gordon Campbell, the son of Mrs.
Creighton L. Morris of Chatham, Mass., and Bruce S. Campbell of Harwich, Mass.
Rabbi Paul H. Levenson is to perform the ceremony at the house of the bride's parents in Craftsbury, Vermont.


'Bastard Out of Carolina'
To the Editor:
Sometime soon after reading Dorothy Allison's novel "Bastard Out of Carolina," I attended a writers' conference where I met a number of publishing industry professionals.
Talk at such a conference naturally revolved around books, and I found myself mentioning "Bastard Out of Carolina" several times as a book I had recently read and found extraordinary.
In a number of the subsequent conversations, the topic of lesbianism came up, with one agent expressing admiration for the book "except for the lesbian stuff."


Two Special Effects (a Crib Sheet)
FROM THE BEGINNING, MOVIE audiences have been asked to marvel.
In 1903, in nickelodeons where "The Great Train Robbery" was playing, women screamed when the desperado fired his gun at the audience.
This summer, a feather floats miraculously down from the sky onto Tom Hanks's shoe in "Forrest Gump" and Jim Carrey swallows a bundle of dynamite in "The Mask." Will audiences believe their eyes?
They'd better not.
Today, computer-generated images are turning reality upside down in more subtle ways than they did when they brought dinosaurs back to life in "Jurassic Park." The lies that computers tell are growing larger -- and harder to detect.
In "The Mask" Jim Carrey is turned into a Tex Avery cartoon; the only puzzle is at what physical point the actor ends and the animation begins.
"Forrest Gump" plays more devious tricks: audiences may well believe that the actor Gary Sinise has no legs or that Tom Hanks actually showed his bare bottom to President Lyndon B. Johnson.


Prison Sentences Seem Likely in Trial of 14 Chinese Dissidents
The trial of 14 Chinese dissidents, the first major political trial here in three years, is drawing to a close, with family members and human rights groups warning that the defendants will almost certainly be sentenced to long prison terms.
The dissidents were arrested more than two years ago in a crackdown on newly formed pro-democracy and labor groups, and their joint trial has been repeatedly postponed until now.


Shannon Green, William Hanson
Shannon Marie Green, a daughter of Leslie A. Stewart of Bellevue, Wash., and John M. Green of Long Beach, Calif., was married yesterday to William Rockefeller Hanson, a son of Mrs.
David F. Ogilvy and Dr.
Ervin E. Hanson, both of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Walker performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Hanson, 26, is an associate at ICF Inc., an environmental consulting company in Fairfax, Va.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley and received a master's degree in public health from Yale University.
Her father is a retired pilot for Trans World Airlines.
Her mother is a bereavement counselor and hypnotherapist in Bellevue.


Gabriella Safran and Michael Kahan
Gabriella Safran, the daughter of Marian and Dr.
William Safran of Boulder, Colo., is to be married there today to Michael Kahan, the son of Ellen and Jerrold Kahan of Peekskill, N.Y.
The ceremony is to be performed by Rabbi Steven Steinberg at the University of Colorado Memorial Center.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals (APD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Journal; Camp Visiting Day
In the letters he has scrawled to me from camp so far, my 10-year-old son, Simon, has reported one ear infection, one long night of watching his counselor involuntarily lose his dinner into a bedside pail, one stomach bug of his own and one incident of being smacked accidentally with a hockey stick.
He is, of course, having a marvelous time.
Simon is a novice at sleepaway camp.
His 14-year-old brother, Nat, is an old hand, which means that his letters are even shorter, more infrequent and less legible.
As befits his advanced status, his bunk recently got to spend some time with their peers at the neighboring girls' camp.
His succinct verdict: "They're all Jewish princesses." Some ethnic stereotypes -- especially among Jewish princes -- die hard.


Peter Brown, 80, Ex-Official For Justice Department, Dies
Peter Campbell Brown, a New York lawyer who was a former New York City corporation counsel and a former Justice Department official, died yesterday at United Hospital Medical Center in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 80 and lived in Rye Brook, N.Y.
The cause was cardiorespiratory failure, said his son Peter C. Jr., and he had been suffering from osteomyelitis.


Rams Sign Top Pick to Five-Year Deal
The Los Angeles Rams yesterday signed first-round draft pick WAYNE GANDY to a five-year contract reportedly worth about $5.1 million.
Gandy, a 6-foot-4-inch, 290-pound offensive tackle from Auburn University, was the 15th pick in the draft.
He is projected as an immediate starter at left tackle for the Rams, who raised their offer on Friday to avoid a lengthy holdout. (AP)


Wendy Glassman, Mark Reiss
Wendy Glassman, a daughter of Audrey and Jerrold Glassman of Bellmore, L.I., is to be married today to Mark Reiss, the son of Gail Reiss and Dr.
William Reiss of North Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Bernard Glassman, the bride's uncle, is to officiate at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 26, is a school psychologist with the New York City Board of Education in Queens.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and received master's degrees in educational psychology and school psychology from Fordham University.
Her father, now retired, was the Superintendent of School District 15 in Brooklyn.
Her mother is an elementary teacher at Public School 114 in Belle Harbor, Queens.


London Traffic Plan Becomes Permanent
An experimental program limiting traffic in the City of London last summer has become permanent.
The plan, which was designed to improve security in the one-square-mile area, was introduced after the explosion of car bombs planted by the Irish Republican Army, including an April 1993 explosion at Bishopsgate.
The area encompasses London's financial district, including the Bank of England in Threadneedle Street, which has its own museum, the Guildhall, and the Lloyd's of London building.
Tourist attractions such as St.
Paul's Cathedral and the Barbican Center are on the edge of the area affected by the plan.
The aim of the program is to reroute through traffic onto the City's main roads, leaving the side streets free for essential local traffic only.
The core of the City's street pattern has survived since medieval times and many of the streets are very narrow, winding between historic buildings.
The restrictions limit access to this area to eight routes, one of which is for buses and taxis only.
Some 20 intersections have been closed.
Access points are staffed by the City of London Police.


Quantum Corp.(QNTM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Lisa D. Clampitt, Joseph Lucchese
Lisa Diane Clampitt, the daughter of Annina Clampitt of New York and Robert Clampitt of Washington, was married yesterday to Joseph Lucchese, the son of Maureen and Bernard Lucchese of Haverstraw, N.Y.
The Rev.
Michele Curtis, a nondenominational minister, officiated at Moran's Townhouse, a restaurant in New York.
The bride, 30, is a social worker at Bellevue Hospital Center in New York.
She graduated from New York University and received her master's degree in social work from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the founder and president of the Children's Express Foundation, an international news service that carries reports written by children, in Washington.
Her mother is an assistant in the factors division at Republic National Bank in New York.
The bride's stepmother, Susan Clampitt, is the deputy chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts in Washington.


Sound Bytes; I.B.M. Software Chief Sees an Opening for OS/2
WHEN the United States Department of Justice announced its settlement with the Microsoft Corporation eight days ago, perhaps no one was more pleased than Leland R. (Lee) Reiswig Jr., president of the IBM Personal Software Products Company in Austin, Tex.
Mr.
Reiswig's group is responsible for developing and marketing OS/2, I.B.M.'s operating system for personal computers.
The consent decree requires Microsoft to end its long-standing practice of charging computer makers a licensing fee on each machine sold, whether or not it contained MS-DOS or Windows.
Competitors say the licensing system inhibited competition.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Katonah; Estates, Reservoirs, Culture and Comforts
SHORTLY after Philip Batson and his wife, Deirdre Courtney-Batson, bought their 1870's Victorian house with its crenellated tower on Bedford Road 11 years ago, they learned where they really lived.
"Oh, you just bought Jimmy Williams's house," neighbors would tell them, referring to the harness maker who lived there 120 years before.


A Republican Who Sees Himself as a Revolutionary on the Verge of Victory
While the Democratic leaders in Congress are struggling to write health legislation that follows President Clinton's principles, Newt Gingrich, the Republican whip, has united his party in the House of Representatives against such a bill and hopes to use the issue as a springboard to win Republican control of the House.
This would not be a modest accomplishment.
Republicans now have 78 fewer seats than Democrats and have been a minority in the House for the last 40 years.


G.O.P. Delegates' Vote Sets Up a Primary
John Rowland, the former Congressman who nearly won the 1990 race for governor, was overwhelmingly nominated at the state Republican convention today to try again.
But the Secretary of the State, Pauline Kezer, narrowly qualified to challenge him in a primary.
After an excruciating four-and-a-half-hour roll-call in which intense pressure was put on Kezer delegates to change their votes and avoid a primary for the party, Mrs.
Kezer ended up with 196 votes, three more than the 15 percent she needed.


Commonwealth Edison (CWE,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


The Lessons of Japan Airlines
To the Editor:
The article on Japan Airlines by Susan Fishman Orlins (Viewpoints, July 3) was interesting.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
AMERICAN IMAGES
An exhibition of 55 black and white photographs by 31 prominent African-American photographers, selected from a pool of 55,000 images, may be seen at the Lyman Allyn Museum in New London through Aug. 7.


Tosco Corp.(TOS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


London Traffic Plan Becomes Permanent
An experimental program limiting traffic in the City of London last summer has become permanent.
The plan, which was designed to improve security in the one-square-mile area, was introduced after the explosion of car bombs planted by the Irish Republican Army, including an April 1993 explosion at Bishopsgate.
The area encompasses London's financial district, including the Bank of England in Threadneedle Street, which has its own museum, the Guildhall, and the Lloyd's of London building.
Tourist attractions such as St.
Paul's Cathedral and the Barbican Center are on the edge of the area affected by the plan.
The aim of the program is to reroute through traffic onto the City's main roads, leaving the side streets free for essential local traffic only.
The core of the City's street pattern has survived since medieval times and many of the streets are very narrow, winding between historic buildings.
The restrictions limit access to this area to eight routes, one of which is for buses and taxis only.
Some 20 intersections have been closed.
Access points are staffed by the City of London Police.


Books From The Times
THE ENVIRONMENT FROM YOUR BACKYARD TO THE OCEAN FLOOR: The New York Times Book of Science Literacy, Volume 2, by the writers of Science Times.
Edited by Nicholas Wade, Cornelia Dean and William A. Dicke. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) Scarcely any discipline makes the concerned lay reader feel more helpless than the environmental sciences.
Everything is connected to everything else: air-conditioning in Texas causes skin cancer in Kazakhstan; whatever anybody does makes everything worse.
"The Environment From Your Backyard to the Ocean Floor" means to help.
It is based principally on articles that appeared in The New York Times from 1990 to 1993; its editors say it is intended to provide readers an understanding of environmental issues by focusing "on the science that provides, or should provide, the framework for political discussion." Its 112 articles explore such recent newsworthy subjects as pollution in the former Communist nations, the perils of intelligence to parrots, the dangers of stocking game fish and the contribution of lawn mowers to smog.
Threats and disasters occupy most of the book, but interesting sections are devoted to the economic consequences of ecological studies, reassessments of previously identified menaces, and the possible restoration of damaged ecosystems.


Trapping Fire I. Rodents for Clues to Deadly Virus
FOR one week last month Federal officials on Fire Island set out 150 traps in largely uninhabitated areas to try to solve one of the most puzzling health mysteries in years.
How did more than 40 people, including a 22-year-old college student from Roslyn Harbor, contract the fatal North American hantavirus?
The scientists know certain facts about the virus.
Illness is caused by inhaling, and the virus is carried in microscopic airborne particles of rodent urine, feces or saliva.


Giddings &amp; Lewis Inc.(GIDL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


U.S. May Thwart China's Trade Goal
China, which has staked its national prestige on becoming a founding member of the World Trade Organization, must comply with the international group's rules before entry, a Clinton Administration official said here today.
In some of the bluntest language directed at Beijing over trade issues this year, Charlene Barshefsky, the deputy United States trade representative, accused the Chinese of widespread shortcomings in their compliance with global trade rules and demanded that the Chinese move toward resolving a list of outstanding trade grievances with Washington.


Lead Removal Won't Delay Start of School, Officials Say
Contractors have begun removing or covering up lead-based paint in about 240 New York City school classrooms, but the project is not expected to delay the start of school on Sept. 12, a spokesman for the Board of Education said yesterday.
The spokesman, John H. Beckman, said that the school board had signed at least two contracts for lead abatement, with more to follow.
The work began shortly after the school year ended on June 28, he said.


Airs on the Breeze


Corrections
An article, a subheading and a caption on July 10 about women from Africa who are pop singers misspelled the surname of the leader of the group Zap Mama.
She is Marie Daulne, not Dualne.


Latvia Amends Harsh Citizenship Law That Angered Russia
Bowing more to pressure from Europe than from Russia, the Latvian Parliament has amended a harsh new citizenship law that infuriated Moscow.
The amendments, passed Friday, eliminate a quota system that would have allowed only 2,000 resident aliens a year to become citizens.
The law would have meant that many of the several hundred thousand Russian-speakers living in Latvia could not have been naturalized until well into the next century.


Tandy Corp.(TAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Rights Leader Minimizes Racism as a Poverty Factor
In a marked departure from the longtime stance of many other civil rights leaders, the new head of the National Urban League is minimizing the significance of white racism as a factor in the poverty of inner-city blacks.
In a speech that he is to deliver on Sunday, Hugh P. Price, the league's president and chief executive officer, says that although racism is "still a well-documented and undeniable reality," intensified economic competition and employers' resulting need for better-educated, better-skilled workers are larger contributors to urban poverty.


Wall Street; For Brokers, Continuing Ed 101
AS every aging 60's radical knows, pass/ fail was one of the great scams of college life, providing a low-demand passport to the baccalaureate that still left time free for the next Dylan tour.
But pass/pass?


A Fair, Exhibitions And Visits to Studios
AN office mailbox shaped like a spiny critter and flowery silk banners above the front porch of an 1850 country store are the only visible clues that the Peters Valley Craft Center is not just another historic village.
Behind the well-preserved facades of a Greek Revival house, a Dutch Reformed church and 19th-century barns are dormitories, a central meeting place and studios for craft artists who come here from across the country.
This summer, students from Brazil, Mexico, Korea and Switzerland have also enrolled in the 80 courses offered.


Trying to Turn Downtown Around
IN MORE than two decades of public service, Carl Weisbrod has held some of the most important and challenging economic policy jobs in New York City government.
But while Mr.
Weisbrod's newest job, as the first president of a new Business Improvement District for lower Manhattan, is outside of government, it may prove to be the most ambitious one yet.
The aim of the business improvement district is to help reverse the economic erosion of the city's downtown economic center, where the recession and technological and other changes in the financial industries have left many buildings with vast amounts of vacant office space.


Method And Madness; TRIALS AND ERRORS
Science and the law are two systems of inquiry that diligently seek truth.
It's distressing enough when they arrive at discordant answers.
But in a number of recent cases, courts have endorsed legal theories of causation that merit credence only where the earth is flat.
The latest is that of silicone breast implants.
Several manufacturers have agreed in principle to pay $4.2 billion to women who believe they have been harmed by the devices.
You might suppose the courts had found, by a preponderance of evidence, that breast implants are iniquitously harmful.


Carolyn A. Koven, Jonathan Schindel
Carolyn Ann Koven, a daughter of Martha Koven of Tenafly, N.J., and the late Dr.
Bernard J. Koven, is to be married today in New York to Jonathan Barth Schindel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew M. Schindel of Centerport, L.I.
Rabbi Arthur Schwartz is to officiate at the Rainbow Room.
The bride, 27, is an associate at the New York law firm of Winston &amp; Strawn.
She graduated cum laude from New York University, from which she also received a law degree and a Master of Laws degree in taxation.
Her father was chief of oncology at the Englewood (N.J.) Hospital and Medical Center.
Her mother is a financial consultant in Tenafly.


Canada Bans Smoking On Its Airlines
The Canadian Government has banned smoking on all flights on Canadian airlines, except for some trips to Japan, on which smoking will be permitted until Aug. 31.
The move adds to a trend by airlines and countries to restrict smoking during air travel.
The two major Canadian carriers had themselves restricted or prohibited smoking in recent years.
Passengers on Air Canada flights have not been allowed to smoke since 1990, and Canadian Airlines has had a similar policy with some exceptions, including its 14 weekly flights from Vancouver and Toronto to Tokyo and Nagoya, Japan.


Jimmy Hoffa's Legacy
To the Editor:
In the review of "Mob Lawyer," by Frank Ragano and Selwyn Raab (June 5), Robert Lacey writes, "Jimmy Hoffa, Santo Trafficante and Carlos Marcello were three of the most notorious underworld figures of recent times."


A Tough Client, An Angelic Host And a Simple Soul
True Lies  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis, Tom Arnold Directed by James Cameron R 135 minutes


Little Is Known, Indeed
To the Editor
Your correspondent Alan Riding and the makers of the forthcoming film "Jefferson in Paris" seem confused as to whether Thomas Jefferson had affairs with Sally Hemings and Maria Cosway  [ "Getting It Right, and Going Light on the History," July 3 ] .


New International Cup Stresses Amateur Competition
In an effort to turn back the clock to a time when yachting was an amateur sport, the New York Yacht Club plans to stage a new international sailboat regatta with a format similar to the America's Cup.
Officials disavow any attempt to duplicate the America's Cup matches, which the New York club had orchestrated for 132 years before losing the prestigious trophy to Australia in 1983.
And, in fact, members of the New York club have expressed interest in a future America's Cup campaign of their own.


Editors' Note
A front-page article in the New Jersey Weekly today about pressure from parents to improve Newark's schools refers to the possibility that the state would take over operation of the district.


The World; When Money Talks, Governments Listen
THINK about the meaning of these numbers: The global currency markets trade about $1 trillion worth of dollars each day.
When the world's 17 largest central banks, led by the Federal Reserve, intervened last month to try to prop up the dollar, they dug deep into their pockets and came up with about $5 billion and change, which they threw into the market in an effort to bid up the value of the American currency.
No wonder they had little effect on the dollar.
The central banks were like a zoo keeper trying to calm a starved gorilla by offering it a raisin for lunch.
It really wasn't the fault of the governments, though.
Raisins, it seems, are all they have sometimes, compared with the assets of the huge capital, currency and bond markets they are trying to influence.
Whose world is this anyway?
The answer is that it is increasingly Adam Smith's world -- a world in which the balance of power between global financial markets and governments is tilting toward markets.
When it comes to global markets these days, the motto of governments is: "There they go, I must catch up, for I am their leader."


A Once-Proud Building Sees the Light of Day Again
For the first time in more than a decade, sunlight shines on the sidewalk at the southwest corner of Ninth Avenue and 57th Street.
The mysterious scaffolding that had girdled the Windemere since 1983 was finally dismantled three weeks ago.
With its boarded-up storefronts, the seven-floor brick apartment house looks abandoned.
But a dozen tenants hang on, despite a record of landlord harassment, neglected repairs and demolition plans.


Monsanto Co.(MTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ART CRITICISM  EMBODIED MEANINGS  Critical Essays &amp; Aesthetic Meditations.
By Arthur C. Danto.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $27.50.


For the Record
To the Editor:
In your article "Ticker Tags from 'M' to 'Zeus" (Wall Street, July 3), you listed the name of the company proudly bearing the symbol "JUKE" as "Video Junkbox Network."


A Plea for Marinas Along the Hudson
To the Editor:
Your article on June 26, headed "The Hudson Waterfront: What's Next," made no mention of any intended boating use (other than a canoe and kayak launch).
There would appear to be more than enough room for a marina to offer Manhattan residents and companies the opportunity to own, rent or use small boats along the Hudson.
Is there not a need to accommodate, at reasonable rates, boats smaller than the 110-foot yachts berthed at the World Financial Center?


Debate Over a McDonald's: Litter, Traffic, and Religion
A plan to open a McDonald's restaurant near a synagogue in Flatbush is being met with opposition from some community leaders who voice concerns about traffic, litter and possible security problems.
In addition, a City Councilman is saying the site in simply inappropriate because of its proximity to an Orthodox congregation and because McDonald's has shown past insensitivity to the Jewish community.


Not So Fast With the Last Rites; The Vinyl Underground Lives
BACK AROUND 1990, BLUE Note Records, like almost everyone else in the recording industry, ceased producing vinyl albums.
Sales were plunging.
The big chain music stores no longer stocked records.
In the Armageddon over recording formats that had begun just a half-dozen years earlier, the compact disk had won and won decisively.
R.I.P. the LP.
But last month, against all conventional industry wisdom, Blue Note began rolling out the first of a dozen titles on traditional 12-inch long-playing records.
The pressings are reissues of obscure, critically acclaimed jazz titles from the 1960's, including Ornette Coleman, Wayne Shorter and Clifford Jordan.
"We've lost our minds," said Tom Evered, the vice president for marketing.


The Executive Life; High-Tech Start-Ups Preen for Investors
'IT'S the debutante ball for successful private companies," said Richard Giordanella, the chief executive of Datalogix International Inc. of Valhalla, N.Y.
He was talking about the Emerging Growth Companies Conference sponsored by the American Electronics Association held earlier this month in Monterey, Calif.
It is one of four such A.E.A. conferences held each year -- in Cambridge, Mass., Austin, Tex. and twice in Monterey -- a tradition that began in 1974.
A fifth, much larger A.E.A. conference, the 23-year-old "classic" for publicly held technology companies, is held in Monterey in October.


Fine Hand for Stripping and Refinishing
WOODWORK can go bad, even if dutifully cared for.
Rehabilitating it is rather like refinishing furniture, but on a grander scale.
Stripping old finish and applying a new one are not always necessary.
Washing may be sufficient.
If the house is an antique, stripping may not be desirable.
Have a restoration expert examine antique woodwork before starting rehabilitation.


From a Striver's Row Home, A Trove of Black History
When Danny DeKind, an antiques collector, bought the crumbling brownstone at 232 West 138th Street a year ago, he envisioned months of hard work.
He knew the collapsing floors would have to be replaced, the rotting beams removed, and the garbage moldering in six-foot piles in the backyard hauled away.
But Mr.
DeKind also found himself digging through minutiae of a bygone era, rebuilding a sense of the heyday of Striver's Row.


Airline Went All Out to Find Missing Cat
To the Editor:
"Eight Lives to Go" (editorial, July 13) misstates Tower Air's position regarding Carol Ann Timmel's ability to enter our aircraft to search for her cat, Tabitha.


Political Memo; Examining the Broad Brush Cuomo Uses to Paint Rival
Racing to define George E. Pataki before the obscure Republican Senator can define himself, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's re-election campaign is seeking to depict Mr.
Pataki -- and the Republican Party in general -- as devoid of principle and willing to shift with the political breeze.
Central to that strategy is Mr.
Cuomo's suggestion that his challenger has been inconsistent on the crucial issues of abortion, taxes and gun control.
But as is often the case in campaigns, the full truth about Mr.
Pataki is not as simple as Mr.
Cuomo's characterization of him.


Playing Ball With the O.S.S.
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY The Mysterious Life of Moe Berg.
By Nicholas Dawidoff.
Illustrated. 453 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $24.


Nancy Weltchek, Henry Ferris
NANCY WELTCHEK, a 34-year-old vice president at Edelman Public Relations Worldwide in New York, a serious Knicks fan and a gregarious dinner guest, has been on so many disastrous blind dates that she and a friend are writing a guide to surviving them.
"The worst one was the guy who asked for the check while I was still eating my entree," she said.
"We also had a fight within five minutes of sitting down. He told me what I had to eat and it was chicken salad with pineapples, and I hate chicken and fruit mixed together. When I got home that night, I wept."


Correction
An article last Sunday about President Clinton's use of Presidential power referred incorrectly to a published account of an argument he had last summer with Senator Bob Kerrey, a Nebraska Democrat, over the Senator's vote on the President's budget package.
The account, in "The Agenda: Inside the Clinton White House" by Bob Woodward, said Mr.
Clinton cursed at Mr.
Kerrey, not vice versa.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
PEEKSKILL ON THE WALL
Three artists in Peekskill are achieving their dream of painting an outdoor mural of the city's history, and by doing so defining the downtown art district that is rejuvenating the area.
"We've raised about $6,000 in grants, largely from the Westchester Arts Council and the city of Peekskill," said Maria Fee, one of the three artists, "but we need $2,000 or $3,000 more."


New York Leading in Summer Nationals
Star-studded bridge teams from New York and Ohio clashed today in the final of the Grand National Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
After 16 deals of a scheduled 64, New York led Ohio by 7 imps.
The New York foursome of Jim Cayne, Alan Sontag, David Berkowitz and Larry Cohen gained 31 imps in the final quarter Friday night to win their semifinal by 40 against a strong Texas squad.
The Ohio team consists of Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell, both multiple world champions, and Doug Simson and Walter Johnson.
They were in trouble against a New England team, trailing by 38 into the final 16 deals, but gained 54 to win by 16.


Aid Workers Struggle to Keep Up With Dying
Amid the choking stench of a refugee camp, Geonest Muhawenimana watched today as his second child arrived nearly four months premature and stillborn.
He was surrounded by scores of dead and hundreds more of the dying, including the child's mother, a cholera victim.
A nurse from the relief agency Doctors Without Borders carried the infant'sbody in a bucket toward a truck bearing scores of other corpses bound for a common grave.
After escaping the civil war and massacres that killed countless thousands of Rwandans in the last three months, Mr.
Muhawenimana, a farmer, had brought his family to this area spotted with lush, green banana groves and crowned by majestic volcanic peaks.
But today he said, "I regret coming here." Wretched Conditions
There are fewer people dying of cholera at Munigi than at some of the other refugee camps.
But that is more a testament to the wretched conditions at the other camps than it is to any ability, so far, to stem the disease here.


E. L. Aldrich, Philip Gillespie
Elizabeth Louise Aldrich, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Aldrich of New Hyde Park, L.I., was married yesterday to Philip Miller Gillespie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip G. Gillespie of Spring Valley, Ohio.
The Rev.
Albert E. Amend performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church in Williston Park, L.I.
Mrs.
Gillespie, 28, is a senior financial analyst at the American Express Travel Related Services Company in New York.
She graduated from Duke University, from which she also received an M.B.A.


Saluting the Negro Leagues
The annual All-Star Game on July 12 was not the only celebratory event at baseball's midseason break.
On July 16 the main gallery of the new Negro Baseball Museum opened in Kansas City, Mo.
The museum stands just a block from the former Paseo Y.M.C.A. where the Negro National League began in 1920.
Loosely organized in the years after the Civil War, the Negro Leagues had their heyday from 1920 through 1948, before folding around 1960.
At present the museum includes a photo gallery and nostagia wall featuring recreations of league uniforms.


Finding the Bad Lieutenant
A recent novel, "A Philosophical Investigation," describes a computer registry of potential serial killers.
The story is set in the near future; a characteristic brain anomaly has been found in these killers.
The potential murderers are watched and sent to counseling.
That's fiction.
The Chicago Police Department now has an Automated Early Warning System, a computer program that identifies cops who are likely to cross the line into corruption or brutality.
They'll be watched and counseled.
That's fact.


In Gaza, Palestinians Are Now Yearning for Prosperity
Every morning, unemployed laborers seeking permits to work in Israel crowd around Palestinian government offices in this refugee district, their simmering discontent a challenge to Yasir Arafat and his new administration in the impoverished Gaza Strip.
Increasingly, Palestinians here are wondering whether their newly won political freedom will also bring economic self-reliance, or whether this limited autonomy will only perpetuate economic dependence and hardship.


A Stroll In the Garden
The Monmouth County (N.J.) Historical Association, July 17.


George E. Block, 67, Innovator In Surgery for Various Cancers
Dr.
George Edward Block, a surgeon who developed new techniques in gastrointestinal surgery, died last Sunday at the University of Chicago Medical Center.
He was 67 and lived in Yorkville, Ill.
Dr.
Block, who had undergone three heart bypass operations, died of cardiac arrest, according to the center, where he was the Thomas D. Jones Professor of Surgery.


At a Rustic Retreat, Sibelius Explored His Many Selves
STEREOTYPES TEND TO fix themselves in the public perception: the ever-affable Papa Haydn, the child-man Mozart of "Amadeus" caricature; not least, the stoically austere Sibelius, as granite-willed as his forehead was monumental.
In truth, Finland's greatest composer was a man of many moods -- by turns turbulent and reposed, a dreamer and a reveler.
As a creator, he veered between faith in his genius and tortuous self-doubt.
Hopeless at managing money, he dined on oysters and cognac even when heavily in debt.
He tended to be reclusive, retreating into his world of symphonic imagination; no composer has known a deeper kinship with elemental nature.
Yet he was a brilliant raconteur, a bon vivant -- a grand seigneur, dressing immaculately, ordering his shirts from London.


Lilco's Problems Caused Lilco's Rates
I find it necessary to respond to Richard Doremus's letter  [ July 3 ] .
Mr.
Doremus does not understand the facts regarding Lilco rates and Shoreham.
Mr.
Doremus suffers from the false impression that somehow Governor Cuomo's settlement to close Shoreham is responsible for Long Island's having the highest electric rates in the nation.
This is simply not true.


An Earful of Noisy Sludge From Three New York Bands
IT MAY SEEM GLAMOROUS when New York is described in tourist brochures as the city that never sleeps, but it's also the city that never washes.
The walls of the subway stations are blackened from years of neglect.
The streets of the East Village smell worse than the open fish markets of Chinatown and even the Upper East Side has become a labyrinth of overflowing garbage bags.
For bands based in the Lower East Side like Helmet, Unsane and Surgery, making music that reflects the environment means turning rock-and-roll into dirty, noisy sludge that assaults instead of soothes.


USX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Literary Equivalent of Shock Therapy
To the Editor:
On the Letters page of the July 3 issue, Louise M. Forscher writes: " 'High-Concept Classics: A Quiz' (June 5) is clever, but one answer -- 'The Inferno' -- is inaccurate: Dante didn't meet up with Beatrice until 'Paradiso.' The answer demonstrates the sad fact that most readers go no farther than 'The Inferno,' and tend to think that's all there is to 'The Divine Comedy.' "


DPL Inc.(DPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Waffling At Columbia
To the Editor:
In his article "Eastern Art Through Western Eyes"  [ July 10 ] , Holland Cotter laments that "there is a very strong possibility that within a year no university in New York City will offer graduate-level courses in Indian art." He adds that "Columbia appears to be waffling on whether it will keep Indian art in its curriculum."


The World; Unifying? Not Now, Please
FOR more than four decades, South Koreans waited for the day when Kim Il Sung, the Communist leader of North Korea, would die or be toppled.
Once the man who started the Korean War was gone, it was thought, the opportunity would arise to unify the Korean peninsula.
But when the "Great Leader" finally passed away this month at the age of 82, South Koreans worried rather than rejoiced.
What they worried about more than anything else was reunification.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption last Sunday about living in New Providence, N.J., misidentified a condominium complex on Floral Avenue and misstated its size.
The complex is Murray Hill Square, and it has 56 units, not 55.
The article also misstated the location of Our Lady of Peace School.
It is on South Street, not Passaic Avenue.


Ideas &amp; Trends; When Fact Is Treated as Fiction
THE most remarkable fact about the opening chapter of Bob Woodward's latest blockbuster, "The Agenda: Inside the Clinton White House," isn't the revelation that it was Hillary Clinton who finally persuaded her husband to run for President when he was still plagued by doubts; nor is it that biographical candor now extends to the bedroom, in which the decisive conversation is alleged to have occurred.
No, the most remarkable fact about this chapter is that it contains so few verifiable facts -- unless you count the information that in August 1991 the Clintons were sleeping in the guest house of the Governor's mansion in Little Rock, Ark., while the mansion itself was undergoing renovation.


Tandy Corp.(TAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Cold War Tale Becomes a 1999 Thriller That Yet Seems Dated
THE ART AND WORK ensemble's presentation of "The Manchurian Candidate," now at the Theater Row Theater on West 42d Street, is so windy, its satire so smudged, that it's not easy to tell where the fault lies.
It could be in the unfocused, amateurish production itself, which involves 18 actors playing more than 40 roles in almost as many locations as you would find in a three-hour movie.
Or it could be in the John Lahr stage adaptation.
This updates Richard Condon's grandly skeptical cold war suspense novel from the paranoid, Commie-obsessed 1950's to the late 1990's.
By the year 1999, according to Mr.
Lahr, United States military forces will be on permanent peace-keeping patrol in and around the site of the 1991 gulf war.
American boys, instead of being shot at by the Chinese Communist-backed North Koreans, as they were in the Korean War in the Condon novel, will be the targets of fanatical "Shiite guerrillas," equipped by heaven knows whom.
At the same time, Americans will be so furious about Japanese ownership of American real estate that a demagogic politician could use the issue as successfully as Senator Joseph R. McCarthy used his bogus, anti-Communist witch hunts in the early 1950's.


Monsanto Co.(MTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Graf Wins Twice  Indoors and out, Steffi Graf prevailed over two longtime rivals yesterday to advance to the final of the Pathmark Tennis Classic in Mahwah, N.J.
Pam Shriver extended the world's top-ranked women's player before losing, 7-6 (7-1), 7-6 (8-6), in a morning match that had been interrupted by rain on Friday night.
After a two-hour break, the five-time Wimbledon champion played Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere in the first semifinal.
Graf took the first set, 6-2, and was leading, 3-0, in the second, when the match was interrupted for three hours by rain.
It was moved to a nearby indoor tennis club, where Graf required 12 minutes to complete a 6-2, 6-1 victory.
In today's final at 11:30 A.M., Graf will play Lisa Raymond, who beat 17-year-old Nino Louarsabishvily of Russia, 6-2, 6-3, in the other semifinal.


St. Petersburg
To the Editor: In regard to "What's Doing in St. Petersburg" (May 29), my wife and I returned from there this spring and would like to warn about gypsy youngsters.
A gang of them attacked us in broad daylight on a crowded plaza behind the Hermitage Museum.
With the help of our daughter, who works in Russia, we were able to fight them off.
No one in the crowd helped.
We stayed in a youth hostel with a panoramic view of the Neva River at a cost of $30 a night for the two of us, including a substantial breakfast.
Showers and bathrooms were down the hall but clean.
It was two or three blocks from the Finland Railway Station and about a 15-minute walk from the Hermitage.


Managers Hum September Song When Plotting July Strategy
In comparing their sport with other sports, baseball people like to call their season a footrace.
"It's a marathon, not a sprint," Don Baylor said, echoing the popular view.
But, the Colorado Rockies' manager added, altering the metaphor to reflect current events, "now you don't know where the finish line is. It could be five feet away, it could be five miles away. Because of the impending strike, it's like almost breakneck speed to whatever the finish line is."


Kendall International (KEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


An Arid 'Landscape of Extremes'
SHOULD South Africa ever develop its film industry, it need look no further than its vast interior for sets and inspiration for a Wild West genre.
The Karoo, as the great dry prairie plains and huge mountain ranges that cover nearly a third of the country are known, is ready made for tales of hardy pioneers, settlers battling indigenous peoples, and humanity waging a war for survival against nature, for those are the contours of its history.
The residents of the Karoo are survivors in what a character in a play by Athol Fugard, South Africa's enduring dramatic voice, called a "landscape of extremes" -- vast spaces devoid of human life, brutal drought-inducing heat in summer, floods, bitter cold and, this year at least, snow in winter.
But it is also a landscape of subtlety, of changing shapes and particularly colors, as the mountains act as a canvas for the sun's light, metamorphosing from unearthly purple to cerulean blue to drab brown depending on time of day, distance and season.


In America; Little Criminals, Big Crimes
When a juvenile commits a crime in New York State, the case in most instances is handled in Family Court.
But under state law, Family Court judges are not authorized to issue arrest or search warrants.
This, to put it mildly, is a problem.
A report prepared recently for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said: "The police cannot enter the home of a juvenile suspected of committing a crime to arrest him, even if they are sure he is there. Because of this limitation, police officers must either ask the suspect to come to the police station voluntarily to be arrested, or, alternatively, post an officer outside the home in order to arrest the suspect on his way in or out."


Kiku Teramoto, W. J. O'Shea Jr.
Kiku Lynn Teramoto, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Teramoto of Mesa, Ariz., was married yesterday to William Joseph O'Shea Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Shea of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
John Kelly officiated at St.
Matthew Roman Catholic Church in Conshohocken, Pa.
Mrs.
O'Shea and her husband, both 27, graduated from Lafayette College.
She received an M.B.A. from Villanova University and is a production engineer at Moore Products, a manufacturer of industrial controls in Spring House, Pa.
Mr.
O'Shea is a project manager at the Fuller Company, a construction concern in Bethlehem, Pa.


Love Among the Risk Takers and Risk Averse
IT seems they stood and talked like this before.
She remembers, instantly, where (the Isle of Capri overlooking the bay of Naples) and when (22 years ago).
It isn't long before he remembers, too.
Now on a veranda with a drop-dead view of Boston Harbor, surrounded by stars as if in possession of them.
And yes, they are thinking of asking for the moon.
In "Later Life" A. R. Gurney establishes his most romantic setting yet.
The scenic designer for the production at Westport Country Playhouse, Richard Ellis, has lived up to his part of the celestial bargain.


American Home Products (AHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
"The biggest single physical churches have 25,000 members. I got more than that, but we don't have a bowling alley." LYNNE BUNDESEN, who moderates a computer-based religious forum.  [ 38:5. ]


Ms. Hoppenstein, Mr. Zucker
Deborah Joy Ruth Hoppenstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham S. Hoppenstein of Mamaroneck, N.Y., is to be married today to Brian Keith Zucker, a son of Judge Barbara Zucker-Zarett of Parsippany, N.J., and Marshall Zucker of Denver.
Rabbi Joshua Finkelstein is to officiate at the Homestead, an inn in Greenwich, Conn.
The bride, 27, is a media supervisor at Arian, Lowe, Travis &amp; Gusick, an advertising agency in Chicago.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology and from Boston University.
Her father is the president of Chartres International Ltd., investment bankers in Mamaroneck.
From 1979 to 1986 he was South Africa's consul general in Washington and then in New York.
The bride's mother, Taubene J. Hoppenstein, teaches kindergarten at the Temple Israel Center in White Plains.


Imo Industries Inc.(IMD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Marian Shelton and Saul Cohen
Marian Shelton, a lawyer in New York, is to be married today to Saul Cohen, a partner in the New York law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is to officiate at Gracie Mansion.
Rabbi Nathan Goldberg will also take part in the ceremony.
The bride graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received her law degree from Fordham University.
Her parents, Blossom and Martin Shelton of Brooklyn, are both retired.
Her father was a partner in the former law firm of Shea &amp; Gould in New York.
Her mother was an elementary school teacher at Public School 99 in Brooklyn.


Brooklyn Woman Killed by Motorcycle
An elderly Brooklyn woman died after being struck by a speeding motorcyclist as she tried to cross the street late Friday, the police said yesterday.
The driver was whisked away from the scene by a partner traveling on a separate motorcycle.
Melvina Emery, 73, of 750 Essex Street in East New York, was hit at 11:10 P.M. at Essex Street and Hegeman Avenue, a short distance from her home, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck-Mladinich, a police spokeswoman.


Meanwhile, Over in Queens . . .


Elizabeth Izzo, L. K. Waters Jr.
Elizabeth Christina Izzo, the daughter of Mary Lou Sweeney of Red Bank, N.J., was married yesterday to Leighton Kinsley Waters Jr., a son of Anita G. Waters of Rumson, N.J., and the late Mr.
Waters.
The Rev.
John Zach performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Cross Church in Rumson.


Open-Ear Policy
One morning when I was about 3, I called my mother a Faulpelz.
She took it in stride, probably figuring that Faulpelz was one of those German words, like Dummkopf, that I had picked up from my European polyglot father and used the way I might shake a bell, because it had a nice ring to it.
A few months ago I finally got around to asking some Germans what a Faulpelz is.
The word means "lazy skin" -- the equivalent of "lazybones." Only Faulpelz sounds better.
More and more I've noticed that so much sounds better if we can find a bon mot for it from another language.
We may mock the French for trying to replace English terms like "talk show" and "prime time" with causerie and heures de grande ecoute.
But I think the French are far more open-minded about absorbing foreign words than Americans.


Italian Style With Asian Accents
THE influx of weekending New Yorkers has already altered the once sleepy culinary landscape of northwestern Connecticut.
This is evident in the new Bee Brook in Washington Depot, which overlooks the surging Shepaug and Bee Brook rivers and maximizes its site with two dining decks shaded by giant oaks and maples.
Indoors the atmosphere is more sophisticated: a small, high-ceiling room with a handsome wooden floor, large Colonial-style wrought-iron chandeliers, a dramatic fieldstone fireplace, well-spaced tables and subdued lighting.


From the Ashes of the Blitz
LONDON'S BURNING Life, Death and Art  in the Second World War.
By Peter Stansky  and William Abrahams.
Illustrated. 201 pp.
Stanford, Calif:  Stanford University Press. $29.95.


Hot Under the Collar
In the current "Wyatt Earp," and in other movies as well, the marshal of Tombstone, Ariz., is all dressed up.
In reality, on the day of the famous shootout, Oct. 26, 1881, he wore a black hat, black coat, vest, tie and long woolen underwear.
Even in October it can reach 85 degrees in Tombstone, but Earp wore the same clothes in the summer.
Was he incredibly hot?
Opinions vary:
"Yeah, they were hot in Tombstone. The Earps were not cowboys, but gamblers. They wore heavy frock coats. That's how people dressed in the Victorian era in the West." -- JOHN LANGELLIER, GENE AUTRY WESTERN HERITAGE MUSEUM
"I'm not sure they did feel hot. It was a cold day that October. The wind was blowing, and it snowed that night in the hills." -- CARL CHAFIN, EARP RESEARCHER
"They absolutely sacrificed comfort for style. It was about respectability."
-- DAVID TATUM, ARIZONA HISTORICAL SOCIETY  "I don't think I could adjust to the kind of clothes they wore. I've never been a hat person." -- ROBERT GERENCSER, CURRENT MARSHAL OF TOMBSTONE  Gerencser wears short-sleeved shirts all year -- over a bulletproof vest.


A SENSE OF PLACE
THE perpetually hard-working citizens of New Jersey are overstressed.
And yes, they are overworked.
Overprogrammed.
Frazzled!
And so, even as the vacationing population of the Garden State approaches the very zenith of summer indolence, some New Jerseyans are finding it difficult to relax.
The greatest challenge?
To do nothing.
Nothing at all.
And how can that impossible vacation goal be accomplished?
Here is a list of tried and tested strategies:


New England Electric System (NES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
The Sunday View column on the theater page on June 26, reviewing the American Jewish Theater revival of the musical "Milk and Honey," misidentified an actor.
James Barbour, who had left the show, returned before it was reviewed; his replacement, Michael Park, did not perform.


On Sunday; The Prison, The Quick And the Dead
SOME of the best jail time in Rikers Island prison, by inmates' own reckoning, is done across the water on Hart Island, where a work gang of 30 men commutes five days a week in handcuffs to dig paupers' graves, climbing down unmanacled into the trenches of Potter's Field to heft the city's forgotten dead into place.
"A hundred years of fine tuning," notes Capt.
Gregory J. Edmonds, who is in charge of what is a smooth, greatly prized work detail.
It lets inmates and keepers out from the cells to take a ferry ride deep into life with the gulls coursing against the skyscraper horizon.


How to Get the Dollar Off This Roller Coaster
To the Editor:
After the Federal Reserve and other central banks bought billions of American dollars with Japanese yen, German marks and other currencies to shore up the value of the dollar in late June, the dollar kept sliding (news article, July 12.) Central banks have thus absorbed huge losses, at taxpayer expense.


Housing for Ex-Drug Abusers? Not Here, Say the Neighbors
When a 20-unit condominium was built at 297 First Street in the late 1980's, some Park Slope residents said, they thought it would be a nice addition to the neighborhood.
But a recent proposal by a nonprofit social-service agency to buy the building is stirring concerns.
Upset by plans of the Institute for Community Living, based in Brooklyn, to buy the one- and two-bedroom apartments and turn them into permanent housing for recovering substance abusers with a history of mental illness and homelessness, residents are signing petitions and writing letters to their elected officials.
Some say they even plan to picket and withdraw money from the Greater New York Savings Bank, which owns the property.


POSTINGS: Real Estate Guides; Free and Not Quite
The City of New York is offering two new books of interest to those in the real-estate field.
One of the books is free.
The other costs $450.
Plus tax.
The free volume is called "The Guide to Mandatory Recycling in the Workplace," and is of special interest to managers and owners of commercial property.


Samuel Zucker and Lorraine Andres
Lorraine Evans Andres, an editor at Scholastic Inc. in New York, is to be married today to Samuel I. Zucker, an assistant to the director of the New York Times History Project, which preserves the newspaper's past through film and oral history.
Rabbi Shimon Berris is to officiate at the Breakers Hotel in Spring Lake, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph Indano, a Roman Catholic priest, will take part in the ceremony.
The bride, 33, graduated from the Catholic University of America and received a master's degree in instructional technology and media from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Leonard and Barbara Andres of Allenhurst, N.J.
Her father is an assistant vice president of Chemical Bank in New York.
Her mother, an actress, is a standby in the cast of "Kiss of the Spider Woman" on Broadway.


The Real Big-City Bargain? Take the Bad With the Good
To the Editor:
Janny Scott in "Parenthood: Rethinking the Big-City Bargain" (Coping, July 10), should continue to buy the vegetables, diapers, toothpaste and fish on Broadway.
Lighten up, Janny!
Broadway is where you live, and your 23-month-old should not be deprived of the vibrancy of that street -- good and bad.
My 2- and 4-year-olds have been riding the subway since infancy, and my older one has come to learn the lessons only city living can teach.
When she was 2, she saw a homeless man who hadn't bathed in weeks.
She felt sorry for him and went over to kiss his hand.
While I was a little startled, I felt proud of her.
This is her city, and she will take the bad with the good.
JANET MARKOFF  Manhattan


Planting by the Book, If You Feel That You Must
Gonzo gardening is all well and good, but most New Yorkers who long to make gardens grow in unnatural places may want a little more in the way of actual instruction.
Here are some basic tips for starting a garden and keeping it growing.
Much of the information comes from an interview with Linda Yang, the author of "The City Gardener's Handbook" (Random House, $26.95), who writes about gardening for The New York Times.
FOR THE TERRACE-LESS
Most New Yorkers, of course, aren't lucky enough to have their own terraces; what they do tend to have, though, are rooftops.
And many of those rooftops have gardens.
Just how hospitable a given rooftop is toward the gardening impulse is basically a matter of house rules.


Cartier Art Center Has New Paris Home
A new $18 million glass and metal building at 261 Boulevard Raspail in Paris is the home of the Cartier Foundation for Contemporary Art, which was previously in Jouy-en-Josas on the city's outskirts.
The site on the Boulevard Raspail was formerly occupied by the American Center before it moved to Frank Gehry's new building in the Bercy area, where it opened on June 8.
The Cartier Foundation building, designed by Jean Nouvel, the French architect who built the Institut du Monde Arabe in Paris and the Lyons Opera, which opened last summer, stands seven floors above and eight floors below the ground in a garden created by the landscape artist Lothar Baumgarten.


Frank Vardy and Jane Cunningham
Jane Catherine Cunningham, an advertising sales representative for The New York Times, was married on Friday to Francis Patrick Vardy, a demographer for the New York City Planning Department.
Msgr.
George Bardes officiated at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
The bride graduated from Marymount College.
She is a daughter of Dr.
James Cunningham of Tenafly, N.J., and the late Julie Cunningham.


Just When You Thought the Worst Was Over
I KNEW I had it bad when the car turned onto a drive marked F.D.R. and the words "formal dining room" danced before my eyes.
Maybe, I thought, I should have held out for an FDR, even though I think I did pretty well with my EIK w/Hrwd Flr, not to mention my Lo Mt and Gt Clsts.
They tell me that buying property ranks just below divorce and death in the stress sweepstakes.
I believe it, especially in the funhouse mirror of New York real estate, where an agent once tried to convince me that a mini-refrigerator placed in a hallway detracted not a whit from the apartment's ambiance.


Imo Industries Inc.(IMD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Penny-Stock Promoters Just Won't Go Away
THE crooks you shall always have with you . . . also the sleazeballs, con artists, flim-flam men, touts and sharks -- not to mention those well-meaning folks who just can't seem to stay on the right side of securities laws.
For if there's one thing regulators know, and events last week conspired to remind the rest of us, old penny-stock promoters and their ilk never die.
They don't even fade away.


Listening to the Numbers
ROUGHLY every five years now for the last quarter of a century, a small band of social scientists has quietly fanned out across the New York area on an unusual detective mission: Tracking down the same 668 black men and women from central Harlem, now in their 30's and 40's, to find out how their lives -- and particularly their health -- have fared.
Sometimes, tracing these lives that began in one of New York's sickest, and most medically underserved, neighborhoods, the interviewers' findings have been grim.
And always the results have been sifted through Dr.
Ann F. Brunswick, who has, in turn, created statistical portraits from these lives and shared them with the world.


Results Are What Count
To the Editor:
As the president of Open City Communications, which represents several home-based businesses with both national and international reputations, I was horrified to read about the tricks and stunts suggested in "How to Look Like a Million When You're Not" (July 10).
Using electronic gadgets, phony addresses and other sleight-of-hand acts to suggest an inflated sense of the dishonest presents a dreadful image of small business owners as liars and frauds, which is the worst possible image any corporate entity could put forward.


Monica J. Shiel, Nicholas Westley
Dr.
Monica Jean Shiel, a cell and molecular biologist, was married yesterday to Nicholas John Westley, a real estate developer.
The Rev.
Jim Robinson performed the ceremony at the First Parish Universalist Unitarian Church in Brewster, Mass.
The bride, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Wheaton College and received a master's degree in neuroanatomy from Boston University and a Ph.D. from Yale University.
She is to begin a fellowship next month studying melanoma at the University of Southern California Medical School in Los Angeles.
She is the daughter of Jean A. Shiel of Brewster, Mass., and Paul J. Shiel of Brookline, Mass.
The bridegroom, 34, is a vice president of JMB/Urban Development in Los Angeles.
He graduated cum laude from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
He is a son of Angela Westley of Laguna Beach, Calif., and Dr.
John Westley of Bryn Mawr, Pa.


Squeeze the Dominican Republic
Frustration over the Haitian military's refusal to restore the democratically elected Government, anxiety over waves of refugees heading to our shores and horror over capsized boats have generated calls for the forcible removal of Haiti's military.
The Administration wants to preserve this option, and has sought explicit United Nations endorsement.
Macabre and protracted repression by Haiti's military has led many who have always opposed United States intervention abroad to embrace this position.
Yet U.S. policymakers should consider the use of force -- anywhere -- only as a last resort.


Refereeing Bias?
To the Sports Editor:
Four crucial matches, all involving European vs. non-European squads, suffered from dubious refereeing decisions: the Netherlands vs.
Brazil; Argentina vs.
Greece; Argentina vs.
Romania and Ireland vs.
Mexico.
These games were crucial to soccer's politics as they were, either directly or indirectly, decisive for the 1998 World Cup lineup.


Ashland Coal Inc.(ACI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Correction
An article on July 3 about Sheri Poe, founder of the athletic-shoe company Ryka Inc., misstated Ryka's 1993 loss.
It was $3.4 million, not $1.7 million.


Facts Are Facts
To the Editor:
Alan Riding has gone a little too light on the historical facts surrounding Thomas Jefferson's public position on slavery.
Jefferson felt that slavery was wrong and in 1774 delivered the first of many attacks in print.


Nancy B. Levine, Nathaniel Dunford
Nancy Beth Levine, the daughter of Bernice Levine of the Bronx and Sidney Levine of New Rochelle, N.Y., is to be married today to Nathaniel Andrew Dunford, a son of Judith Dunford and Nelson Dunford, both of New York.
Rabbi Amy Roth is to officiate at the Cotillion Ballroom in Bronxville, N.Y.
The bride, 26, is a psychologist at Public School 49 in the Bronx.
She graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and received a master's degree in school psychology from the City College of New York.


The Great Yes
To the Editor:
I appreciate very much Carol Muske's generous review of my "Women in Praise of the Sacred: 43 Centuries of Spiritual Poetry by Women" (July 3).


Schlumberger Ltd.(SLB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


End Near for Once-Grand Pool
The year was 1939.
People stood in long lines that curled around the outside of the New York State Amphitheater hours before show time to get a ticket to see Eleanor Holm and the Water Ballet Rockettes or the Billy Rose Aquacade Show.
But the crumbling amphitheater has been closed since 1981.
And now it may be destroyed: last Monday, Borough President Claire Shulman and the city's Parks Commissioner, Henry J. Stern, proposed that it be demolished.


Profile; The New Man in a Hollywood Hot Seat
FOR years Jonathan Dolgen toiled as a behind-the-scenes studio executive here.
A tough, sometimes abrasive numbers cruncher in a world of profligate spending.
Content to remain anonymous.
A perennial No. 3 or No. 4 in studio hierarchies.
Unknown outside Hollywood.
Not any more.


Mattel Inc.(MAT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: WILLETS POINT Enough Yankees Already. The Mets Have Their Own Plans; Enough Yankees Already. The Mets Have Their Own Plans.
Even as the Yankees' future in the South Bronx becomes more and more uncertain, the Mets are making sweeping plans that could profoundly alter the face of Queens.
Fred Wilpon, a co-owner of the team, said that if all goes according to his plans, the Mets will be playing in a new domed stadium just east of Shea within four years.
The old Shea Stadium will be torn down and replaced by a giant parking garage.
Around it, Mr.
Wilpon said, there will be an entertainment center with a permanent, high-tech "world's fair."


Liberal Wing of Haiti's Catholic Church Resists Military
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide was its most visible symbol and charismatic leader.
In his absence, the progressive wing of Haiti's Roman Catholic Church, under constant assault by the state and largely shunned by its own church hierarchy, is fighting an uphill battle to preach the same gospel of social justice and change he espoused.
Known as the Ti Legliz, or Little Church, the grass-roots movement has remained one of the few viable centers of resistance to the military-dominated Government that overthrew Father Aristide as President nearly three years ago.
Inspired by the theology of liberation developed in Latin America, its adherents call for a complete transformation of Haitian society and an "option in favor of the poor," the constituency on which Father Aristide drew.


Blackhawks Giving Probert a Chance
The Chicago Blackhawks signed free agent left wing BOB PROBERT to a three-year contract plus an option year yesterday.
Probert, who had a number of off-ice problems in Detroit, was waived by the Detroit Red Wings earlier this week and became an unrestricted free agent.
"We understand that three or four teams were definitely interested, but Bobby told his agent to call Chicago first, and we're glad of that," said BOB MURRAY, the Blackhawks' director of player personnel.
The Red Wings waived Probert, 29, saying they were tired of his off-ice problems and lack of production.
Probert's latest problem occurred on July 15 when his motorcycle collided with a car in Michigan. (AP)


Ricki L. Farber and Aaron L. Zitner
Ricki Lande Farber, the daughter of Walter V. Farber of New York and Denise L. Brown of West Bloomfield, Mich., is to be married today to Aaron Lawrence Zitner, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
George L. Zitner of Pittsburgh.
Rabbi Deborah Glanzberg-Krainin is to officiate at the Wequassett Inn in Chatham, Mass.
The bride, 30, and the bridegroom, 31, graduated from Oberlin College.
The bride received a master's degree in special education from Bank Street College of Education and is a learning-disabilities specialist at the Bowman School in Lexington, Mass.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.


Tosco Corp.(TOS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Bettman's Decisions, Decisions
WHEN the doors close behind Mike Keenan and the executives of the Rangers, the St.
Louis Blues and the Detroit Red Wings in the National Hockey League's new midtown offices tomorrow morning, Commissioner Gary Bettman will be under the microscope along with everyone else.
After less than 18 months on the job, Bettman will be confronted with the most momentous decisions of his brief reign: judging the validity of Keenan's contract with the Rangers and his new contract with the Blues, then determining possible compensation to the Rangers from both the Blues for having signed Keenan and the Red Wings for allegedly having tampered with the coach before he kissed the Stanley Cup.


Trying to Be A Lot Like Tanglewood
"WE HOPE THIS WILL BE NEW Jersey's Tanglewood," Percival H. E. Leach said last winter, when he announced his ambition to build a $50 million theater at Waterloo Village in Stanhope, N. J., with the hope that it would become the summer home of the Metropolitan Opera, the New York Philharmonic and the American Ballet Theater.
In June, Mr.
Leach, who is president and founder of the Waterloo Festival, brought up the analogy again: "There's no reason we can't become the Tanglewood of this area."
Whether or not ground is ever broken for a new theater, Tanglewood is an admirable model for the festival, which ended its season last weekend.
In fact, the comparison raises just the right questions about Waterloo's artistic future.


New England Electric System (NES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
The Habitats column last Sunday, about a loft on Barrow Street, misidentified a broker.
Lauren Zehner of the Halstead Property Company was not involved in the sale.
The brokers were Lanie Zera of Ambrose Mar-Elia and Judith Harvest of Halstead.


Close To Home; Remembering The Past; Repeating It Anyway
ONCE again, the United States finds itself weighing military intervention in the Caribbean, with ships and troops poised just offshore, waiting for an order to move in and restore order to a country that has plunged into chaos and misery.
For nearly a century now, that has been the standard American response when events in the region geographically closest to the United States threaten to get out of hand, and for just as long a time, those interventions have almost uniformly failed to produce the results that policy makers in Washington had hoped for.
Since its first sustained foray into the region during the Spanish-American War of 1898, which yielded a protectorate in Cuba, permanent possession of Puerto Rico and a colony in the far-off Philippines, the United States has intervened militarily in the insular Caribbean and in Central America more than a score of times.
Some countries, such as the Dominican Republic and Nicaragua, have been invaded and occupied more than once, a phenomenon that probably most eloquently expresses America's historic inability to remake neighboring societies to its own satisfaction.
Indeed, it has often seemed that the more the United States tinkers, the worse things become.
Many Tactics, One Rationale
The forms of intervention have varied, of course, from quick campaigns such as in Nicaragua in 1912, Grenada in 1983 and Panama in 1989, to long occupations in Haiti and the Dominican Republic early in the century.
Then, too, there was invasion by proxy, practiced in Central America in the 1980's, and even the creation of a country by fiat -- Panama in 1903.
The locations have also varied, with Spanish-, French- or English-speaking parts of the Caribbean all having to surrender sovereignty and self-determination at one time or another.


Ideas &amp; Trends; At the Top of the Ivory Tower The Watchword Is Silence
A GENERATION ago, James B. Conant of Harvard, Clark Kerr of the University of California, Robert M. Hutchins of the University of Chicago and a great many other college and university presidents cut striking figures on the public stage.
They called for the reform of American education, proposed safeguards for democracy, sought to defuse the cold war, urged moral standards for scientific research and addressed other important issues of the time.
Today, almost no college or university president has spoken out significantly about Bosnia, Haiti, North Korea, health care, welfare reform, the attack on the National Endowment for the Arts or dozens of other issues high on the national agenda.


Budget Setbacks May Force More City Service Cuts
After the blush of success from pushing through an austere $31.6 billion budget for New York City, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has suffered a string of budgetary setbacks in recent weeks that threaten to undermine his plans and force deeper cuts in municipal services, possibly even layoffs.
Facing criticism from the city's fiscal monitors, the Mayor has already promised to raise the city's reserves at least $100 million by putting off some spending for a quarter.
On Monday, officials said yesterday, the Mayor will order his commissioners to find roughly $50 million more for a total 2.3 percent in contingency cuts, to have ready when needed -- even in agencies spared so far, like the police and fire departments.


INSIDE
A Hidden Arsenal
Guns turn up in surprising places in the New York area, like an illegal handgun, above, behind a liquor-store counter.
What a photographer found is on page 37.
Nigerians Object to Jesse Jackson as Envoy
Arguing that Jesse Jackson had ties to their former army dictator, many Nigerians oppose an American plan to use him as a mediator in their political crisis.
Page 9.
Dante's Voyage Into an Inferno
Scientists are hoping to learn more about the gases in active volcanos as an eight-legged robot named Dante descends into an Alaskan crater.
Page 20.
Jordan Reports Confession in Slaying
A man captured in Jordan has confessed to strangling his wife in New Jersey and then fleeing with their two young children, a Jordanian official said.
Page 33.
Yankee Official Resigns After Protests
Richard Kraft, a Yankee official in charge of community relations, resigned in the face of comments attributed to him that were called racist.
SportsSunday, Section 8.


The Unlikely Gardener
THE jackhammering of the dead hedge was what turned me into an urban gardener.
Back in New York after years on the road, years in which the height of my domesticity was to count out dirty shirts and dial 6 for laundry (in some circles, this was a significant accomplishment), I finally had a haven of my own.
More than a decade of falling governments and favorable exchange rates, mostly in the Middle East, had left me what I believed to be a substantial fortune, an innocent delusion swiftly dispelled by the city's real estate market.
Indeed, as an eyewitness to history, I had acquired more rugs than I could afford the floor for.


Harriette Moore, Peter W. Warren
Harriette Milliken Moore, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Moore of St.
Louis, was married yesterday at her parents' house to Peter Whitney Warren, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Warren of Newport, R.I.
The Rev.
Steven Lawler, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
Mrs.
Warren is a designer at Oppizzi &amp; Company, a florist in New York.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.


Ipsco Inc.(IPSCF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jeff Honea, Katherine L. Hughes
Katherine Lee Hughes, the daughter of Ambassador and Mrs.
Arthur H. Hughes of Sana, Yemen, and Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to John Jeffery Honea, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Honea of Little Rock, Ark.
The Rev.
Willie Oliver, a Seventh-day Adventist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the St.
Moritz Hotel in New York.
The bride, 28, is a candidate for a Ph.D. degree in sociology at Columbia University, where she also received Master of Arts and Master of Philosophy degrees in sociology.
She graduated cum laude from Georgetown University.
Her father is the United States Ambassador to Yemen.
He has served as the deputy chief of mission in Tel Aviv, The Hague and Copenhagen.


In the Region/Westchester; Office Vacancy Rate May Be Tightening Slightly
AFTER years of corporate cutbacks that left blocks of office space unoccupied, a reduction in Westchester County space availability is being reported for the first time in over two years -- at least by two of the four real estate firms that compile office vacancy rates in the county.
The other two reported virtually unchanged rates.
According to the midyear report from the Rostenberg-Doern Company of Purchase, the county's vacancy rate fell to 25.4 percent in the second quarter from the 27.8 percent rate it found in the first quarter, although it included one project, the conversion of the Ciba Corporation's 12-building campus near Ardsley, that has not yet been approved.


Gingrich's Quest for Glory
Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the House minority whip, proposes to use opposition to President Clinton's plans on health as a springboard to Republican control of the House.
Page 22.


Cholera's Spread Raises Fear Of Toll of 40,000 Rwandans
Like a serial killer, cholera struck another refugee camp today, and doctors are now saying that the epidemic may be even more deadly than they had originally feared.
In the last three days, relief workers estimate, 7,000 Rwandan refugees have died, most of them from cholera, and doctors fear the death toll could reach 40,000.
At Mugunga, a refugee site nine miles northwest of Goma, the only doctor treating the dying, a woman hardened by working in Somalia, cried this afternoon.
At her feet was a tiny child dead of cholera; next to him was a dead woman and next to her was a dead man.


SPECTATOR SPORT
Say what you will about R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr. and The American Spectator, the magazine is perhaps a perfect antidote to Anna Quindlen, Anthony Lewis et al at The New York Times.
ROBERT N. SILLARS JR.
Darien, Conn.


HOW TO MAKE A POND
On a Monday morning in August 1883, a volcano erupted on the Pacific island of Krakatau, smothering its flora and fauna under a blanket of sulfurous ash more than 100 feet thick in some places.
Krakatau had been literally sterilized; what remained of the island was about as dead as a place on this earth can get.
By the following year, however, visiting naturalists began to observe the return of life to the island, starting with a couple of spiders and blades of grass.
By 1886, 34 plant species were counted, including blue-green algae, mosses and some ferns; by 1897, there were 61.
A few years later, the island was once again enveloped in life.
I thought about Krakatau in the spring as I watched life colonize my new pond -- determinedly, improbably, astonishingly.
Five months before, there had been only a raw, sterile-looking crater out here in the woods behind my house, a kind of scaled-down, concave Krakatau.
It, too, had had its origins in violence, which often seems to attend the birth of ponds made by animals like us.
My own began with the howl of chain saws, the screech of a chipper big enough to devour trees thick as thighs, and then the gut-tightening roar of heavy earth-moving machinery.
For two days in October, my house shook, as a mammoth front-end loader, working together with a bulldozer in a kind of rough, elephantine dance, plunged its toothed bucket into the earth's surface, tearing first through the thin, living skin of black humus and then deep into progressively lighter layers of subsoil to a depth of 12 feet, where life is all but undetectable.
When they were done, Al and Ken and their machines had rendered this landscape almost unrecognizable; it was as though the revisionary work of a glacier had been compressed into the space of 16 hours.


GOOD EATING
CENT'ANNI * (212) 989-9494; 50 Carmine Street, near Avenue of the Americas; $$$; American Express, Mastercard, Visa
This small, bustling and friendly restaurant offers Tuscan country fare that suffers only from timid seasoning.
Among starters are a good cold seafood salad, with shrimp, lobster, scallops and squid bathed in olive oil dressing; grilled portobello mushrooms with garlic, fresh basil and a drizzle of olive oil, and broiled stuffed zucchini with a ground meat and cheese filling.
Pastas, served in full or half portions, include capellini con aragosta (chunks of lobster and fresh clams in tomato sauce) and rigatoni with white wine, tomatoes, onions and zucchini.


Eight Tell What They'd Do If They Had Coliseum Site
The collapse of Mortimer B. Zuckerman's nine-year effort to build high-rise office and apartment buildings on the site of the New York Coliseum has left new uncertainty, and new possibilities, for what may be New York City's most highly coveted development parcel.
But what, if anything, will be built at Columbus Circle? Who will build it? And when?


Cape Ann
To the Editor: After you published "Embracing Cape Ann" (May 8) I worried that my well-kept secret would be overrun with tourists.
After reading the letter from Lexi Blaum describing an unhappy stay at the Cape Ann Motor Inn (June 26), my initial response was selfish pleasure, figuring it would keep people away.
I have now regained my senses and feel obligated to write in defense of the inn and the innkeeper.


At Work; Beach Book? Working Class Tales
AS Freud did not believe in jokes, people who write about work and related subjects seem not to believe in beach books.
So the following books are not "sliders," in the Steele-ian tradition, but they are all eminently readable, and reading will relieve your guilt about being out in the sun in No. 2 tanning oil.
When Barbara Garson, playwright, journalist and friend to workers, wrote the first edition of "All the Livelong Day: The Meaning and Demeaning of Routine Work" (Penguin Books), most of the workers she wrote about were blue-collar and bored.
Asked how he put up with a brain-numbingly repetitive job, one millworker answered: "It's easy. You just blank your mind."


Going to See The Lama
THE JEW IN THE LOTUS A Poet's Rediscovery of Jewish Identity in Buddhist India.
By Rodger Kamenetz. 304 pp.
San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco. $20.


Ashland Coal Inc.(ACI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Flavor and Drama of Whole Roasted Fish
FISH for dinner usually means fillets or steaks in the saute pan or, in summer, on the grill.
Americans, it is often said, have an aversion to whole fish.
All those bones.
But when it comes to flavor, nothing compares to cooking fish on the bone.
Many kinds of fish, like smelts, baby bluefish or butterfish, are too small to bother boning.
Tiny whitebait are traditionally floured, deep-fried and eaten intact -- head, bones and all.
And to serve to a party of six or more, a whole fish is not only delicious, it is dramatic to serve.


Texas Detour


Love Affair


A Washstand With a Tale to Tell
A WASHSTAND BOUGHT AT A Glasgow auction for $25 in 1933 went on view last week at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The piece, by the Scottish architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh, had disappeared from public view for 60 years.
Then, three months ago, the museum acquired it at a London auction for $365,000.
And two years from now, the washstand will be part of the first Mackintosh retrospective in 25 years and the largest show of his works ever held.
After the show opens in Glasgow it will travel to New York, Chicago and Los Angeles.
Mackintosh, underappreciated at the turn of the century and impoverished at his death at age 60 in 1928, is having a good year.
Within the last six months alone, two collections of his works have been auctioned in London for high prices; a desk brought a record $1.2 million at Christie's in February, and the washstand sold for six times the expected amount at Sotheby's in April.


Traffic Signs Need Interpreters, Too
In reference to "A Drive for Court Interpreters"  [ July 3 ]  and the obvious conclusion that many people involved in the judicial process are not being served adequately, I would like to bring to your attention those situations dealing with failure to understand the English on traffic signs while operating a motor vehicle with a valid operator's license.
In my personal experience there were too many tickets issued to such operators for failure to obey a traffic sign where operators did not understand the English on the sign, this having come out on the trial of the violation.


A Party for a Cleared Police Officer Stirs Up Racial Tension
A month after Officer Donald Brown's welcome-back party, people here are still talking about it.
Officer Brown, who is white, had been on a paid leave of absence for killing an unarmed black man last winter, a case that had already caused an uproar, not least because of what many saw as the Police Department's unlikely portrayal of it: as an accident growing out of a mistake that stemmed from a hoax.


The World; Who Resisted Hitler? Germans Can't Unite
GERMAN resistance to Hitler was fragmented and ultimately ineffectual; commemorating the resistance last week, today's Germans showed that in some ways they haven't yet found a way to live comfortably with even this aspect of their past.
For years after World War II, how Germans saw their few resistance heroes depended on where they stood politically.
The Communists who fled to Moscow in the 1930's and later ruled East Germany recognized their own martyrs and acknowledged others only grudgingly.
In the West, a few Social Democrats and the White Rose student resistance movement were honored, but even Chancellor Willy Brandt, who worked in the underground in Norway, was taunted years after by those who thought him a traitor.


July 17-23; Math Team Makes a Perfect Score
In the decade since a bipartisan national commission warned that a rising tide of mediocrity was threatening America's schools, a string of embarrassments has heightened concern about the quality of education.
On one math test, scores for American teen-agers were far below their counterparts in Europe and Asia.


The Debilitating Malady Called Boyhood
UNTIL quite recently, the plain-spun tautology "boys will be boys" summed up everything parents needed to know about their Y-chromosome bundles.
Boys will be very noisy and obnoxious.
Boys will tear around the house and break heirlooms.
They will transform any object longer than it is wide into a laser weapon with eight settings from stun to vaporize.
They will swagger and brag and fib and not do their homework and leave their dirty underwear on the bathroom floor.
But they will also be. . .boys.
They will be adventurous and brave.
When they fall down, they'll get up, give a cavalier spit to the side, and try again.
Tom Sawyer may have been a slob, a truant and a hedonist; he may have picked fights with strangers for no apparent reason; but he was also resourceful, spirited and deliciously clever.
Huckleberry Finn was an illiterate outcast, but as a longterm rafting companion he had no peer.


Hidden Arsenal: Gun Owners, Their Weapons and Their Reasons
Born of the frontier, America has always been an armed society.
Scratch the surface and guns turn up in surprising places, for surprising reasons.
As he traveled the New York area recently, a photographer for The New York Times asked people whether they were armed, and discovered a netherworld of weaponry.


Putting It All Together At the Aldrich Museum
LARRY ALDRICH'S is a rag-trade-to-riches story that centers on his decision in 1963 to auction off his holdings in Impressionism and Post-Impressionism, the better to accommodate a growing collection of contemporary art.
Mr.
Aldrich had already found the space for this work, an 18th-century house in Ridgefield that had seen service as a hardware store and was then functioning as a Christian Science church.


Ipsco Inc.(IPSCF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
98.90
97.83
107.04
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5960
1.5534
1.7195
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3773
1.3772
1.2805
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5270
1.5617
1.5045
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$384.90
$386.00
$390.10
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Airlift Shifts Into High Gear To Supply Refugee Camps
The team managing the airlift of relief supplies to Rwandan refugees in Zaire reported that 20 planeloads of supplies had reached the Goma airfield today, a big increase in the rate of deliveries.
"This is very much better than anything we've done so far and we're very encouraged, but it still isn't enough," said Rupert Colville, the spokesman for the Sarajevo Air Operations Cell in Geneva, which manages the United Nations airlift.


4 Strip Malls Planned for Store-Scarce Neighborhoods
Four shopping strips are to be developed in the next year in the central Bronx under a city program intended to encourage the growth of retailing in inner-city neighborhoods.
Two others are planned for the South Bronx.
Over the last two decades, three neighborhoods in these areas -- Tremont, Crotona Park and Mott Haven -- have seen a tremendous growth in low-cost housing units, but the population boom has not been matched by a growth in stores and other services.
Fearful of crime and red-lining, retailers, especially national or regional chains, have stayed away.


Phelps Dodge Corp.(PD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Missy Harris, Mark Moskovitz
Marilyn Ann Harris, the daughter of Nancy and Leonard Harris of Short Hills, N.J., was married last evening to Mark Elliott Moskovitz, the son of the late Norman and Bernice Moskovitz.
Cantor Martha Novick officiated at Gateways, a historic house in Morristown, N.J.
Mrs.
Moskovitz, who is known as Missy, is a vice president of television program development for Time Warner in New York, where she oversees programming and new media development for Catalog 1, a cable shopping channel.
She graduated summa cum laude from Barnard College.


Guarding the Elbow Room Of the Great Unwheeled
To the Editor:
Regarding Amy M. Spindler's discovery of New York-style freedom on her in-line roller skates, as long as she conforms to the city's laws of vehicular traffic -- i.e., going where she needs to go through the streets and not upon the sidewalks where us poor pedestrians plod -- more power to her.


Commitment to Education
To the Editor:
Steve Lohr's otherwise very perceptive article on I.B.M.'c chief executive officer, Louis V. Gerstner Jr. ("On the Road with Chairman Lou," June 26), overlooks one of his peculiar assets: his longtime commitment to the improvement of American schools, as reflected in a recent book, "Reinventing Education," that he co-authored.
What does this have to do with his chances of turning I.B.M. around?
In my view, quite a lot.


Ms. Eggers, Mr. Kenney
Patricia Ann Eggers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Eggers of Garden City, L.I., is to be married today in New York to Christopher Kenney, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
William Kenney.
The Rev.
Dick Leonard, a Unitarian Universalist minister, is to officiate at Tavern on the Green.
The bride and bridegroom both work for the AT&amp;T Corporation, she as a sales director for business communications services in New York and he as a marketing and sales director for video teleconferencing in Basking Ridge, N.J.


Taylor Joins TNT as Game-Day Analyst
LAWRENCE TAYLOR has signed on to be the analyst for "The Stadium Show," TNT's National Football League program, in a two-year deal worth about $600,000.
He will work on pre-game, halftime and post-game segments for the program, broadcast from each of the sites on TNT's nine-game, prime-time schedule, which begins Sept. 4.
DON McGUIRE, TNT's executive producer, said: "We're not going to cram L. T. into being a suit-and-tie studio analyst. This is a natural for him, a high-energy program that only requires him to be himself."


Family Affair


July 17-23: Whole World May Watch; Democrats Choose Chicago For 1996 Convention
The Vietnam War is long over.
There's a new Richard Daley in the Chicago Mayor's office.
The city even has a gleaming new Comiskey Park.
But the question still lingers: Is Chicago -- and the Democratic Party -- still haunted by the violence that ruined the party's convention in 1968 and marred the city's reputation?


FPL Group Inc.(FPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Art of Decoration
Gloria Groom sheds magnificent light on a little-known facet of her subject's career in the beautiful and scholarly EDOUARD VUILLARD: Painter-Decorator.
Patrons and Projects, 1892-1912 (Yale University, $60).
The author, an assistant curator of European painting at the Art Institute of Chicago, examines Vuillard's work during the two decades in which he created decorative panels and screens for some of his affluent patrons.
His first efforts, for a Paris industrialist, established many of the themes Vuillard (1868-1940) would explore in his subsequent decorations: domestic scenes on a terrace, vignettes in a dressmaking studio, images of nursemaids with children in public gardens.
Ms.
Groom stresses that perhaps more than the choice of subject or format, Vuillard's use of distemper -- a technique requiring the fast and arduous application of a mixture of glue and pigment to obtain a tapestrylike surface -- signaled his concern for the decorative qualities of his work and helped to change ideas about interior decoration and modern esthetics.
The book is profusely illustrated with color reproductions not only of Vuillard's work but also of paintings by contemporaries like Pierre Puvis de Chavannes and Claude Monet.
Sure-footed and fluid, Ms.
Groom's highly informative study gives Vuillard's sophisticated decorations the recognition they deserve.
CHRISTINE SCHWARTZ HARTLEY


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (CIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


USX-Delhi Group (DGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


After 4 Straight Pops, Bills Start Blowing Up That Balloon Again
The last one, the fourth one, was not the hardest one.
No, each of the Buffalo Bills' four consecutive Super Bowl losses offered their own wicked sting.
Each one offered an off season of reflection and misery and jokes.
And boy, in the last off season, those just seemed to keep coming every day.
Bruce Smith gained his share of rude queries.
If it wasn't one fan or friend asking what happened a million times, it was crude comments from a jilted Super Bowl bettor on how much money the Bills had cost him.


Whitewater, Now on Capitol Hill
George Stephanopoulos will be there, as will Thomas McLarty, Harold Ickes and Bernard Nussbaum, the deposed White House counsel.
The Treasury Department will send Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and his deputy, Roger Altman.
The Whitewater hearings that begin this week in the House and Senate Banking Committees will draw the largest collection of senior executive-branch officials since Watergate two decades ago.
The allegations surrounding Whitewater have not, of course, risen to Watergate levels; nobody in the Clinton Administration has been charged with a crime.
Yet there is a rough similarity between the central question then and now: whether people in positions of public trust manipulated the machinery of government to deflect the truth.


Benefits Are an Important Consideration
To the Editor:
In "The New Faces of U.S. Manufacturing" (July 3), Louis Uchitelle writes that at the Rotoflow Corporation "automation has helped to keep the average blue collar wage at $13 an hour." This I did not say in my interview with him and it is totally incorrect.
Average rates may be $13 an hour, but this is because of prevailing market rates and not because of automation.
In fact, automation usually requires higher skilled workers (albeit fewer in number), and they can command higher pay rates for these skills.
We have machinists earning over $19 an hour and, in general, wages at Rotoflow have been growing much faster than the national average.


A. J. Thompson, Richard Riegel 3d
Amanda Jane Thompson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wade F. B. Thompson of New York, was married yesterday in Old Lyme, Conn., to Richard Eveland Riegel 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Riegel Jr. of Montchanin, Del.
The Rev.
Lidabell Pollard performed the ceremony at the Old Lyme Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Riegel, 24, is a sales associate at Friman &amp; Stein, a diamond and jewelry dealer in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Thor Industries, a manufacturer of recreational vehicles and buses, in New York.


Corrections
Entries in the Residential Sales listings on July 3 and June 12 misstated the address of a house in Glen Cove, L.I., and a correction last Sunday misspelled the street name.
The house is at 39 Willets Road, not Willis Avenue or Willits Road.
The July entry also was inadvertently repeated after being reported in June.
And the June listing misstated the sale price and the taxes.
The sale price was $211,000, not $210,000.
The taxes are $3,900, not $3,800.


The Class President


'A Dead, Violent Generation'
To the Editor:
Stephen Holden left out two important elements in his essay "How Pop Music Lost the Melody"  [ July 3 ] .
The first was the advent of blatant homophobia in pop music, which came about as a reaction to the ambisexuality of performers like the Doors, Elton John and David Bowie.


Pamela Reid and Romain Chauvet
Pamela Reid, a daughter of Mrs.
Timothy Horan of New York and the late Jesse B. Reid, was married yesterday to Romain Alexandre Chauvet, a son of Catherine Chauvet and Eric Chauvet, both of Geneva.
The Rev.
Richard Lund performed the ceremony at the Bridgehampton (L.I.) Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Chauvet is an artists' representative specializing in fashion in New York.
She graduated from the Tobe-Coburn School of Fashion Design.
Her mother, Vivian Horan, owns a Manhattan art gallery that bears her name.


Zydeco and Latin Beat Spice Up Jazz Festival
THE Hudson River Museum in Yonkers has retreated almost entirely from classical music presentations, but jazz continues to be a summer specialty.
"This 14th season brings a change in title and an expanded concept in the programming," said Connie Cullen, the museum's public relations director.
"Results of a survey taken at the three Summer Jazz concerts last year uncovered a distinct desire for a greater variety of music, so this season we'll offer zydeco, gospel and Latin jazz under the new, more descriptive title Jazz Plus."


Indians Are Alive and Slugging in Central
In one sense, the Cleveland Indians' Class AAA pitcher beat the Chicago White Sox's Class AAA pitcher today.
In another, more meaningful sense, the Indians' awesome offense crushed the White Sox.
With Jason Grimsley shutting out the White Sox for eight innings, the Indians battered Scott Ruffcorn and Jose DeLeon for 15 hits and an 11-2 victory.
Following a six-homer barrage in a 9-8 victory Friday night, the one-sided decision sliced the White Sox's American League Central lead over the Indians to one game.


Pool Classes For Babies


Brussels
Brussels will celebrate the 50th anniversary of its liberation by British troops on Sept. 3 and 4, 1944, with a mixture of solemnity and fun.
On Sept. 3 at 11:30 A.M., King Albert II will review a march-past of veterans in the heart of the city, the Grand'Place.
A fly-past of British vintage aircraft will follow, and that evening the Welsh Guards, who were the first to reach the city, will parade through the Grand'Place.
Then comes the first of a series of son et lumiere programs featuring the music of Glenn Miller -- to be repeated every night until Oct. 2 -- followed by music and dancing in the square until late in the evening.
The liberation motif, which includes the 12 flags of the European Union, will also be woven into this year's Tapis de Fleurs, or Flower Carpet, a biennial event.
On Aug. 13, the Grand'Place will be covered for a display through Aug. 15 by a carpet of more than a half-million begonias from the growers of Ghent.
The begonias are put in position in a single afternoon, to preserve their freshness.
The 15th-century Town Hall is decorated with flowers and opened so that visitors can admire the flower carpet from its balconies.
Events
Following the celebration of Belgium's National Day on July 21, the Royal Palace, on the Place des Palais, opposite the Parc du Bruxelles, will be open to visitors until Sept. 11.
Rebuilt in 1904, it bears the imprint of the empire-builder Leopold II.
The palace will be open daily except Monday from 9:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.; telephone 513-0770. (The country code for Belgium is 32, the city code for Brussels is 2.)


After Mussolini
WAR IN ITALY, 1943-1945 A Brutal Story.
By Richard Lamb.
Illustrated. 335 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $23.95.


Saving Frequent Fallers
At last, an invention for old people, and one that has nothing to do with in-line skates.
It's a floor -- to be tested early next year at a nursing home in Pennsylvania.
"The home is a typical facility, with 225 residents," says Peter Cavanagh, who teaches biomechanics at Penn State.
Somebody falls down at the home roughly once a day, and "about once every other month, one suffers a broken hip."
That's because the floor is so hard, thought Cavanagh and one of his colleagues, Donald Streit, a mechanical engineer.
What if, when someone collapsed, the floor did, too?
They call their creation dual stiffness flooring.
It's a kind of sandwich, two plastic sheets separated by plastic columns, all of it about an inch thick and designed to break the force of a fall by as much as 30 percent.
Then it bounces back.


POSTINGS: The Asking Price Is $9.5 Million; For Sale: A 200-Acre Estate in Westchester
Seven Springs, one of the largest remaining residential estates in the New York metropolitan area, the former home of the late Washington Post publisher, Eugene I. Meyer Jr., is up for sale.
The price: $9.5 million.
The 200-acre estate spreads over parts of three towns in Westchester County, Bedford, North Castle and New Castle.
It has been owned since 1984 by Rockefeller University, which has been using the site as a conference center.
"We are concentrating on our core operations, and it is remote geographically," said David J. Lyons, vice president for business and finance for the university, which is situated on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
"We haven't used it as much as we had hoped."


As Vote Nears, Detroit Edges Closer to Gambling
Detroiters have rejected proposals to legalize casino gambling four times, most recently last year.
But the success of gaming in a Canadian city just across the Detroit River may inspire voters to change their minds on Aug. 2.
On that day, Detroit residents will vote on two proposals, one to allow a casino on a moored riverboat and another to allow a casino owned by American Indians in Greektown, a downtown restaurant district.


His New Movie Is Finished (Really)
Whit Stillman's HIGHLY regarded 1990 film "Metropolitan," a poetic, quirky, documentarylike portrait of a group of New York debutantes and their young escorts, was made for only $300,000.
In what was generally described as an overnight success for its unknown 38-year-old neophyte director, the film went on to earn $3 million at the box office.
It was widely praised.
In a typical comment, Vincent Canby, writing in The New York Times, called the movie "a singular pleasure. . . . a joyfully talky comedy." Mr.
Stillman was nominated for an Oscar for best original screenplay, in the company of Woody Allen, Barry Levinson, Peter Weir and Bruce Joel Rubin, who won for "Ghost." The film won awards at festivals in Locarno, Switzerland, and Deauville, France, and played commercially throughout Europe.


Playing With Numbers
To the Editor:
In his review of "The Politics of Dispossession: The Struggle for Palestinian Self-Determination, 1969-1994," by Edward W. Said (June 26), David K. Shipler informs us that Mr.
Said's claim of 20,000 dead in Israel's 1982 invasion of Lebanon is an exaggeration.


Changing, But Quietly, At National Geographic
In 1900, Alexander Graham Bell, the second president of the National Geographic Society, invited prominent editors and publishers to Washington to seek their advice about the society's magazine.
They gave him these suggestions:
*Move to New York, because it is impossible to establish a popular magazine in Washington.


World Economies


F.H.A. Loans Would Help Middle Class
To the Editor:
"Save F.H.A. Loans for Needy Families" (editorial, July 15) mistakenly states that increased Federal Housing Administration loan limits would cut service to low- and moderate-income families.
But higher limits would strengthen our insurance fund reserves, while increasing the Department of Housing and Urban Development's ability to serve millions who would otherwise have little hope of becoming homeowners.


Scana Corp.(SCG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Die as Plane Falls Soon After Takeoff
Two men were killed in the crash of a light plane yesterday in Wallingford, Conn., shortly after it took off from a small airport nearby.
The craft, a single-engine, two-seat Mooney, took off about 5 P.M. from Meriden-Markham Airport with two men aboard and crashed onto Old Colony Road two to three minutes later, said Mary Culver, a spokeswoman for the Federal Aviation Administration.
It did not catch fire.


Abroad at Home; World Without Power
Rwanda is many things: a human catastrophe, a testament to the danger of ethnic hatred, a devastating symbol of man's inhumanity to man.
But beyond all that it is a sign of the New World Disorder: a world in which no great power takes responsibility for preventing a descent into chaos.
When an organized group of militant Hutus began slaughtering Rwanda's Tutsi minority in April, no outside power was prepared to intervene.
Pleas by the Secretary General of the United Nations, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, got no response.


Gephardt Asks Phase-In Of Insurance
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader, said today that national health insurance should be phased in more slowly than President Clinton and several Congressional committees have proposed.
"I think four to five years make sense," he said.


CHRONICLE
GENE KELLY, the singer, dancer and actor, was hospitalized after he suffered a mild stroke, hospital officials said yesterday in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Kelly, 81, was in stable condition and "resting comfortably" at UCLA Medical Center, said a nursing supervisor, Susan Davidson.
She said she did not know when he would be released.


Diary Says White House Pressed To Keep Treasury Aide on Inquiry
Senior White House officials put heavy pressure on the Deputy Treasury Secretary, a close friend of President Clinton, to stay involved in the sensitive Whitewater investigations, according to a politically candid diary kept by a senior Treasury official that has been turned over to Congress.
Mr.
Clinton was livid when Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman decided to recuse himself from the Whitewater case in late February, according to the diary kept by Joshua L. Steiner, the chief of staff to Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen.
At the time, Mr.
Altman was also serving as acting head of the Resolution Trust Corporation, which made him the country's top savings and loan regulator.


Mayor Gets Into Spirit Of Visiting Churches
For the most part it was a typical Sunday at the Burke Avenue Baptist Church in the Bronx.
The girls' dresses were tied with bows in the back, the boys' shirts were buttoned to the neck, the ushers wore white gloves, the choir was 33 voices strong and the Rev.
Norman Coleman was preaching with fervor.
The only odd part was the man in the business suit and glasses sitting down front, his lips closed tightly, respectfully, except when he was joining in the singing of "The Lord Raised Me" and other hymns.


Long Twisting Road From the Blues
Hole in Our Soul  The Loss of Beauty and Meaning in American Popular Music  By Martha Bayles  453 pages. $24.95.
Free Press.
Almost everything that Martha Bayles argues in her brilliant, complex, overlong but finally illuminating history and critique of popular music begins with the old saying she quotes in her introduction, "If you don't like the blues, you've got a hole in your soul."


IN PERFORMANCE
Easily Enough Bands For Dancing All Night  Manhattan Center
The New Music Seminar brought a rave to Manhattan Center on Saturday night.
In the main ballroom, disk jockeys played frantic, synthetic techno music, all indefatigable riffs and booming drumbeats, while psychedelic patterns rippled across video screens and dancers jittered on the floor.
There was another setup of turntables and lights in a hallway.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; CBS-Fox War of Words Extends to the Top Ranks
How nasty are the relations between CBS and the Fox network getting?
Nasty enough to bring the billionaires into it.
In separate news conferences here in the last two weeks, the chairmen of the two companies, Laurence A. Tisch of CBS and Rupert Murdoch of Fox, took turns disparaging the other network in unusually blunt terms.


Giants' Comeback Kid Playing Catch Again
Players look at Mike Sherrard and do not know what to make of him.
They stare at him and ask all kinds of strange questions.
"He's like a walking hospital," said fullback Kenyon Rasheed, "a walking hospital who may be the fastest guy on the team."
How is the hip, Mike?
Does it hurt?
How do you do it?
How do you get hurt again and again and come back again and again?
Are you back to form yet?
Can you do it?
Can you come back from yet another injury that would have left most people rehabilitating for life -- let alone playing professional football?
Where do you find the strength?
The heart?
And can I borrow yours sometime?


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Existing-Home Sales . . .
June  Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
July  Wednesday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
June  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Gross Domestic Product . . . 2d Qtr  Farm Prices . . .
July


Volcano Walk Is Delayed
Low clouds prevented another effort today to airlift the Dante II robot to the edge of an active Alaskan volcano, where the machine is scheduled to descend for unusual studies.
On both Saturday and today, the clouds prevented helicopters from flying the robot and equipment to the edge of the crater of Mount Spurr, 80 miles west of Anchorage.


Elton John and Billy Joel: So Alike, So Different
When Elton John and Billy Joel performed together on Friday night at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., in the first of five sold-out shows ending this Friday, the concert began more like a diplomatic meeting than a pop music performance.
A drapery emblazoned with a Union Jack hung on the side of the stage from which Mr.
John stepped out; an American flag drapery hung on the other side for Mr.
Joel, who emerged to a recording of "Yankee Doodle."
The two piano men exchanged formal greetings -- "Good evening, Billy," "Good evening, Elton" -- before sitting at their grand pianos to perform Mr.
John's "Your Song," followed by Mr.
Joel's "Honesty." Each regularly acknowledged the other's accomplishments with scripted salutes, nods and bows.


Cincinnati Bell (CSN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


An Energetic Trustbuster, but Not a Boat Rocker
To the surprise of nobody, Anne K. Bingaman, in her first year as the top Justice Department trustbuster, has transformed a dormant antitrust operation into a fountain of activity, the ideal place for a veteran of the corporate litigation trenches to fulfill herself in making policy.
"This is the dream of my life," Ms.
Bingaman, who is 51, said in her Southwestern twang a few days after announcing that the Government had forced the Microsoft Corporation, the software giant, to change some of the ways it does business.
"I get out of bed every day and ask how could I be so lucky."


Cincinnati Milacron Inc.(CMZ,N) reports earnings for 12wks to June 18


60 Die in Separatist Battles in Northeast India
Tribal militants in Assam, in northeastern India, staged a predawn raid on a crowded relief camp today, killing at least 40 Muslims who had fled earlier ethnic clashes.
The Indian Government responded by ordering army units into the state.
The massacre followed a week of clashes between armed militants from the Bodo tribe and Muslim settlers from Bangladesh.
The police said the attack this morning had raised the number killed in the past week to more than 60, with hundreds of others wounded.


Some Who Fled Rwanda Return As Zaire Opens Border Crossings
A week ago today, 50-year-old Laurent Kanani was among the tens of thousands of Rwandans who pushed their way across the border here, terrified of the advancing Tutsi rebels.
Today, even though the rebels captured this lakeside resort town and declared victory, Mr.
Kanani has decided it is time to go home to his small farm, where he had planted sorghum, peas, beans and sweet potatoes before fleeing.
His wife and six of their children are with him.
During the three weeks that Mr.
Kanani and his family were on the run, they were separated from his 22-year-old son, and they have not seen him since.


Amato, the Little Opera Company That Can and Does
Carved deeply into the floorboards on the stage of the Amato Opera Theater is a square.
It covers not the expensive hydraulic lift that Anthony Amato, founder and patriarch of this miniature opera house, once imagined could free the theater for the surprises of special effects, but a jerry-rigged pulley made with an 80-pound weight, a winch and spare cable.
Somehow, the ingenious contraption works.


METRO DIGEST
SUSPECT EXPLAINS STRANGLING
A man accused of strangling his wife in New Jersey and then fleeing to the Middle East with their two young children declared that jealousy and rage over her refusal to reconcile had led him to kill her.
The suspect, Muhammad Ismail Abequa, a naturalized American born in Jordan, told of the killing in a 90-minute prison interview with two reporters.
A1.
A BATTLE OVER WIND-SHEAR RADAR
Long Island residents, backed by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, have forced the Federal Aviation Administration to abandon the two sites it had chosen for huge radar towers to monitor wind conditions at Kennedy and La Guardia Airports.
Now the Senator is sponsoring legislation that would direct the administration to begin testing an alternative system at the airports themselves -- a system that he says is smaller, cheaper and safer.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  5 ARE RESCUED AFTER CAR CRASH
Three firefighters and more than 100 other emergency workers rescued five people whose silver Lincoln Continental had raced over a 10-foot-high embankment, landing wheels-up in Coney Island Creek, 15 feet from shore.
The accident on Friday evening left one passenger dead, and three others and the driver in serious condition.
B3.
CHURCHGOERS APPLAUD GIULIANI
Mayor Giuliani worshiped with a black congregation in the Bronx after learning that there was a group of parishioners who pray for him, and, he said, "I want to encourage it because I need all the prayers I can get." But his reading of the polls is that his approval rating among black voters is on the rise, and he wants to encourage that also.
B3.
PRESERVATION CHAIRWOMAN NAMED
A 38-year-old lawyer has been named chairwoman of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, and she says she will move quickly to look at the future of buildings in lower Manhattan and to cultivate public-private partnerships in the care of landmarks.
B3.
GOODBYE, COLUMBUS
Businesses on Columbus Avenue are bracing for the loss of customers they say will be driven away by gaping holes in the pavement, swirling dust and the general racket as the city's most expensive street and utility reconstruction starts.
The $65 million reconstruction of the southbound avenue is expected to take 28 months.
B3.
REGION  L.I.
TOWN IN TURMOIL
After suffering four heart attacks and undergoing two operations since Christmas Eve, the Riverhead Town Supervisor, Joseph F. Janoski, has told the town that entering Town Hall could jeopardize his life.
So he has overseen town affairs from his bedroom and created a cloud of confusion as to who is in charge.
B5.
STURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING
They call Dr.
Mark B. Bain "the sturgeon general," although his official title is associate professor of fish biology at Cornell University in Ithaca.
Dr.
Bain, the coordinator of several programs researching the life and habits of sturgeon, and his associates are trying to find out why the sturgeon population has plummeted, not only in the Hudson River but all along the East Coast.
B5.
STUDYING SCIENCE IN RUSSIA
The picturesque city of Pushchino, Russia, is a citadel of Russian science.
Its nine biological research institutes have long been considered among the finest in the world.
What better place for an ambitious American high school student to prepare that all-important entry for the Westinghouse Science Talent Search?
Sixteen are doing just that this summer, including Vinay Gupta, a 16-year-old who attends Half Hollow Hills High School East in Dix Hills, L.I.
A4. 3 DIE IN SEPTIC TANK ACCIDENT
A father and his two sons were overcome by fumes and apparently drowned while working on a septic tank in the older man's backyard in Dix Hills, L.I., the police said.
One of the victims died after he went into the tank to try to rescue his father and his brother, the Suffolk County Police said.
B5.
Chronicle B7


Mattingly Pounds Out The Exclamation Point
With his pursuit of 2,000 hits completed Saturday night, Don Mattingly relaxed for eight innings today until Manager Buck Showalter summoned him to pinch-hit in the ninth.
On a West Coast road trip that had been fraught with offense and suspense, Mattingly's emergence from the dugout had the potential to supply more of each.
Could Mattingly get his 2,001st hit?
While the number Mattingly was pursuing did not end in zeros, it was important.
The Yankees were trailing California by two runs, the potential tying runs were on and a fresh pitcher had entered the game in Joe Grahe.
The suspense was there.


U.S. Arts Endowment Makes A New Batch of Grants
The National Endowment for the Arts has announced $31.5 million in grants for the third quarter of the year.
The 1,127 grants, which range from just over $2,000 to $800,000, will go to arts organizations and a scattering of individual artists in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands and American Samoa.
Nearly $5 million will go to state agencies for programs intended to make the arts part of the basic public-school curriculum and $4 million to programs that bring the arts to underserved rural and urban areas.
In a statement that accompanied the grant announcements, Jane Alexander, the endowment's director, said, "These are the grants that don't make the headlines and are all too often overlooked in the debate over Federal funding of the arts."


Disney Is an Easy Target
Commerce and scholarship are at war in the Piedmont region of northern Virginia.
The Walt Disney Company's plan to build a historical theme park near the area's Civil War battle sites has incurred the wrath of a group of distinguished historians, organized as Protect Historic America.
The scholars have claimed the high ground against the commercialization and, by implication, the vulgarization of history.
But they are taking a narrow and possessive attitude toward American history.
By celebrating the battle sites as the ultimate symbols of the Civil War, they are lending credence to a common but worrisome interpretation of the epochal event in our history -- one that makes the sacrifices of war more important than the achievement of freedom.


U.S.-Japan Talks Near Make-or-Break Deadline
With just one week remaining before a deadline that could push the Clinton Administration toward its first serious trade rupture with Japan, last-ditch talks this weekend produced no breakthrough but offered enough signs of flexibility for the negotiators to say they will continue discussions.
"There was no breakthrough, but no breakdown," said one official involved in the talks, which were hastily arranged in Hong Kong on Saturday and today.


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds (REY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Seattle Agency Gets Ortho Account
The Solaris Group, a division of the Monsanto Company in San Ramon, Calif., has selected Cole &amp; Weber in Seattle as the first agency to handle advertising for a new line of Ortho lawn and garden products.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $20 million.


Albert Bush-Brown, 68, Is Dead; Historian Was L.I.U. President
Dr.
Albert Bush-Brown, an architectural historian who headed Long Island University from 1971 to 1985 as chancellor and then president, died on Friday at his home in Barnstable, Mass.
He was 68.
He died after a brief illness, said his son, David.


Maytag Corp.(MYG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dividend Meetings


Subways to Become Less Safe if New York Police Forces Merge
To the Editor:
Would a takeover of New York's Transit Police by New York City mean fewer and less effective police officers in the subways?


Using Old Ways to Make New Waves


International Shipholding Corp.(ISH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Iowa Farmers Rebel Against Subsidies, Seeking New Setup
Few people get a better deal from the Government than farmers, big-city politicians often complain.
Growers of the biggest crops can collect checks from the taxpayers for producing nothing at all.
And farmers who produce too much can sell the excess to Washington rather than eat a big loss.
After 60 years of this Depression-born system, which currently gives farmers about $11 billion a year in subsidies, an insurrection is rising in, of all places, Iowa.


Duriron Co. (DURI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Head of Landmarks Panel Looks to Future
A 38-year-old lawyer has been named chairwoman of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, and she says she will move quickly to look at the future of buildings in lower Manhattan and to cultivate public-private partnerships in the care of landmarks.
The chairwoman, Jennifer J. Raab, a litigation associate in the firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, was named to the post last week by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
She was the issues director for his 1989 mayoral campaign.


Applied Magnetics Corp.(APM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Officers of Italian Premier's Company Sought for Arrest
Two finance officials of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's Fininvest corporation were being sought for arrest today in a widening scandal involving hundreds of Italian businessmen and Government tax auditors accused of trading fraudulent audits for bribes.
The arrest orders brought the scandal closer to the giant television, publishing and financial services company that is owned by the Prime Minister.


Clinton Stars at High School Reunion
Even when polls are sagging and problems are multiplying, being President has some virtues.
Consider its advantages at a high-school reunion, that wallflower's revenge and balding man's nightmare.
As he ventured here on Saturday night among faces from his long-ago past, Bill Clinton (Hot Springs High's class of 1964) could at least count on not being asked once what he was doing these days.


Rangers Acquire Nedved In the Keenan Dispute
The nine-day-long tug-of-war over Mike Keenan ended late last night with a harsh settlement that left no party pleased or unpunished.
The multipart decision by National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman lets Keenan go to the Blues as coach and general manager.
In compensation for Bettman leaving with four years left on his contract, Bettman approved the Blues' trade of Petr Nedved to the Rangers for Esa Tikkanen and Doug Lidster.


Bridge
For the first time in the 25-year history of the event, the prestigious Grand National Team Championship has been won by a group from the New York metropolitan area.
But it was by the slimmest of margins.
When the last deal arrived, soon after 1 A.M. this morning, Jim Cayne, Alan Sontag, Larry Cohen and David Berkowitz were trailing, although they did not know it, by 7 imps.
When Berkowitz and Cohen defeated a game that succeeded in the replay, their team gained 10 international match points and won the match, and the title, by 3.
The match had been close throughout, with the Cayne team leading through the first three quarters by small margins.
The losers were a foursome representing Ohio: Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell, both multiple world champions, and Walter Johnson and Doug Simson.


CHRONICLE
"Star Trek: The Next Generation," won praise from many science fiction enthusiasts during its seven-year mission for its ingenious plots and futuristic effects.
But MARINA SIRTIS, who played the half-alien counselor, Deanna Troi, found one occasional plot element to be a little absurd.
Ms.
Sirtis, speaking at a Star Trek convention in Tulsa, Okla., last weekend, said she never understood how the writers allowed her character -- who possesses telepathic powers -- to play poker.


Comparisons, Like Hits, Are Kept at a Distance
Matt Williams is the stealth bomber of baseball's impressive arsenal of long-ball hitters.
He will never be confused with Ken Griffey Jr., he of the hat-worn-backward panache and giddy chase of Roger Maris.
Nor will Williams be confused with Frank Thomas, he of the cork-filled arms and 1,000 candlepower smile that lights up all of Chicago these days.
Those two players, more so than any of their contemporaries, have caught the public's imagination.
And the news media's.
And Madison Avenue's.
But they are not alone in waging a full-fledged assault on home run records with highly publicized power surges.


INSIDE
Irish Peace Tenets Rejected
Sinn Fein, the political wing of the I.R.A., rejected several crucial points of a peace initiative for Northern Ireland, dealing a setback to efforts to end years of violence.
Page A3.
Russian Scientists Now Tutor
In order to make a living in the post-Soviet era, top Russian scientists have taken on a new job: tutoring foreign high school students.
Page A4.
Back Seat Is the Hot Seat
Why are the back seats of many cabs like V-8 steam baths?
It's a New York conundrum, with conflicts among air conditioning and partition rules and cabbies' thriftiness.
Page B1.
Keenan Dispute Settled
The Rangers' Stanley Cup coach, Mike Keenan, will stay with St.
Louis under a settlement that includes fines and a trade.
SportsMonday, C1.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Grey Advertising tries to get inside the minds of youngsters.
IN "Bye Bye Birdie," an exasperated Paul Lynde sang about how frustrating it was to try to figure out "Kids." A unit of Grey Advertising Inc. hopes for more success at that challenging task.
The unit is named Grey 18 and Under after its mission, which is to specialize in marketing messages aimed at the nation's estimated 59 million youngsters. (For those wondering how far "under" Grey 18 and Under reaches, the cutoff is around age 3; even Madison Avenue's most creative minds haven't yet found ways to pitch products to babies and toddlers.)


Pianist and Falsetto Surprise in Their Ways
When the right elements come together at the Mostly Mozart Festival, the results can be thrilling.
Those elements were largely in place on Saturday evening.
Jane Glover, an English Mozart specialist, was on the podium, and the soloists were Maria Tipo, an Italian pianist whose charm is in her unpredictability, and Brian Asawa, whose stunningly beautiful falsetto tone forces a listener to reconsider the art of countertenor singing.
The only disappointment was at the beginning of the program, when Miss Glover led the orchestra's strings in Britten's "Simple Symphony." The work, with its paradoxical currents of childlike playfulness and knowing pathos, thrives best in a smaller hall with brighter acoustics, and on Saturday the lack of resonance at Avery Fisher Hall often left the music sounding diffuse.


IN PERFORMANCE
A Festival's Final Night Is a String of Firecrackers  Mercury Lounge and Knitting Factory
Anyone in the East Village on Saturday night probably witnessed an annual music-industry rite of passage called the seminar scramble as hundreds -- possibly thousands -- of people with New Music Seminar admission badges dangling from their necks walked, biked, took cabs and sprinted among a couple of dozen clubs on the last jam-packed day of the convention.


Abroad at Home; World Without Power
Rwanda is many things: a human catastrophe, a testament to the danger of ethnic hatred, a devastating symbol of man's inhumanity to man.
But beyond all that it is a sign of the New World Disorder: a world in which no great power takes responsibility for preventing a descent into chaos.
When an organized group of militant Hutus began slaughtering Rwanda's Tutsi minority in April, no outside power was prepared to intervene.
Pleas by the Secretary General of the United Nations, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, got no response.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
American corporations are expanding operations overseas, creating jobs there and reviving an old debate here: why can't the goods and services that these foreign workers produce be supplied from the United States?
A weak dollar and falling labor costs have made American products increasingly competitive, and yet overseas investment is rising at twice the rate of exports.  [ Page A1. ]


Food Stamps
The number of households in the region receiving food stamps has jumped 51 percent since the start of the decade.
The area's sluggish economy has been the main reason, but the Agriculture Department also says the Clinton Administration's efforts to issue food stamps to all who qualify has increased the rolls.
If the local economy continues to improve, the number of food stamp recipients should begin to decline in the next year or two.
The statistics released earlier this month on overpayment and error rates for food stamps concerned mistakes involving the issuance of food stamps.
They did not reflect the smaller, but growing, problem of merchants buying food stamps, usually at 60 to 70 cents on the dollar, and redeeming them at full price from the Federal Government.


A Surge in Advertising Across the Radio Dial
Helped by qualitative ratings and research that provide a snapshot of listeners' buying habits, radio advertising has been surging this year at stations big and small around the country.
Advertising revenues rose 12 percent in May, the last month for which data are available, from May 1993.
The gain was the fourth double-digit increase in five months.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Acquired Bob Melvin, catcher, from the California Angels for Jeff Schwarz, pitcher.
Optioned Bob Zupcic, outfielder, to Nashville of the American Association.


Do We Have the Will to End Domestic Abuse?
To the Editor:
Congress has proposed federalizing domestic violence, and many states have introduced legislation to add mandatory jail sentences on conviction.
Will this really help women, or will it just provide another opportunity for a candidate for office to show how tough he or she is on crime?


Sonoco Products Co.(SONO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Dix Hills Septic Tank Accident Kills a Father and His Two Sons
A father and his two sons were overcome by fumes and apparently drowned while working on a septic tank in the older man's back yard in Dix Hills, L.I., yesterday, the police said.
One of the victims, 16-year-old Thomas Campo, died after he went into the tank to try to rescue his father, Gaspare Campo, 57, and his brother, Anthony Campo, 27, the Suffolk County Police said in a statement.


IN PERFORMANCE
Learning From Sonic Youth, But Lashing Out Abrasively  Tramps and Tramps Cafe
Some bands use raw volume to shake up listeners; smarter ones use other strategies.
Polvo, a band from Chapel Hill, N.C., that performed on Friday night at Tramps, has abrasive energy down to a science.


Dreams Aren't Silent Movies, but Talkies
To the Editor:
A traditional definition of "dream" is a vision in sleep, which is how you treat the phenomenon in "Clues to the Irrational Nature of Dreams" (Science Times, July 12).
Yet dreams are far from silent movies.
There is a soundtrack that abounds in dialogue.


U.S. CORPORATIONS EXPANDING ABROAD AT A QUICKER PACE
American companies are once again rapidly expanding their operations abroad -- demonstrating that no matter what the incentives for keeping business in the United States, the urge to spread factories, offices, stores and jobs overseas is irresistible.
The surge in these investments and the jobs they create overseas comes just when exports should be climbing more rapidly than investment abroad.
A weak dollar and falling labor costs have made American products increasingly competitive.
Yet overseas investment is rising at twice the rate of exports.
And for each dollar earned from exports, American companies take in nearly $2 from the sale of what they produce abroad.


Homedco Group (HOME,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Official's Illness Causing Some Political Trauma
For the last seven months, the chair in the Supervisor's office here has been empty, leaving the Town of Riverhead in leadership limbo.
After suffering four heart attacks and undergoing two operations since Christmas Eve, Joseph F. Janoski, who for eight terms has held a job virtually equivalent to mayor, has told the town that entering Town Hall could jeopardize his life.
So he has overseen town affairs from a desk in his bedroom, letting a Town Board member take charge of day-to-day operations, appointing his girlfriend to represent him on various commissions and creating a cloud of confusion as to who is in charge.


Outboard Marine Corp.(OM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cornell Biologist Studies Sturgeon's Steep Decline
They call Dr. Mark B. Bain "the sturgeon general."
Although his official title is associate professor of fish biology at Cornell University in Ithaca, along the Hudson River here he has earned the new, unofficial rank as the coordinator of several programs researching the life and habits of sturgeon.
More particularly, Dr.
Bain and his associates are trying to find out why the sturgeon population has plummeted, not only in the Hudson River but all along the East Coast.


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp.(RGS,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Accounts
*
Memtek Products, Santa Fe Springs, Calif., to Chiat/Day, Venice, Calif., to handle advertising for its Memorex line of products, including audio tapes, videotapes and accessories, and computer disks and data cartridges, previously at the Richards Group, Dallas.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Colgate-Palmolive Co., New York, to FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising to introduce Palmolive dishwashing liquid and antibacterial hand soap.
Billings were not disclosed.


Germany Pleads for Other Nations to Provide Aid
Germany's Foreign Minister made an urgent appeal today for other nations to join his country and the United States in helping the more than one million Rwandans who have fled to Zaire.
"The extent of the catastrophe in Goma is indescribable," the Foreign Minister, Klaus Kinkel, said as a team of American troops accompanied the airlift of water purification systems, distribution equipment and medical supplies to cholera-stricken Rwandan refugees there.


What's The Uproar About?
Democratic leaders on Capitol Hill will gingerly dip their toes into Whitewater tomorrow when the House Banking Committee opens hearings on President Clinton's involvement in that decades-old real estate collapse in Arkansas and its ties, if any, to the savings and loan scandal.
The press has been pounding on the Whitewater story for months.
Republican politicians and the fundamentalist right wing, meanwhile, have been tirelessly accusing the President, usually without evidence, of everything from infidelity to financial shenanigans and murder.
Some of these charges, too, have found their way into print and broadcast news.


Hemingway Slept Here, So the Town Cashes In
Taking a cue from the folks at Disney World, this tiny resort island has finally come up with a mascot it can plaster on everything in sight, and it is not a rodent.
It's Ernest Hemingway.
"The mouse is to Orlando what Hemingway is to Key West," said Gerry Tinlin, a resort manager who has been president of the Key West hotel and motel association.
"Would Key West have the same lure, the same mystique, the same image without Ernest Hemingway? I think not."


Rookie Delivers Seven Runs For Expos
Expos 7, Dodgers 4
Rondell White, a rookie, turned a rare start into a one-man show yesterday.
White drove in all seven Montreal runs with a homer, double and two singles as the host Expos beat the fading Los Angeles Dodgers, 7-4, for their sixth straight victory.


4 Charged in Attack on 2 Men in Village
Four young men from New Jersey who taunted and then attacked two pedestrians in Greenwich Village got more than they bargained for early Sunday, when the pedestrians beat three of them so badly that they were taken to a hospital before they were arrested on assault charges, the police said.
The four men were driving along Christopher Street about 6 A.M. and stopped to yell anti-gay remarks at Terence Joyette and Andrew Miller, both 31, who were crossing at Hudson Street, the police said.


The Talk of Hollywood; A Script Strikes Gold: $4 Million
Over the weekend, producers, agents and studio executives temporarily forgot about the O. J. Simpson case.
All the talk about management turmoil at the Walt Disney Company was placed on hold.
What riveted Hollywood was the record-breaking sale on Thursday night of a movie script for $4 million by International Creative Management, a top talent agency.


Correction
Because of a mechanical error, a front-page article yesterday about Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's strategy against Senator George E. Pataki omitted a line in some copies.
The affected sentence should have read:


No Headline
"She wanted to raise the kids the way she liked. She  rejected my requests to come to Jordan. She didn't allow me to live with my kids. Therefore, I killed her." -- MOHAMMAD ISMAIL ABEQUA.  [ B2:1. ]


Yet Another Round in Greed vs. Prudence
As mutual funds begin to wrestle with losses from derivatives, regulators and investors can be expected to pay more attention to these complex, risky investments.
But the derivatives debacle is just another symptom of a much larger and simpler problem that has long plagued the mutual fund business and seems to be getting worse, a problem that over time is likely to hurt more Americans than derivatives ever will.
The problem is that intense competition among fund companies and their need to sell, sell, sell often comes into conflict with good, safe investment practices.
So the fund companies turn to risky strategies and untried investment gimmicks, which can backfire.
It happened a decade ago with so-called option-income funds, bond funds that wrote up options to generate income but instead led to big losses.
It happened two years ago in short-term world income funds.
And it is happening now, some analysts say, in bond funds like Paine Webber's.


Keystone International Inc.(KII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Firefighters Tell of Dives To Rescue 5
It was not until his fourth dive that Firefighter Jim Kennelly -- his chest aching for air, his eyes clenched against the filthy water -- first wondered whether he, too, might end up among the tangle of bodies in the overturned car at the bottom of Coney Island Creek.
Firefighter Kennelly -- along with Lieut.
Mike Lee, Firefighter Thomas Ingram and more than 100 other emergency workers -- was credited yesterday with rescuing five people whose silver Lincoln Continental had raced over a 10-foot-high embankment, landing wheels-up in the creek, 15 feet from shore.


Kent Electronics Corp.(KNT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


The Noble Failure of July 1944
It is 50 years since a group of German officers tried to rid the world of Adolf Hitler.
By chance, someone happened to move their bomb-laden briefcase, and the Fuhrer was only wounded as walls shook in his underground command post in East Prussia.
Col.
Claus von Stauffenberg, the chief conspirator, had already left the room.
On hearing the blast, he mistakenly assumed Hitler was dead and sped to Berlin to spur the revolt, only to be arrested and summarily executed later that day.
The July 20 plot was a noble failure, an honorable treason.
Yet in a profound but poignant sense the failure triumphed.
Nothing better became the conspirators than their demeanor when they were arrested, tortured, tried before a ranting Nazi judge and then strangled slowly with piano wire -- much of this filmed for Hitler's gratification.
Of the nearly 200 principals who were thus executed, none recanted; several thousand other suspects were later convicted in civilian courts.


Beijing Journal; Chinese Sup on the Sweet and Sour Days of Mao
Wan Jingfeng is too young to remember much about the chaos of the Cultural Revolution, but he is old enough to pocket a small fortune from the memories of millions of others.
Mr.
Wan, 33 years old, is part of what must surely be China's oddest culinary trend.
He has joined the ranks of Beijing restaurateurs who are offering diners the chance to relive the deprivations of Cultural Revolution, the 10 years in which Mao Zedong solidified his cult of personality with waves of political terror and forced migration.


Protesters Clash With Police in London Over a New Anti-Crime Law


Galvanizing the Test Ban Talks
Talks on a treaty to ban nuclear tests around the world resume today in Geneva with little indication that they will be given the urgency they deserve.
A test ban is surely in America's interest.
The U.S. no longer needs tests to design new warheads, assess the reliability of old warheads or rattle potential foes.
Indeed, a ban on such tests would help improve the political atmosphere for tougher curbs on the spread of nuclear arms, perhaps the most critical security issue today.
But the benefits could be imperiled if the sluggish pace of the talks does not pick up.


Ex-Leader Of U.N. Set to Join Fray in Peru
After a long career as a Peruvian diplomat crowned by 10 years as Secretary General of the United Nations, Javier Perez de Cuellar might be forgiven for responding that his public life is over, that he is proud of his achievements, that he asks for no more.
Instead, in the unlikely surroundings of an elegant Left Bank apartment, he has been steeling himself to take on a challenge unlike any he has known, one that entails risking his reputation and perhaps even his life.


Sports of The Times; Flash: It Is Safe at Yankee Stadium
THE first-place Yankees open a homestand tomorrow night against the Boston Red Sox, and the Yankee advisory for attending a game in Yankee Stadium, in clear if unspoken terms, includes wearing armor.
If that's in storage, then helmet and flak jacket.
Remember fans, there are animals out there.
The Yankee advisory might have a shot at being funny if it weren't so detestable.


Indurain Captures His Fourth Tour
Miguel Indurain rode into Paris in triumph today, celebrating his fourth consecutive victory in the Tour de France.
Just two other riders have recorded four consecutive victories since the world's most difficult, richest and greatest bicycle race began in 1903.
Only those two, Jacques Anquetil and Eddy Merckx, in addition to one other rider, Bernard Hinault, have ever won it five times.


ISRAEL AND JORDAN AGREE TO CALL OFF A STATE OF WAR THAT HAS ENDURED 46 YEARS
Israel and Jordan will end the state of war that has existed between them for nearly half a century in a declaration that paves the way for a formal peace, senior American and Israeli officials said today.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and King Hussein of Jordan will issue the statement on Monday when they meet publicly for the first time at a White House ceremony, the officials said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  ISRAEL-JORDAN PACT EXPECTED
A declaration is expected to be issued today that will be the first step toward peace between Israel and Jordan.
The leaders of the nations, meeting in Washington, are also expected to announce various agreements on trade and commerce.
A1


Mobsters, Molls, Murder, The Old-Fashioned Way
They're all on show tonight and tomorrow: Capone, Costello and Castellano; Lansky, Lepke and Luciano; Gotti, Gallo and Gambino, along with many lesser initiates into Murder Inc. and La Cosa Nostra whose exploits keep turning up in books and movies and on television.
"Loyalty and Betrayal: The Story of the American Mob" is among the snappiest of the genre.
Based on a book by Sidney Zion, who is much on screen as an enthusiastic authority, the four-hour chronicle features over-the-hill mobsters and molls telling of the good old era of broad-shouldered bears and bare-shouldered broads enjoying the rewards of bootlegging, bookmaking, loan sharking, extortion and, naturally, murder.
The production is appropriately pulpish.


Agricultural Minerals Co.  (AMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Businesses Fear Columbus Ave. Reconstruction Will Drive Away Customers
The city's most expensive street and utility reconstruction starts on Columbus Avenue today, and businesses are already waving goodbye to customers they fear will be driven away by gaping holes in the pavement, swirling dust and the general racket.
"First, it has to be done; otherwise they wouldn't do it," said Lillian Rydell, executive director of the Columbus-Amsterdam Business Improvement District, which includes businesses on Columbus from 96th to 110th Streets.
"Second, it's going to be a disaster. What else can you say?"


9 Woodstock Veterans Signed For Bethel '94 Music Festival
Bethel '94, the second of two festivals in upstate New York commemorating the 25th anniversary of Woodstock, has finally announced its lineup, and not one solo artist or original group member performing is under 45.
Fourteen acts, nine from the 1969 Woodstock festival, have been scheduled for Bethel '94, to be held on the site of the original Woodstock festival on Aug. 13 and 14 at the farm of Max Yasgur in Sullivan County, near Monticello.


Falconbridge Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Aid Airdrop Off to Ragged Start
An American military airdrop of food and other aid to Rwandan refugees in Zaire got off to a rough start today, adding fuel to criticism by international relief officials of such efforts.
Three C-130 aircraft that left Uganda with eight pallets of supplies weighing a total of 24 tons were not able to drop all their cargo.
The crates, dropped by parachute, missed their target by a mile and crashed onto the foundation of a stone building under construction, a grassy knoll near a United Nations helicopter and a cornfield where goats were grazing.


Market Place; Utility Investors Find They've Become Real Estate Owners.
MUTUAL funds that specialize in utility companies have traditionally been conservative investments favored by retired or elderly investors seeking to supplement their incomes.
So it may come as a surprise to them that many utility funds are rounding out their portfolios by investing in a sector that some consider to be highly speculative: real estate.
The Stratton Monthly Dividend Shares fund has about 65 percent of its $137 million portfolio invested in electric and telephone companies, but 24 percent of the fund is invested in six real estate investment trusts, or REIT's.
Eaton Vance's Total Return Trust, which normally has from 75 to 100 percent of its $533 million portfolio invested in utilities, has about 18 percent invested in real estate trusts.


First USA Inc.(FUS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Philosopher's Words Translated Into Action
Descartes may have come up with the perfect sound bite in "I think, therefore I am." That 17th-century French philosopher was wordier when it came to discussing the emotional rather than the cerebral side of human nature.
Descartes's treatise "The Passions of the Soul" is, in fact, the springboard for "Waterzooi," the highly original and witty new work that the Compagnie Maguy Marin from France presented over the weekend here at the American Dance Festival.
"Waterzooi" is named after a Belgian stew, chiefly because its several ingredients include as much vocalizing as choreography.
Yet the piece as a whole is very French, a rational examination of humanity at large through aphoristic vignettes about disparate and basic emotions.


G.E. Finds Tough Going in Hungary
Five years ago, amid handshakes and grins, the General Electric Company agreed to acquire Tungsram, a maker of lighting products and one of Hungary's industrial gems, in a deal that many believed would show other leading Western corporations how to turn Communist-run enterprises into money makers.
Almost immediately, other ambitious American companies took notice of General Electric's investment in Eastern Europe, and it became a beacon of hope for Hungary's workers and Government leaders.


Ahead of Schedule, If There's a Schedule
Ozzie Guillen, the loquacious shortstop of the Chicago White Sox, perhaps put the weekend series in the proper perspective.
"If we go on strike," Guillen said midway through the four-game series between the White Sox and the Cleveland Indians, "they're going to forget about this series. If we strike, you think anybody is going to say, 'You remember that series in Cleveland?' "


In a Brazilian TV Hit, Morality Is a Matter of Public Opinion
Brazil's Globo television network, the producer of some of the world's most popular soap operas, has been finding success with a drama series that asks its audience to vote on its ending each week.
"Voce Decide," or "You Decide," poses challenging ethical questions on topics including poverty, race, sexuality and religion.
As many as 80,000 viewers participate in the call-in voting each week, and the total would be far higher if the network had more telephone lines, Globo officials said.


Raymond Started Thinking, And Started Losing to Graf
After winning her semifinal match in the Pathmark Tennis Classic on Saturday, Steffi Graf said she was just where she wanted to be in terms of progress after a monthlong layoff.
But the 25-year-old Graf was hardly where she wanted to be today when she found herself down a set and with Lisa Raymond serving for a 5-3 lead in the second set of the final.
At that stage of the match, Graf may have been the top-ranked player in the world, but the 20-year-old Raymond appeared to be the best player on the court with her big serve and crunching forehand.


Agencies Accepting Donations
Adventist Development and Relief Agency, P.O.
Box 4289, Silver Spring, Md. 20914; (800) 424-2372.
AmeriCares, Rwanda Relief, 161 Cherry St., New Canaan, Conn. 06840; (800) 486-HELP.


Do We Have the Will to End Domestic Abuse?; A National Center
To the Editor:
In "A Crime Against God, Too" (Op-Ed, July 12), Blu Greenberg asks why there is no national religious leadership organization dedicated to "a wife's right to physical safety."


Sinn Fein Rejects Key Parts of Anglo-Irish Peace Initiative
Sinn Fein, the political wing of the outlawed Irish Republican Army, today formally rejected crucial points in the peace initiative for Northern Ireland that was advanced in December by the Irish and British Governments.
Officials and analysts in Ireland and Northern Ireland said the Sinn Fein resolutions on the initiative, known as the Downing Street Declaration, were tantamount to total rejection and a serious setback for efforts to end the campaign of violence involving the British province's Protestant majority and its Roman Catholic minority.
The fighting has killed more than 3,100 people since 1969.


Southest Airlines (LUV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Does Taxi Ride Leave You Hot Under the Collar?; Cabbies Have One Regulation and Many Excuses Why It Isn't Cool in the Back Seat
Gerald Tierstein says it is just one of those New York conundrums: how to air-condition his taxi, while keeping a plastic partition between the front seat, where the air-conditioning is, and the back seat, where the passengers are.
The Taxi and Limousine Commission says he must be able to do both. Simultaneously.


New Head of Landmarks Panel Looks to Future
A 38-year-old lawyer has been named chairwoman of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, and she says she will move quickly to look at the future of buildings in lower Manhattan and to cultivate public-private partnerships in the care of landmarks.
The chairwoman, Jennifer J. Raab, a litigation associate in the firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, was named to the post last week by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
She was the issues director for his 1989 mayoral campaign.


British TV News
To the Editor:
Simon Marks has some harsh criticisms of British television journalism (letter, July 13).
However, as an occasional contributor to British Broadcasting Corporation news programs, he should know better than to include the BBC in his broadside.


D'Amato and the Politics Of Wind-Shear Detection
Long Island residents, backed by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, have forced the Federal Aviation Administration to abandon the two sites it had chosen for huge radar towers to monitor dangerous wind conditions at Kennedy and La Guardia airports.
Now the Senator is sponsoring legislation that would direct the aviation agency to begin testing an alternative system at the airports themselves -- a system that he says is smaller, cheaper and safer.
It is made by the Unisys Corporation, a major Long Island contractor.


A Steady Sheehan Seizes U.S. Open
She is only 5 feet 3 inches and one of the shortest hitters in women's golf.
But when there is a major championship on the line, Patty Sheehan looms very big.
She did it again today, on a bright, gusty afternoon at Indianwood Golf and Country Club, beating back the challenges of younger and stronger players and winning her second United States Women's Open championship by simply refusing to bend.
Sheehan, 37, ground out a round of 71, even par, and finished at seven-under-par 277.
That was one stroke better than Tammie Green, who also shot 71.
Liselotte Neumann finished third, four strokes back, after a 69.


Sales Pitch for (Which?) Health Care Plan
If anyone should like Hillary Rodham Clinton, it is Craig Salins: he is 46, like her; a rabid Democrat, like her; a frenetic advocate of national health insurance, like her.
And indeed he does like Mrs.
Clinton, comparing her favorably to Eleanor Roosevelt.
It is the health care plan she is selling that he is not so sure about.
Mrs.
Clinton came to the Northwest this weekend to whip up support for Democratic health care legislation, and Mr.
Salins was passing out leaflets and cheering at her sun-washed rally here.
But beyond her stirring calls for guaranteed coverage and health "security" for the middle class, Mrs.
Clinton said little about the sort of law she favors.
What Mr.
Salins remembers is the plan her husband, the President, proposed to Congress last fall.
He detests that plan.


IN PERFORMANCE
Amid the New, Some Old: A Bit of Delta-Style Blues  Tramps
The New Music Seminar made way for some old music when Keb' Mo' (the stage name of Kevin Moore) performed at Tramps on Thursday night.
Mr.
Moore sat with an acoustic guitar and finger-picked some Delta-style blues, singing mostly about women and love in a relaxed baritone.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Easy Work for Spain  Spain, with second-ranked Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and No. 3 Conchita Martinez, routed the United States yesterday in Frankfurt to win the Federation Cup for the second straight year.
Sanchez Vicario defeated Lindsay Davenport, 6-2, 6-1, after Martinez had won against Mary Joe Fernandez, 6-2, 6-2.
The two Spaniards went on to a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Gigi and Mary Joe Fernandez in the meaningless doubles match. (AP) Edberg Wins in Washington: Second-seeded Stefan Edberg defeated Jason Stoltenberg, 6-4, 6-2, to win the Legg Mason Tennis Classic in Washington.
Edberg needed only 70 minutes to down Stoltenberg for the fourth time this season. (AP)


The Road to a Health Care Plan
Sept. 22, 1993 -- President Clinton outlines to a joint session of Congress his plan to overhaul the nation's health care system.
Nov. 20, 1993 -- The President's health proposal is introduced as a bill in Congress.


Patents; At Inventors Expo, Everything from Bed Exercisers to a Guard to Keep Baby Out of the Bathtub
THE 22d annual National Inventors Expo over the weekend here featured 76 recent inventions ranging from a drummer-activated strobe light for rock bands to a modular space station.
But most inventions at the Expo -- sponsored by the United States Patent and Trademark Office as a way to showcase recently issued patents -- were associated with more everyday activities.
Heavily trafficked by summer tourists weary of visiting nearby museums, the Expo included Otha O. Graham, a retired Methodist minister from Maysville, N.C., who demonstrated his system for exercising in bed (patent 5,207,628).


A Stalled Cleanup in Congress
The 103d Congress has roughly 10 days to get serious about passing campaign finance laws, putting limits on gifts and lobbying, and revising the outdated procedural rules by which Congress operates.
If nothing happens before the August vacation break, it is unlikely anything will get done before members quit to campaign in September.
What a wasted opportunity.
The 1992 election produced the biggest crop of new members in years, and a new President, too -- all sworn to restore public trust in government.
Yet neither Congress nor President Clinton has done anything to change business-as-usual in Washington.


Health Debate Recasts Lawmaking Process
The schematic of how a bill becomes law always looks so orderly and stately in the civics textbooks: one house acts, then the other, they split the differences in a conference committee, and a happy President signs the bill into law.
But the struggle over health care legislation has become so intense and so compressed by the calendar that the orderly schematics simply no longer apply.


Bratton Policing Experiment Gets Results
Experimenting with plans for dealing with violence in New York City, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton decided this spring to turn one of the toughest parts of the city into a laboratory for criminal science.
His area of concentration, the 75th Precinct in the East New York section of Brooklyn, teems with murders, shootings and robberies.
It is a precinct where stickups take place in broad daylight and ricocheting bullets are a constant hazard, a place where hardly anyone takes an afternoon stroll without giving it serious thought.


Rescuers of Five


Intrenet (INET,NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Guard Shoots Rikers Inmate At Hospital
A Rikers Island inmate who was awaiting treatment at Kings County Hospital Center in Brooklyn was shot and wounded by a correction officer early yesterday after he tried to escape, correction officials said.
It was the second incident in just over a month in which a Rikers prisoner taken to the hospital has attacked an officer and been shot while seeking to escape.
Tom Kelly, Deputy Commissioner for Public Information for the Department of Correction, described as a coincidence the two shootings within a month.
"We have over 7,000 hospital runs without incident each year and it's been a number of years before we had incidents, this summer," he said.


Ladd Furniture (LADF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Russia's Elite Scientists Turn High School Tutors
This picturesque city is a citadel of Russian science.
Its nine biological research institutes have long been considered among the finest in the world.
Its molecular biologists, protein physiologists and biochemists have published thousands of articles in prestigious journals.
What better place, then, for an ambitious American high school student to prepare that all-important entry for the Westinghouse Science Talent Search?
Who could be a more perfect coach for an eager teen-ager than a world-renowned specialist in the field he wants to enter?


New Head of Landmarks Panel Looks to Future
A 38-year-old lawyer has been named chairwoman of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, and she says she will move quickly to look at the future of buildings in lower Manhattan and to cultivate public-private partnerships in the care of landmarks.
The chairwoman, Jennifer J. Raab, a litigation associate in the firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, was named to the post last week by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
She was the issues director for his 1989 mayoral campaign.


Do We Have the Will to End Domestic Abuse?; The Batterer's Disorder
To the Editor:
In 1921 the German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin published his classic "Manic Depressive Insanity and Paranoia," in which he recorded all the symptoms of depression and mania he had observed in hundreds of manic depressives.


Do We Have the Will to End Domestic Abuse?; Helping Jewish Women
To the Editor:
Blu Greenberg makes the case for religious involvement to help end domestic violence and asks why there are no national religious leadership organizations dedicated to a wife's right to physical safety ("A Crime Against God, Too," Op-Ed, July 12).
There are such organizations, among them the American Jewish Congress's Commission for Women's Equality.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Allied Capital Acquisition Corp., Washington, an initial public offering of 7 million common shares.
Lehman Brothers.


VF Corp.(VFC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Lintas Executive Is Joining Y.&amp; R.
Stewart Owen, executive vice president and director of strategic development at Lintas New York, is leaving to join Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., effective next Monday, in the new position of worldwide director of marketing.
Mr.
Owen, 43, is the first prominent executive to announce he is leaving Lintas New York since its merger with Ammirati &amp; Puris, a move that left management of the merged agency in the hands of top Ammirati executives.
He said, however, that his decision was unrelated to the merger.


Eyeball to Eyeball: And Franco, Not Bonds, Blinks First
Barry Bonds batting with the bases loaded is every reliever's nightmare.
Is there anything more daunting than the prospect of facing Bonds with runners on base and the game on the line?
John Franco pondered that question yesterday afternoon at Shea Stadium.


Computer Underground Comes Out of the Cold
On stage in the Grand Ballroom here at the Sahara Hotel, an intense young man who calls himself the Dark Tangent is holding up a T-shirt that declares, "I am a Fed."
Before an audience composed largely of college-age men, he jumps to the floor and strides down the aisle until he finds his victim, an older man trying his best to remain inconspicuous.


Week's Sales Offer Bills And Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to bills and notes, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
The Government will auction two-year notes on Tuesday and five-year notes on Wednesday.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.36 percent, while the six-month bill was at 4.76 percent.


Jets Waste No Time Breaking A Sweat
There hasn't been a Jets camp opener like this weekend's since, well, maybe back when they were called the Titans.
The veterans circled the rookies when it was over today, everyone sweating from the summer heat, but chanting and laughing.
Coaches call the drill "up's and downs," but "torture" is more accurately descriptive.


Sky Beauty Beats a Jinx
The legendary Saratoga jinx finally met its match today when the filly champion Sky Beauty rolled to her ninth victory in the last 10 starts and became the first favorite to win a stakes race since the new season opened three days ago.
The 4-year-old superstar outran Link River by 10 1/2 lengths in the Go for Wand Stakes, remained undefeated in four starts this year and won for the 13th time in 16 starts in her career.
And the "house of upsets" also bit the dust when another favorite, the ancient 9-year-old gelding Fourstardave, made the 93d start of his career and won a race at Saratoga for the eighth year in a row.


Robert Kagan, 67, Lawyer for Tenants
Robert Kagan, a New York lawyer and a former chairman of Community Board 7, on the Upper West Side, died on Friday at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 67 and had lived on the Upper West Side for the last 30 years.
The cause was pneumonia, and he had heart surgery in December, said his son Marc.


Graco (GGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


First Data Corp.(FDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Prudential Pact Focus Of Inquiry
The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating whether Prudential Securities required its former chairman to improperly destroy documents relating to the firm at a time it was facing hundreds of lawsuits over its business practices in the 1980's, people with knowledge of the situation said yesterday.
The destruction requirement was included as part of a severance agreement with George L. Ball, the former chairman and chief executive, after he was forced out early in 1991.
The agreement -- between Mr.
Ball, the brokerage and its parent, the Prudential Insurance Company of America -- was signed in August 1991, about six months after the announcement of Mr.
Ball's departure.


Health Care Bus: Lots of Miles, Not so Much Talk
From Oregon through Idaho and on to Utah, passengers on a cross-country bus trip in support of health care change have moved with a cheerful mien across the Western landscape, sharing personal stories and anxious accounts of the need for Congress to overhaul the American health insurance system.
But so far, they have spoken mostly to themselves.


St. Louis Blues and Keenan: A Tale of Cloak and Swagger
In St.
Louis, where the sports icons are named Musial, Gibson, Dierdorf and Ozzie, the Blues are trying to redefine the city's sports psyche.
At a time when the Cardinals appear timid and talent-short, the Blues are rules-bending rogues who don't care if they offend their National Hockey League rivals.
With two new riverboat casinos in the St.
Louis area, where games of skill like poker and blackjack are allowed but slot machines are not, the Blues have wagered that a martinet with slicked-back hair, a trim mustache, a killer Ditka stare and a reputation for tempestuous hockey romances will deliver what coaches named Plager (Bob and Barclay), Berry, Sutter and Francis could not.


Rule Pumps Dollars Into Decayed Housing
Roofless buildings yawning to the sky, gaping windows without glass, inside walls stripped to rough planks, outside walls pitted with holes: it isn't the emptiness of the Desire public housing development that is disconcerting, but the presence of any residents at all.
About 3,000 people live in a project that was designed for more than twice that number.
In March, the Inspector General for the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Susan Gaffney, told Congress that renovating the isolated 97-acre reservation for the poor would cost $14 million more than tearing it down and starting over.
Yet work is under way on a renovation plan that is expected to cost $90 million to $100 million.
The housing agency has already approved the first $12 million.


Kirby Corp.(KEX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Don't Thank the Boss for 'Casual Friday'; Men's Wear Angst
To the Editor:
"Nowadays, Workers Enjoy Dressing Down for the Job" (front page, July 15) misses the angst Casual Fridays are bringing to the men's wear industry and to men themselves.
Men's suit manufacturers, already suffering declining sales, fear Casual Fridays will make things worse.
Men fret about what to wear when they don't wear a suit to business.


People
*
Jan D. Starr, senior vice president and general manager at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Detroit, was promoted to the new position of executive vice president and managing director.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about a lawsuit challenging New York State's prohibition on assisting a suicide misattributed an article about helping to hasten a patient's death, written by one of three physicians who filed the suit.
It was by Dr.
Timothy E. Quill, not Dr.
Howard A. Grossman.


Jett's Supervisor at Kidder Breaks Silence
Edward A. Cerullo, who stepped down as Kidder, Peabody's No. 2 executive on Friday, went on the offensive yesterday to counter questions about whether he had provided adequate supervision of Joseph Jett, the Government bond trader who is said to have inflated his profits -- and Kidder's -- by $350 million through fictitious trades.
After maintaining a public silence for months as the Kidder, Peabody scandal made headlines, Mr.
Cerullo, 44, who reportedly earned more than $20 million last year as the head of Kidder's 750-member fixed-income trading department, said that he continually monitored Mr.
Jett's performance but that he had to rely on the firm's internal audit reports, which gave no hint of irregularities.


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co. (LLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


USLife (USH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
Still, there were enough celebrities left over on Sunday for the opening of the newest outpost of Planet Hollywood, in Las Vegas.
The actor STEVEN SEAGAL arrived on an elephant, ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER and SYLVESTER STALLONE, who are among the partners of the restaurant chain, came in horse-drawn chariots, and WHOOPI GOLDBERG made her entrance a la Cleopatra, borne by gladiators, The Associated Press reported.


MGM Grand Inc.(MGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bettman Justice: Everyone Loses, Everyone Gains
When National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman examined the trade engineered by the Rangers and Blues late Friday to resolve the Mike Keenan dispute, he said it was not enough and summoned both sides to his office Sunday.
Bettman was willing to accept the Blues' swap of Petr Nedved for the Rangers' Esa Tikkanen and Doug Lidster to compensate for St.
Louis's signing of Keenan on July 17.
But he had punishment in mind for everyone.


Jackpot: Two Lives Inspire Art
A POLICE officer walks into a coffee shop, schmoozes up the world-weary, wisecracking waitress, finds he doesn't have money to tip her.
He says he'll give her half his prize if he wins the Lotto, she says 'Yeah, right,' then he wins $4 million, gives her half, and despite his (nag of a) wife and her (jerk of a) husband, ta-dah, they fall in love.
Art imitates life; Hollywood likes to schmaltz it up.
You can't blame Robert Cunningham or Phyllis Penzo, though, for thinking the story is a hoot.
"Hilarious," Mr.
Cunningham said, stretching the word like taffy.


USX-Marathon Group (MRO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


To Put It Baldly, Brooks Is a Leader
Ever since he has played professional football, linebacker Michael Brooks has shaved his head.
He thought it made him look more, well, like a linebacker.
When he came to New York last year from Denver, bald head and all, Giants players got to watch him in action and soon learned what the American Football Conference already knew: He is simply one of the best middle linebackers in the game.
Soon the bald thing caught on.
Linebacker Carlton Bailey shaved his head last year when Brooks got hurt and vowed not to let his hair grow until Brooks came back.
Bailey did it again at the beginning of training camp.
Soon, the bald head became the rage among the linebackers.
Now, just about every Giants linebacker has a chrome dome.
They all want to be like Mike.


Black &amp; Decker Corp.(BDK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Business Digest
The Economy
A bill that would remove the remaining barriers to branch banking across state lines was set for passage after House and Senate negotiators resolved their differences.
The bill would also subsidize small banks that lend money in low-income neighborhoods.
President Clinton is expected to sign the bill.  [ Page D1. ]


Amre Inc.(AMM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


G.O.P. Holds Big Fund-Raiser for Pataki
At a fund-raiser last night that New York State Republicans painted as a symbolic emergence from the party's humiliation four years ago, Republican leaders raised what they said was $2.5 million to help State Senator George E. Pataki in his bid to unseat Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo this fall.
The event's chairman, United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the chief architect of Mr.
Pataki's candidacy, said it was the party's largest fund-raiser for a gubernatorial candidate in 12 years.
The sum was just a bit short of the combined total that the two previous Republican challengers spent for their entire campaigns.


If Yanks Are in First, The Race Is in Trouble
Labor negotiations and threatened strikes obviously work well for the Yankees.
The last time the Yankees finished first in their division was in 1981, and though they didn't know it at the time, they clinched first place with an 8-5 victory over Kansas City June 9.
That victory gave the Yankees a three-game lead over Baltimore, and because only two games remained before the strike deadline, the Orioles couldn't catch the Yankees before the strike began.
When it was decided at the conclusion of the strike 50 days later that the season would be split into two parts, the Yankees were assured a spot in the playoffs.


Kitchen-Sink Bonds: Paine Webber's $180 Million Misstep
Few investors would deliberately buy toxic waste.
But a lot of them ended up owning the Wall Street equivalent, because they -- or their mutual funds -- bought what are called kitchen-sink bonds.
Last Friday, Paine Webber Group said it would spend $180 million to buy two of these issues from its troubled Short-Term U.S.
Government Securities Fund, which has fallen by more than 7 percent this year, far more than similar funds.
The bonds made up about a quarter of the fund's assets.


Kerkorian Has 5% of Viacom But Asks No Seats on Board
Kirk Kerkorian, the Las Vegas billionaire, said yesterday that his privately held Tracinda Corporation had acquired 5 percent of Viacom Inc.'s outstanding stock.
Tracinda said that the $300 million purchase of 10 million class B nonvoting shares was for investment purposes only and that Tracinda would not seek board representation.


Q&amp;A
Liberty's Complexion
Q. Is the green stuff that covers the Statue of Liberty harmful?


ServiceMaster L.P.(SVM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cipsco Inc.(CIP,N) reports earnings for 12mo to May 31


Lawyer Held After Drug Burglaries
Back in May, Kevin G. McKeon appeared as a lawyer representing a criminal defendant in Judge Charles P. Sifton's courtroom in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
Yesterday evening Mr.
McKeon stood before Judge Sifton's bench again -- only this time, he was the defendant, charged with tipping off burglars to where they might find stashes of drugs to steal and sell.


By Design; Relieving Midsummer Ennui
By now, every piece of summer clothing in your closet probably looks pretty tired.
Fall clothes are arriving in the stores, but who can face mohair and wool when the temperature is hovering around 90?
The solution may be found at the Banana Republic stores, which have just received early fall merchandise in fabrics and colors that can be worn from now until the first frost.


Shaw Industries(SHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Coachmen Industries Inc.(COA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lavagna Journal; Italy Sees Smoother Sailing (Yachting's In Again)
There are some people around this town of provincial purposefulness, sparkling marinas and bustling boatyards who believe there is some link between the state of Italian yachting and that of the nation's soul.
Maybe it is because the country's postwar economic miracle went hand in hand with a boom in the building of big sleek boats, as the hobby of monarchs and tycoons slid down to the middle class.
Maybe, too, it is because a major public tragedy played out in Italy last year seemed so inextricably intertwined with yachting.
After all, was not the daring -- though ultimately unsuccessful -- effort of Raul Gardini's yacht, Il Moro di Venezia, to seize the America's Cup for Italy a metaphor for the kind of extravagances that ultimately bankrupted the big Montedison corporation of Mr.
Gardini and led to his suicide, an incident that became an emblem of the corporate and political scandals that have racked the national spirit in recent years?


Caraustar Industries Inc.(CSAR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Compuware Corp.(CPWR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ron Cochran, 81, Television Anchor
Ron Cochran, a former television and radio newsman with CBS and ABC, died yesterday at Palm Beach Regional Hospital in Lake Worth, Fla.
He was 81 and lived in Aberdeen, Fla.
The cause was heart failure, and he had been in the hospital for five weeks with heart trouble and other ailments, said his wife, Beulah.


Mitchell Puts Some Zip In Reds' So-So Crowd
Reds 7, Astros 4
Kevin Mitchell homered twice to rally the Reds to a 7-4 victory over the Houston Astros at Cincinnati last night, securing the Reds' month-long hold on first place in the National League Central Division.


Paul Revere Corp.(PRL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American General (AGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


States Able To Stabilize Their Budgets
Aided by a resurgent economy, state legislatures across the country were able to stabilize their finances this year, with most avoiding tax increases and deep budget cuts, according to a national study of legislative budgets released yesterday.
The study, conducted annually by the National Conference of State Legislatures, found that Medicaid, the Federal-state health program for the poor, and state prison programs continued to command the largest increases in state budgets in the fiscal year that began this month.
But the average increase in spending in those two categories has actually slowed, the conference found, leaving additional money available for other programs, like public schools.


Computer Task Group (TSK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Operating Profit Rises At American Express
The American Express Company said yesterday that its earnings from continuing operations increased 19 percent in the second quarter, to $359 million, pushed up by strong results in its credit card and investment businesses, the two areas in which the slimmed-down company is now concentrating.
Still, its total net income declined 14 percent, to $357 million, from $416 million in the second quarter of last year.
Last year's results included $109 million from its Shearson and Lehman Brothers investment banking subsidiaries.
The company spun off Lehman to its shareholders on May 31 and sold Shearson to Travelers Inc. last July.


CHRONICLE
From England comes the story of two women, one ex-Beatle and 150 Canada geese, now deceased.
The trouble with the Canada geese, some ecologists say, is that their powers of excretion and reproduction are so remarkable that long-term management is called for.
When England's Department of Environment advised shooting as a way of controlling the population of the birds, which collide with aircraft, shower parks with waste and even threaten humans, CARLA LANE, a television comedy writer, and her neighbors in Sussex, PAUL and LINDA McCARTNEY, came up with a plan: Move the geese from Battersea Park in London to the McCartney estate.


Medusa Corp.(MSA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Valley National Bancorp (VLY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Strengths and Weaknesses Apparent in 2 DNA Tests
Each of the two DNA tests at the center of today's sparring between prosecutors and O. J. Simpson's defense team has strengths and limitations.
The more conclusive of the two tests, used to determine whether two tissue samples came from the same person, is R.F.L.P., for restriction fragment length polymorphisms.
It examines regions of the genetic material -- from blood, saliva, tissue or a hair follicle -- where particular small segments of DNA are repeated over and over, a sort of molecular stutter.
Different people have different numbers of repeated segments.
If one person has a segment repeated, say, 300 times, that would distinguish him or her from someone whose segment is repeated 100 times.


Vanessa Williams's Enticing 'Spider Woman'
Ever since it opened more than 14 months ago, "Kiss of the Spider Woman" has been one of Broadway's most thrilling musicals.
Now that Vanessa Williams has joined the cast, it is also the sexiest.
Sleek, proud and breathtakingly confident, the recording star has taken over the role of Aurora, the exotic film goddess who prowls men's dreams and inflames their imaginations.
Whenever she's onstage, the temperature in the Broadhurst Theater shoots up about 20 degrees.
The air-conditioning bills are going to be hell to pay, but the box office is bound to start jumping as word of her performance gets around.


Children's Cemetery a Clue To Malaria as Rome Declined
DIGGING among the ruins of a Roman villa, archeologists have made a macabre discovery about disease and death in the fifth century A.D., and perhaps even about the reasons for Attila the Hun's decision to leave his invasion of Italy unfinished and for the decline and fall of the Roman Empire.
The discovery is a cemetery for infants, excavated over the last two years by an international team led by Dr.
David Soren, a classical archeologist at the University of Arizona in Tucson.
The cemetery overlooks the Tiber River near the town of Lugnano in Teverina, 70 miles north of Rome.


Alltrista Corp.(JARS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Children Become Priority In Senate Leader's Plan
Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, said tonight that he would seek quick action to provide health insurance for most children who do not have it in the health care legislation he will offer to the Senate next week.
While in most respects his proposal would produce slower progress toward universal health coverage than the plan proposed by President Clinton, the Maine Democrat said, "this is one area where we are trying to accelerate implementation."


At Rwanda Border, Mass Graves And the Start of a Journey Home
As the death toll from cholera among Rwandan refugees climbed to 14,000, relief officials started digging six new mass graves today and began burning the bodies of some victims in order to prevent spread of the disease.
A moderate but steady stream of refugees began today to make the trek along hilly and curving roads from refugee camps in Zaire to return to their homes in Rwanda.
Relief officials said about 3,000 refugees crossed the border today, the first full day since the border between the two countries was reopened.


Marley's Son Pleads Not Guilty
Miami Hurricanes linebacker ROHAN MARLEY pleaded not guilty yesterday to a charge of aggravated assault against a police officer.
The junior, who led Miami in tackles, was arrested July 4 and accused of trying to hit a Miami Beach officer with his pickup truck.
He is the son of the late reggae star Bob Marley. (AP)


CAPITAL CITIES/ABC INC. (CCB,N)
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. said yesterday that performances by its ABC Television Network, cable television and publishing operations contributed to a 24.8 percent rise in second- quarter earnings.
The broadcasting company also said it had signed an agreement with the Hearst Corporation that extends its current station affiliations for 10 years in five big markets.
The stations are in Boston, Pittsburgh, Milwaukee, Kansas City, Mo., and Dayton, Ohio.
The extensions come as the networks are scrambling to lock in long-term affiliation deals in major markets.


Bank of Boston Corp.(BKB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bacteria That Resist Some Drugs Implicated
The huge outbreak of cholera among Rwandan refugees in Zaire has been caused by a strain of bacterium that is highly resistant to the standard antibiotics used in helping to treat the diarrheal disease, officials of the World Health Organization said yesterday.
But the strain is susceptible to another antibiotic, furazolidone, sold under the trade name Furoxone in the United States, according to tests performed in laboratories in Europe, officials of the United Nations health agency in Geneva said.


Charter One Financial Inc.(COFI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hudson Foods Inc.(HFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Coleman Evidence Sent to Prosecutor
The police in Detroit said yesterday that evidence gathered in the investigation of a rape complaint filed against DERRICK COLEMAN by a 22-year-old woman had been passed on to prosecutors for a decision on whether to pursue charges against the Nets' star.
Under Michigan law a woman's complaint, even if uncorroborated, is sufficient to require consideration by prosecutors.


Don't Thank the Boss for 'Casual Friday'
To the Editor:
"Nowadays, Workers Enjoy Dressing Down for the Job" (front page, July 15) begs the question.
If worker productivity is improved with one day of casual dress, why not reap this benefit every day?


Gordon Lipetz, 86, Retired L.I. Judge
Gordon M. Lipetz, a retired justice of the New York State Supreme Court in Suffolk County, died on July 17 in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He was 86 and lived in Southampton, L.I., for many years before moving to Pompano Beach in 1981.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.


Hershey Foods Corp.(HSY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Kitchen-Sink Bonds: Paine Webber's $180 Million Misstep
Few investors would deliberately buy toxic waste.
But a lot of them ended up owning the Wall Street equivalent, because they -- or their mutual funds -- bought what are called kitchen-sink bonds.
Last Friday, Paine Webber Group said it would spend $180 million to buy two of these issues from its troubled Short-Term U.S.
Government Securities Fund, which has fallen by more than 7 percent this year, far more than similar funds.
The bonds made up about a quarter of the fund's assets.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.31
4.26
3.11
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.43
4.36
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.83
4.76
3.24
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.24
7.27
5.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.52
7.56
6.67
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.33
8.36
7.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.38
5.81
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Domco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Haiti Is Washington's Dirty Little Secret
To the Editor:
Re "U.S. Making Moves for Haiti Action" (front page, July 15): When Senator Sam Nunn, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, warned against the use of military force to restore democracy in Haiti, he joined a long list of prominent apologists for Haiti's military rulers.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
From Africa, With a Hint of Gaul  Central Park Summerstage
Musicians from French-speaking Africa and the Caribbean flock to Paris to record in modern studios with producers who promise to reach the world market.
Sometimes the results are cross-cultural marvels; sometimes they're provincially Parisian, glimmering with sweet synthesizer tones and flaunting dated funk and rock flourishes.
Africa Fete, the touring festival of French-speaking international performers, brought a little of each to Summerstage on Sunday afternoon.


Storage Technology Corp.(STK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Clark Equipment (CKL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Community Roadblock Set Up Against Traffic Fatalities


Brunswick Mining reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Keeping Force In the Balkans Is Questioned
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali suggested to the Security Council today that its members should seriously consider whether the United Nations peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina should be withdrawn in the event of peace there, saying only the major powers could enforce a peace agreement.
It is the first time that Mr.
Boutros-Ghali -- who carries out policy but does not make it -- has so explicitly discussed the circumstances that might require an end to United Nations presence in Bosnia.


Fantastic World Found in Sea's Middle Depths
THE darkened room is lit only by glowing computer screens and ghostly images from a robot more than a half-mile below, tethered to this ship by an electronic cord.
To the left, the pilot guides the robot forward.
To the right, the chief scientist scans his video monitor, searching the ocean depths for unusual forms of life.
Suddenly, the blur of marine snow is cut by a thin line.
The image on the screen grows until it becomes a bizarre gelatinous creature, perhaps 15 or 20 feet long.
Translucent bells at its head pump slowly to move it forward in a long arc.
Hundreds of willowy tentacles hang from its slender body, stingers ready to immobilize prey.
Along its length are dozens of stomachs, some fat with digesting kills.


St. Paul Cos.(SPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cirrus Logic Inc.(CRUS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Accounts
*
Sun International Inc., Miami, to Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine, Orlando, Fla., as the first agency to handle advertising for a new resort on Paradise Island, in the Bahamas.
Billings were estimated at $4 million to $5 million. *
Millennium Telecommunications Inc., Garden City, L.I., to Welch &amp; Nehlen Advertising Inc., also of Garden City, as the first agency to handle advertising for a new information and entertainment service called "Caller's Choice." Billings were estimated at $2 million.


Apple South Inc.(APSO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N.'s Team in Iraq Sees Arms Gains
The flickering image of a boiler-like machine on a television screen at a United Nations office here indicates that the monitoring system imposed on Iraqi industry four years ago is achieving its aim of preventing President Saddam Hussein from building weapons of mass destruction.
But it also means that the oil embargo and other sanctions against Iraq for its invasion of Kuwait are closer to being lifted without having achieved their unstated aim -- in the eyes of the United States and some other countries -- of removing President Hussein from power as well.


El Nino Said to Predict Rain and Crops in Africa
FLUCTUATING sea-surface temperatures in the Pacific Ocean can reliably predict both rainfall and corn harvests halfway around the world in Africa, scientists have found, in a discovery that may offer a powerful new tool for agricultural planners.
Climatologists say they are able to forecast with some confidence the two-to-seven-year oscillations in Pacific temperatures, associated with the phenomenon known as El Nino, that set off long-distance atmospheric chain reactions which influence climatic conditions in many parts of the globe.
The new findings suggest that these predictions can be used to forecast crop conditions in Africa as much as a year in advance, enabling planners to anticipate and cope better with droughts and shortened rainy seasons.


No. 5 Finisher Donates Purse to Rwandans
The fifth-place finisher in the Tour de France has pledged his $47,000 winnings to a relief agency helping Rwandan refugees.
RICHARD VIRENQUE of France also announced Sunday that he will auction his bicycle and polka-dotted jersey, signifying the race's best climber, and give the proceeds to relief for Rwanda. (AP)


BCE Mobile Commun reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Excerpts From Ruling That Upholds Capital Sentences
Following are excerpts from today's ruling by the Connecticut Supreme Court upholding the state's death penalty.
In their overall configuration, our death penalty statutes facially satisfy the constitutional requirements of the Eighth and 14th Amendments to the United States Constitution.
The multitiered pyramid meets the prerequisite of consistency and reliability by guiding the capital sentencer's discretion with clear and objective standards that narrow the class of defendants eligible for the death penalty and by providing a meaningful basis for distinguishing between those cases in which the death penalty is imposed and those in which it is not.
The third tier in the pyramid meets the individualization prerequisite by requiring the sentencer to consider any relevant mitigating information so as to enable the sentencer to make the reasoned moral judgment that death is the appropriate punishment in a particular case.
. . .
We must therefore decide whether contemporary understandings of applicable economic and sociological norms compel the conclusion that any death penalty constitutes cruel and unusual punishment.
The question is not whether any one of us would vote to enact a death penalty if our role were that of a legislator.
It is, rather, whether the defendant is correct in his contention that the death penalty is so inherently cruel and so lacking in moral and sociological justification that it is unconstitutional on its face because it is fundamentally offensive to evolving standards of human decency.
Stated so categorically, we are unpersuaded by the defendant's contention.
Judicial evaluation of evolving standards of human decency cannot proceed in a vacuum.
Community standards of acceptable legislative policy choices are necessarily reflected in the text of our constitutional document, in our history and in the teachings of our sister states as well as that of the Federal courts.
While we should not blindly follow a beaten path, we agree with the New Jersey Supreme Court's cogent observation: "When, in the course of a decade, 37 states call for the death penalty, the probability that the legislature of each state accurately reflects its community's standards approaches certainty." State v.
Ramseur, 106 N.J. 123, 173, 524 A. 2d 188 (1987).


A in Sociology Adds to Upset Ledger
The colt named A in Sociology got an A in stakes racing today when he won the Daryl's Joy Handicap by a nose and became the fourth outsider in five stakes to defeat the favorite at Saratoga Race Course.
So far at the track's 126th meeting, the only favorite who has made the winner's circle in a stakes race has been the champion filly Sky Beauty.
And the parade of the long shots continued today when the even-money favorite Fourstars Allstar ran third and the second choice, Home of the Free, finished seventh.


Radica Games
Radica Games Ltd., a maker of electronic games with gambling themes, lost more than a third of its value yesterday after the company said third-quarter earnings would not meet Wall Street estimates of 29 cents a share.
Radica, based in Reno, said production problems had caused a decline in revenue.
Radica went public at $11 a share in May.


USX-U.S. Steel Group (X,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Unocal Corp. (UCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
It started with PRINCE CHARLES in London and ended with WARREN BEATTY in Anaheim, Calif., and in between, BARBRA STREISAND'S five-city concert tour, which concluded Sunday, attracted a slew of celebrities.
Among them: President and Mrs.
Clinton, Barbara Walters, Dustin Hoffman, Tom Hanks, Meryl Streep, Jesse Jackson, Harry Belafonte, Diane Sawyer and Mike Nichols, Peter Jennings, Ted Koppel, Steven Spielberg, Michael Jackson, Jay Leno and Liza Minnelli.


Lubrizol Corp.(LZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
American Potpourri For a Summer Night  Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center
The distinctive, colorful and irresistible music of Morton Gould formed the highlight of a concert by the Goldman Memorial Band on Sunday evening.
Mr.
Gould, who celebrates his 80th birthday this year, has written prolifically for symphonic and marching bands; on the second half of the Goldman Band's program, he conducted his own "American Salute," "Sante Fe Saga," "Pavanne," "West Point Symphony" and "Jericho." Of these, the "West Point Symphony" is the most ambitious and impressive, seamlessly mixing broad American sonorities with darker intimations of Mahler and Shostakovich.
"American Salute" is, however, the inevitable audience favorite, with its virtuosic, spiky elaborations of "When Johnny Comes Marching Home."


Corrections
A brief report in the Real Estate column in Business Day on July 13 about a lease signed by a group of men's wear manufacturers for space at 1350 Avenue of the Americas in Manhattan misidentified the owner of the building.
It is the 54-55 Street Company, a group of investors led by Jerome Minskoff, Myron Minskoff and Marjorie Minskoff-Schleifer, not Edward J. Minskoff Equities Inc.
The article also misidentified the owner of 1325 Avenue of the Americas.
The building is owned by Edward J. Minskoff, not Edward J. Minskoff Equities, a leasing and management company of which Mr.
Minskoff is president.


Foster Child From Birth: Torn Between 2 Families
Three-year-old Sharmaine wrapped her pudgy arms tightly around her foster father's neck, scrunched up her face for a cry and said, "Daddy, I don't want to go."
"Come on, baby," coaxed John Dais, the tall, slender man who has cared for Sharmaine as his own since she was 12 days old.
"Nooooo!" she wailed, panic creeping into her voice.


Loctite Corp.(LOC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
Children's Health Is No. 1
The Senate majority leader said his health care measure would seek insurance for most children who do not have it.
Page A16.
Boost for Interstate Banking
A bill to remove barriers to interstate branch banking was set for passage after the House and Senate resolved their differences.
Page D1.
Connecticut Death Penalty
Connecticut's death penalty law was upheld by the state's highest court, though it is unclear when, or if, any execution will take place.
Page B1.


Komag Inc.(KMAG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Take Their Cars Away
To the Editor:
Your July 17 news article on unlicensed drivers who inflict lethal damage reports a preventable tragedy.
Why not confiscate vehicles operated by drivers with suspended or nonexistent licenses on the spot, as was done to reduce drug buys in New York City's Washington Heights not long ago?
JAMES D. STOROZUK  Fair Lawn, N.J., July 18, 1994


McDonnell Tests Market For New Jet
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation, in an apparent attempt to bolster its flagging commercial-airliner business, said yesterday that it was trying to determine if there was interest among the airlines in a short-haul new twin jet that would carry 100 passengers.
The company, however, has made no commitment to build the new jet, which would be designated the MD-95.
The Wall Street Journal reported yesterday that McDonnell would begin offering the plane.
The MD-95 would be the smallest commercial aircraft built by McDonnell Douglas of St.
Louis, which these days is largely a military contractor.


Detroit Edison Co. (DTE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Observer; The Flexible Goodbye
A noble sense of public duty to dilate wisely on the great health-care battle is at war within me against the shameful suspicion that I haven't the faintest notion what it's all about.
Suspicion is about all that's left in me anymore about the health-care matter.
I suspect that many, if not most, members of Congress are equally baffled.
I suspect this doesn't much matter, since whatever Congress does will be the product of a small circle of insiders, with the rest going along in befuddlement under pressure of the astounding amount of money the lobbies have flung into the battle.


Dubrovnik Remains the Pearl of the Adriatic
To the Editor:
Since Dubrovnik is my favorite city, your July 14 news article on the Dubrovnik performing arts festival was of great interest.
I have made eight visits there, six before the war and two since.
Despite the damage it is still an incredibly beautiful city.


2 Major Bridge Titles Decided at Nationals
Two major bridge titles were decided here on Sunday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
Robert Levin of Orlando, Fla., a former world champion, and Jeff Wolfson of Chicago, an options trader, surged in the final session to take the Life Master Pairs title by a full board.
The standings were: first, Levin and Wolfson, 1304.93 match points; second, Eddie Wold of Houston and Steve Sion of Las Vegas, Nev., 1267.1; third, Linda and Ron Smith of Chattanooga, Tenn., 1235.06; fourth, Zia Mahmood and Michael Rosenberg, both of Manhattan, 1207.03; fifth, Craig Robinson and Elaine Landow of Lansdale, Pa., 1181.99; sixth, Andrew Robson of London, and Hjordis Eythorsdottir of Reykjavik, Iceland, 1178.66.


Howell Corp.(HWL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Whitewater Disinformation
As the President's lawyer, Lloyd Cutler has a right to divert attention from his client as the Whitewater hearings commence.
But Congress and the public need to understand that Mr.
Cutler was misrepresenting both the factual terrain and the importance of those hearings in his Sunday talk show appearance.
First, he argued that it was of incidental importance that President and Mrs.
Clinton "happened to be" equal partners with James McDougal in the Whitewater Development Corporation.
Mr.
Cutler maintained that whatever the problems of Mr.
McDougal and his failed savings and loan, they had nothing to do with the Clintons.


Travails Shape the Reasons for Being on the Bus
In the loneliness of the long road, Daniel Lumley's voice has risen, again and again, in a wildly spirited, two-syllable whoop above the constant din of life on the highway.
Clutching a microphone in his one good hand and balancing his partly severed leg atop an artificial one, he calls out to his fellow bus riders time zones, state borders and, like a kindly coach, a constant stream of friendly taunts.
Yesterday, he clicked on the microphone to share a more personal exchange.
"This woman at our last stop came up to me and said because I was disabled I never would amount to anything," he said.
"She said if I want good health insurance I should get a high-paying job and pay for it myself.


First Hawaiian Inc.(FHWN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Insteel Industries Inc.(III,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lieberman-Cline Now a Mother
The three-time college All-America basketball player NANCY LIEBERMAN-CLINE, gave birth Friday at Dallas Presbyterian Hospital to TIMOTHY JOSEPH CLINE JR., who weighed in at 9 pounds, 8 ounces.
"I've accomplished a lot of things in my lifetime, but not one of those accomplishments comparses to the feeling of becoming a mother," the 36-year-old Lieberman-Cline said. (AP)


Giuliani Demands New Spending Cuts From All Agencies
Barely a month after New York City adopted a budget with sharp cuts in spending, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani ordered city agencies yesterday to make $250 million in additional cuts immediately and to prepare for the possibility of cutting yet another $200 million.
The $250 million cut, to be made over the six months that began July 1, represents an across-the-board reduction of about 2.6 percent for every city agency, including the Police and Fire Departments and the Board of Education.
The move follows a reduction of 15,000 municipal jobs and program cuts of $1.1 billion already approved as part of the $31.6 billion budget.


Faulk Gets Richest Rookie Contract
Coach TED MARCHIBRODA plans to make MARSHALL FAULK earn the richest rookie contract in National Football League history that the running back signed with the Indianapolis Colts.
"A guy like Marshall, without question, you have to give him the ball," Marchibroda said yesterday.
"I think you're talking about 30 times a game, passing and running." After signing the contract -- $17.2 million for seven years -- on Sunday, Faulk practiced yesterday.


Simpson Defense Seeks Role in Blood Tests
The defense in the O. J. Simpson case demanded a role today in saying how and when to test blood samples, evidence that may play a pivotal role in freeing or convicting the former football star of murder charges.
The defense, in a pretrial hearing, demanded immediate access to droplets and blood smears collected at Mr.
Simpson's house and outside the condominium where his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend, Ronald L. Goldman, were found slashed to death on June 13.


Associated Banc-Corp (ASBC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Seattle Offers a Minimal, Dignified 'Lohengrin'
"Lohengrin" is the threshold through which Wagner passed on his way to "The Ring." Behind him lay Bellini and vestiges of Italian style.
In the far distance ahead was "Parsifal." In Wagner's retelling of myth, Lohengrin, Knight of the Holy Grail, is Parsifal's son.
In terms of opera history, the roles are reversed: "Lohengrin" the progenitor, "Parsifal" the heir.
The Seattle Opera is reviving "Lohengrin" in an eight-performance run that began on Saturday night and ends on Aug. 10.
Revival is a curious word for a habitual favorite packed with beloved tunes, but "Lohengrin" has fallen on hard times.
A familiar piece at the Metropolitan Opera since 1883, it has had no Met performances since 1985-86, and then in an aging production.


American Brands Inc.(AMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Excerpts From Remarks by U.S., Israel and Jordan
Following are excerpts from remarks made today by President Clinton, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and King Hussein of Jordan after the signing of the Washington Declaration, as transcribed by the Federal News Service for Reuters and with translation of the Hebrew portion of Mr.
Rabin's remarks by The New York Times: BY PRESIDENT CLINTON
After generations of hostility, blood and tears, the leaders of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the state of Israel will solemnly declare with the world as their witness that they have ended the state of belligerency between them.
From this day forward, they pledge to settle their differences by peaceful means.
Both countries will refrain from actions that may adversely affect the security of the other and will thwart all those who would use terrorism to threaten either side.


Union Planters Corp.(UPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30





New Kangaroo Species Is Reported
A PRIMITIVE black and white tree kangaroo previously unknown to scientists has been discovered by Australian and Indonesian researchers in a remote mountainous region of Indonesia, the researchers have announced.
The newest member of the marsupial family has bold, pandalike patterns in its thick fur and is about as large as a medium-sized dog, said Dr.
Tim Flannery, a senior research scientist at the Australian Museum in Sydney who led the team that discovered the animal.
Researchers from a zoological museum in Bogor, Indonesia, also participated.


Grocery Art Fans Anger Against Illegal Aliens
Earlier this month, checkers at an upscale supermarket here started packing shoppers' organic vegetables and free-range chickens into paper grocery bags that carried the pictures and life stories of four children from the area.
But the effort of the supermarket, United Market, to distribute public art put it right in the middle of California's stormy debate over illegal immigration.
Many shoppers objected to the poignant tale of an unidentified fourth grader from El Salvador.
They were angered by his account of how he had come to the United States -- illegally.


Computer Sciences Corp.(CSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


F.C.C.'s Auction Draws Rich Bids
The Federal Communications Commission held the nation's first auction for the right to use the public airwaves today, and the opening multimillion-dollar bids -- five times higher than what analysts had expected -- drew gasps from the audience and astounded perhaps everyone but the bidders themselves.
The auction for 10 nationwide licenses, which are expected to be used for advanced two-way paging services, is expected to continue at least through Tuesday here at the Omni Shoreham Hotel.
The auction will end only when each of the 29 companies doing the bidding has either dropped out or won one or more licenses.
The limit for any single bidder is three licenses, and based on today's action, at least half of the licenses will sell for at least $30 million.


Jack Harrold, 74, Comic-Opera Tenor
Jack Harrold, a tenor who also coached other opera singers, died on Friday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 74 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was lung cancer, said his sister-in-law, Dorothea Harrold.


Mirage Resorts Inc.(MIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cooper Industries Inc.(CBE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Health Care Workers Rally for Reform


Robot Expedition Delayed
Poor weather prevented an attempt today to airlift the Dante II robot to the top of Mount Spurr, an active Alaskan volcano that the robot is to explore.
For the third day, clouds or rain kept Army National Guard pilots from flying their Blackhawk helicopters to the rim of the active crater on Mount Spurr, 80 miles west of Anchorage.
However, forecasters predicted good weather for the next two days, and project officials anticipated putting the robot on the mountain sometime Tuesday, said Charles Redman, a spokesman for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, sponsor of the project.


New York State Electric &amp; Gas (NGE,N) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


American National Insurance (ANAT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NBB Bancorp Inc.(NBB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Albany's Usual Legislative Madness Serves Democracy Badly
To the Editor:
In each of my four years in the New York State Assembly, I have co-sponsored and supported a package of reforms to end the state's closed-door, ineffective legislative process, whose failings have been demonstrated once again in an all-night session before the summer recess that lasted into the morning of July 3.


First USA Inc.(FUS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chess
If you want praise, don't be subtle.
That was a lesson that the Indian grandmaster Vishwanathan Anand might have garnered last month from his quarterfinal world championship match, organized by the Professional Chess Association.
Anand defeated the Ukrainian grandmaster Oleg Romanishin by 5 to 2 in their series, played at Trump Tower in Manhattan and sponsored by Intel, the microchip maker.
But he got scant appreciation from his colleagues, who noted that he had not played any of the monumentally scintillating tactics for which he is famed.
Moreover, they concluded that he had not extended himself because Romanishin had not performed well enough to require that.


Emphesys Financial Group (EFG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Spanish Banking Giant Discovers Healthy Profits on Many Horizons
Geography may not be destiny, but Banco Santander's location provided a clue to its future.
Overlooking the Bay of Biscay and dominating the waterfront promenade in the northern port city of the same name, this tightly run regional bank, founded in 1857 to finance trade between Spain and South America, was built facing the horizon beyond the seas.
Banco Santander is now an international financial player, with a presence in 27 countries and one of the largest international banking networks in Latin America.
Indeed, Emilio Botin 3d, chairman like his father and grandfather before him, spends half his time flying around the world checking into Santander's foreign operations.


Justice Dept. Defends Setup of Care Panel
The Clinton Administration told a Federal judge today that the President's health plan had been devised by "an anonymous horde" of more than 500 people operating in creative confusion with no organized structure and no fixed roster of members.
As a result, a Justice Department lawyer said, the group was not a formal advisory committee and did not have to divulge its working papers or financial records.


A Cloud on the Breyer Nomination
Eager for swift confirmation of the Supreme Court nominee Stephen Breyer, senators of both parties are rushing to a floor vote without fully investigating significant ethical issues connected to the nominee's investments.
This irresponsible failure by the Senate leaves Judge Breyer with a cloud still hanging over his nomination.
Judge Breyer, who is Chief Judge of the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Boston, answered the Senate Judiciary Committee's questions for three days and won unanimous clearance for a floor vote scheduled for tomorrow.
But the committee failed to fully explore the judge's participation in pollution cases despite his investment in a Lloyd's of London venture that heavily insured asbestos and toxic pollution risks in this country.


Probert Charged With Drunken Driving
BOB PROBERT, released by the Detroit Red Wings last week because of off-ice problems, was charged yesterday with drunken driving in connection with a motorcycle accident earlier this month.
Probert, who signed a $6.6 million, four-year contract with Chicago last Saturday, was arraigned in Bloomfield Hills (Mich.) District Court for operating a vehicle while under the influence of liquor.
The 29-year-old forward was thrown from his motorcycle after colliding with a car July 15.
Probert's blood alcohol level was 0.31 percent after the crash, according to The Detroit News.
That is more than three times the 0.1 percent level that is considered drunk under Michigan law. (AP)


Albank Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


METRO DIGEST
FOSTER CHILD: TORN BETWEEN 2 FAMILIES
Because of her mother's addiction to crack, Sharmaine has spent her entire childhood in foster care in the Bronx.
Although Federal and New York City guidelines say that children should be put up for adoption or returned to their parents within 18 months, she has been in foster care for three years.
Sharmaine is typical of the growing proportion of children across the nation who are put in foster care as babies, then spend years in foster homes before being returned to their parents or put up for adoption.
A1.
MAYOR ORDERS NEW SPENDING CUTS
Barely a month after New York City adopted a budget with sharp cuts in spending, Mayor Giuliani has ordered city agencies to make $250 million in additional cuts immediately, and to prepare to cut yet another $200 million.
A1.


Great Lakes Bancorp (GLBC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


York International (YRK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


PETRIE STORES SALE NOT COMPLETED AS SCHEDULED
The Petrie Stores Corporation did not complete its sale to an investor group led by E. M. Warburg, Pincus &amp; Company by yesterday, as scheduled earlier, but said its board would meet later this week to consider extending the deadline until mid-August.
"Because of the complexity of the deal, coupled with summer vacations, this is going forward on a slightly slower schedule," said Gilbert Harrison, the investment banker advising the company.
The complexity arises from the company's need to sell 40.4 million shares of Toys "R" Us Inc. stock that it holds.
Part of the agreement is to distribute 37.1 million newly issued shares of Toys "R" Us to Petrie Shareholders in a tax-free transaction.
The Internal Revenue Service must determine whether the deal would be tax free to Petrie, its shareholders and Toys "R" Us.


Italian Club Says It Has Lalas
Padova of the Italian first division said yesterday that it would sign the American defender ALEXI LALAS, but the United States Soccer Federation said no deal has been agreed to.
Padova said that Lalas would sign today at a news conference in Padua.
Lalas's contract with the U.S.S.F. doesn't expire until Oct. 31, and a spokesman, TOM LANG, said in Chicago that Coventry City of England's first division and VfL Bochum of Germany's first division were in contention to sign Lalas. (AP)


Mexico Crash Badly Injures A Candidate
An opposition party candidate for Governor of the state of Chiapas who was considered close to the leaders of the rebel movement there was seriously injured today in an auto accident that left three people dead and threatened to upset the state's uneasy peace.
The 55-year-old candidate, Amado Avendano, was listed in serious condition with a punctured lung, six fractured ribs and head injuries.
His daughter, Amalia Avendano Villafuerte, 25, said he was conscious and had been placed on a respirator.
He was transferred to a Mexico City hospital this afternoon.


Airborne Freight Corp.(ABF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


John J. Driscoll, 82, Is Dead; Led Connecticut Labor Council
John Joseph Driscoll, who served for 24 years as president of the Connecticut State Labor Council, died on Thursday at St.
Vincent's Medical Center in Bridgeport.
A Bridgeport resident, he was 82.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.


The Watchwords Are Clingy and Curvy
The sweater girl of the 1940's remains as much an icon of fashion as the flapper of the 1920's.
Both types surface from time to time as symbols of the ideal female form.
The sweater girl with her exaggerated bra gave way to the corseted curves of the Dior New Look in 1947.
Ten years later, Cristobal Balenciaga and his disciple, Hubert de Givenchy, brought back the chemise, the flapper's basic dress, with some support from Dior.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  New Jersey Dodges Raindrops and Wins  The opening warmups between the New Jersey Stars, the top team in the East Division of World Team Tennis, and the Atlanta Thunder was delayed by rain last night.
But the weather held up long enough for New Jersey to defeat Atlanta, 29-20, in overtime.
Martina Navratilova, representing New Jersey defeated Chanda Rubin, 6-5 (5-2), in the women's singles match, which plays to six games for one set to determine the winner.
Team Atlanta retaliated with Rubin and partner Dinky Van Rensburg defeating Navratilova and Mariaan de Swardt, 6-5 (5-2).
But the main draw at the Hamilton Park Conference Center in Florham Park, N.J. was Bjorn Borg, as the stands swelled to capacity with 2,500 fans crammed inside, clutching umbrellas.
This is Borg's second year playing with the World Team Tennis league, and his first year with Atlanta.
Borg's first match was a whitewash -- New Jersey's John de Jager and Brian Devening defeated Atlanta Thunder's Borg and Kelly Evernden, 6-0.
Borg also lost, 6-3, to Devening in singles play.
In mixed doubles, Van Rensburg and Evernden defeated Navaratilova and de Jager, 6-5 (5-4).


Deluxe (DLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quaker State Corp.(KSF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chemical Found to Block Protein That Has Key Role in Toxic Shock
IN a novel approach to treating toxic shock syndrome, researchers in Seattle have developed a chemical that blocks the formation of a protein responsible for the life-threatening consequences of the disease.
The protein, tumor necrosis factor, plays a critical role in the body's normal immune response to tumor cells and infection but can cause severe damage when produced in excess amounts.
This is what happens in the case of toxic shock.
The protein exists in two forms, a long form that is anchored inside the cell but extends outside its membrane, and a shorter form that is soluble and is released to roam in the blood.
It is when too much of the soluble form is released that problems occur.


Two on Police Force Shoot Themselves to Death
A police captain and a patrol officer shot and killed themselves within a 24-hour period this week, bringing the suicide toll for the New York City Police Department to eight this year.
The captain, Terrence Tunnock, 50, was the highest-ranking police supervisor in New York City to take his life in at least 20 years, officials said.


Alleghany Corp.(Y,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Newark School Officials Pitch a Plan for System
Trying to stave off a takeover by the New Jersey Department of Education, Newark school district officials today touted their own plan for fixing the city's broken schools and urged state officials to abandon takeover plans and work with them.
The plan outlines ambitious academic goals -- saying that by 1999, Newark graduates will be able to speak a foreign language, understand calculus and write a 25-page literature paper.
But the plan is short on specifics about how the district will achieve those goals.


Crane Co. (CR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Premark International (PMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Corrections
An article on Friday about a private company's efforts to win a contract to manage the public schools in Hartford misstated the position of the American Federation of Teachers on "mainstreaming," the placement of special-education students in regular classrooms.
The union opposes a practice known as full inclusion, in which all such students are placed in regular classrooms regardless of the severity of their disabilities; it does not oppose all mainstreaming.


For Notebook, a Return To the Old Days of DOS
A SUBNOTEBOOK was recently added to my computer collection for one principal business-related reason: to write on the back porch on hot summer weekends.
It is a fine machine in many ways, but the little built-in trackball is awkward to use even when it works correctly, which it often doesn't.
Microsoft Windows can be operated without a mouse or trackball, but many of its programs cannot.
While it seems that the rest of the world is switching from DOS computers to Microsoft Windows computers, with DOS in the background, I switched back.
I deleted the Windows subdirectory, using the DOS Deltree command, removed references to Windows in the autoexec.bat and config.sys files, using the DOS Editor, and put the fairly lean and slightly mean Professional Write 3.0 for MS-DOS word-processing program (the SPC Software Publishing Corporation; $100 or less) on the hard disk.
Then I refurbished the chips and hard disk with Memmaker, Scandisk and Defrag, all features of DOS routines.
It was sweet, like visiting the early 1980's again and knowing you don't have to stay there.


Survivor of Shooting Recounts His Ordeal in Courtroom
The survivor of a shooting and carjacking at a Rockland County shopping mall last January stepped off the witness stand today and lay down on the courtroom floor to demonstrate how he witnessed the fatal shooting of his childhood friend.
"I kept my head propped up the whole time and watched him shoot my best friend in the back of the head," the witness, Scott Nappi, 18, testified at a series of pretrial hearings in Rockland County Court this week and last.
As he spoke he lay on his stomach with his hands behind his back and his head turned to the left.


Community Health Systems Inc.(CHSI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Manpower Inc.(MAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coffee on the House: Brogna the Local Boy Makes Good
At Joe Ro's Coffee Shop in Watertown, Conn., the locals gather each morning to discuss the town news.
For a little more than a month now, the favorite topic of conversation has been Rico Brogna, the home-grown ball player who has made a most remarkable debut with the Mets.
Tuesday morning, it is likely they will talk of nothing else.
A left-handed hitter with impressive power, Brogna went 5 for 5 tonight at Busch Stadium to lead the Mets to a 7-1 victory over the Cardinals.
It was the 22d time a Met has had five hits in a game, the last coming when Howard Johnson tormented the Cubs on Sept. 8, 1988.


Safeco Corp.(SAFC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Report Identifying Cancer Gene Was Wrong, Some Researchers Say
A NEWLY discovered cancer gene may be much less important than it originally seemed, some molecular biologists say.
At least four independent groups report that the new gene, called p16, seems to be playing a minor role, at best, in most cancers.
Although the researchers who first hailed the gene say the story is not over yet, many others say it has become clear that p16 does not seem to be mutated in most cancers.


Treasury Department Scolded Regulator in Navy Chief's Case
Roger C. Altman, the Deputy Secretary of the Treasury, admonished a top savings and loan regulator for not informing him in advance about a bad-debt notice sent earlier this year to the Secretary of the Navy by the agency overseeing the savings and loan bailout, Administration officials said.
Last February the Government sought to collect $27,000 from the Navy Secretary, John H. Dalton, because he had defaulted on a condominium loan from a Texas savings and loan.


Chesapeake Corp.(CSK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


O'Brien Dreaming Of 9,000 Points
In the decathlon, 9,000 points has always been the impossible dream.
For Dan O'Brien, the dream could come true at the Goodwill Games in St.
Petersburg, Russia, this week.
O'Brien's world record in the decathlon is 8,891 points.
His coaches, Mike Keller of the University of Idaho and Rick Sloan of Washington State, believe he can exceed 9,000 points this year.
If not at the Goodwill Games, then on Sept. 10-11 in Talence, France, where O'Brien set his current record in 1992.


Tecumseh Products Co.(TECUB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pennant Fever In July? Not Alou
For the Atlanta Braves and the Montreal Expos, this is not, repeat, not, the Gunfight at the OK Corral, this three-game series between the two leading teams in the National League East.
Right?


Hot and Ornery


Cominco Fertilizers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Optioned Jerry DiPoto, pitcher, to Charlotte of the International League.
Called up Albie Lopez, pitcher, from Charlotte.
National League


Trinova (TNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Commerce Clearing House (CCLRA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Court Upholds Death Penalty For Murders In Connecticut
Connecticut's death penalty law was upheld today by the state's highest court, ruling in the first murder case to come before it under the 14-year-old law.
But when, or if, any execution will take place was far from clear because the court also insisted on strict compliance with a provision of the law that rules out execution if a jury finds any mitigating factor for the defendant.
Advocates of capital punishment say that that provision of the law makes it almost impossible to execute anyone.


AT&amp;T Capital Corp.(TCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bank Bill Is Cleared For Vote
House and Senate negotiators resolved their differences today on legislation that would remove the remaining barriers to branch banking across state lines and would subsidize small banks that lend in low-income neighborhoods.
Today's deal clears away most of the obstacles to final passage in the coming days of the most comprehensive bank legislation to emerge from Congress in several years.
Administration officials said that President Clinton would sign the bill quickly.


Armor All Products Corp.(ARMR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Western Swing Is Sweet Music As the Yankees Lengthen Lead
From Seattle to Oakland to Anaheim, the Yankees traveled the West Coast, winning with stylish comebacks, winning with incredible offense and winning almost every time they arrived at the ball park.
For 11 glorious days, except for one misstep in Oakland, the Yankees made the treacherous trip out West seem like a breezy vacation.
And now they're finally home to open a three-game series against the Red Sox tonight.


Comet That Shook Jupiter May Probe Planet's Secrets
THE bad luck of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 in venturing too close to Jupiter was a bonanza for amateur stargazers and for professional astrophysicists.
The greatest planetary show in recorded history is over, but the exciting scientific insights it may yield are yet to come, as astronomers begin to decipher their voluminous data.
When some 21 fragments of the comet struck Jupiter, they dotted the face of the planet with gigantic holes, some the size of Earth.
White-hot gas from the planet's interior erupted through the holes in great fireballs, as if from cosmic cannons.


School Board Member Named for S.I.
Borough President Guy V. Molinari yesterday named Louis DeSario, a retired school superintendent, as Staten Island's representative to the central Board of Education, and said Mr.
DeSario would be "an important voice" in pushing for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to decentralize the school system.
Mr.
DeSario, who retired in 1992 as superintendent of Community School District 31 on Staten Island, said he hoped to begin pressing immediately to allocate more of the board's $8.5 billion budget to the schools themselves, an initiative that Mr.
Giuliani has made one of his top educational priorities.


Roper Starch Buys Crossley Surveys
Roper Starch Worldwide Inc., a marketing, public opinion and advertising research company in Mamaroneck, N.Y., has acquired the Crossley Surveys division of Westat Inc. in New York.
Though terms were not disclosed, Roper Starch said last week that it had paid cash.


U.S. Home Corp.(UH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Bettman Lets Keenan Off the Hook
AT least Mike Keenan didn't get to keep the Stanley Cup, but he got everything he wanted.
Wholesale, too.
In his wrist slap from Commissioner Gary Bettman, the coach who deserted the Rangers emerged triumphant as the general manager and coach of the St.
Louis Blues at a cost of a $400,000 refund on his Ranger signing bonus, a $100,000 fine by the National Hockey League and some $170,000 in docked pay during his 60-day suspension that ends Sept. 24.


Campbell Is First Name On Rangers' Coach List
Colin Campbell, a Rangers assistant with no head-coaching experience in the National Hockey League but with a proven staying power within a tumultuous organization, was anointed yesterday as a top candidate to replace Mike Keenan.
"There will be other names," said Rangers General Manager Neil Smith, who declined to name them but said he hoped to make a quick decision on Keenan's successor.


WMX Technologies Inc.(WMX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jacobs Engineering Group Inc.(JEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


JORDAN AND ISRAEL JOIN IN PACT AIMED AT BROAD MIDEAST PEACE
King Hussein of Jordan and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel today reached across 46 years of war, uneasy coexistence and furtive attempts at peace to sign a Washington Declaration ending the state of war between their nations.
As President Clinton sat beaming between them on a stage on the South Lawn of the White House, the two leaders also agreed to reaffirm King Hussein's role as guardian of Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem, a step intended by Israel to forestall Yasir Arafat's aspiration to claim that right for himself.


Haiti Is Washington's Dirty Little Secret; No Panama Reversal
To the Editor:
Re "Needed: Steady Hands on Haiti" (editorial, July 9): With respect to your comments on Panama's position, I must point out that:


Westinghouse Electric Corp.(WX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kool Cigarette Ideas From Tatham
Brown &amp; Williamson said yesterday that it was considering creative work from Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago on the company's largest cigarette brand, Kool, in addition to Grey Advertising in New York, which was named to the account four months ago.
Although billings on the national account were not disclosed, they were estimated at $25 million by Adweek.
Tom Fitzgerald, a B.&amp;W. spokesman in Louisville, Ky., confirmed a report of the talks this week in Adweek.
He said that "this is not a creative shootout" between the two agencies, which have been sharing B.&amp;W.'s account, but that ideas for Kool's national account from both agencies had been presented.
"Grey is, and remains, our agency for Kool," Mr.
Fitzegerald added, but he declined to discuss further details.


Liz Claiborne (LIZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


No Headline
"It is dusk at our homes in the Middle East. Soon darkness will prevail. But the citizens of Israel and Jordan will see a great light." -- YITZHAK RABIN, Prime Minister of Israel.  [ A1:6. ]


Union Chief Of UAL Pilots Is Forced Out
Roger D. Hall, who since 1985 has been a leader in the effort by United Airline employees to gain control of the carrier, has resigned as chairman of the airline's pilots' union and as a member of the company's board.
The move comes less than two weeks after shareholders of the UAL Corporation, United's parent, approved an employee plan to acquire a 55 percent stake in the company.


Commerce Group Inc.(COMG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


McKesson Corp.(MCK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Foundation Is Accused Of Ignoring Artist's Will
The New York State Attorney General has filed a lawsuit charging that a foundation set up under the will of the artist Joseph Cornell has failed to fulfill the artist's philanthropic wishes.
When Cornell, best known for his collages and boxes, died in 1972, he left a will instructing his executors to set up a foundation to help charitable organizations.
The foundation, now worth about $21 million in cash and securities and almost $14 million in artworks, has given artworks worth more than $7 million to 16 museums across the country.
It has given only one cash contribution: $1,000 to the Council for Vail-Leavitt Music Hall in Riverhead, L.I.
The Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, contends in the state's suit that the grant does not adequately meet Cornell's stipulations.


Tentative Agreement Reached Between Union and M.T.A.
Averting the possibility of an illegal strike, transit officials reached a tentative labor settlement with the union representing 32,000 New York City subway and bus workers, officials on both sides announced yesterday.
But union officials and negotiators refused to comment on the details of the proposed contract until the executive board of Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union meets tomorrow to discuss them.


Culbro Corp.(CUC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


PECO Energy Co.(PE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; In the bear market for biotech, a manager voices long-term hope.
IN 1991, the last great bull year for biotechnology, the Oppenheimer Global Bio-Tech Fund returned an astonishing 121 percent.
But in the protracted biotech bear market of the last three years, the fund, like most of its competitors, has seen double-digit losses.
And recently, the Oppenheimer Management Corporation announced that it would refocus the fund and rename it the Global Emerging Growth Fund.
The shift will not be voted on by shareholders until Sept. 19, but the expectation that the $154 million fund will sell off biotech shares has already prompted fear that the depressed biotech sector will be battered still further.
Short-sellers are taking on shares, hoping for a debacle.
But both Oppenheimer Management, and Sandra Panem -- the fund's manager who is departing to run a new biotech fund for Vector Securities International -- insist that no such sale is likely.


Major Update for Macs, Though Not the Big One
LAST week in this space we learned about the forthcoming Microsoft Windows 4.0 operating system, code-named Chicago.
This week we can preview Apple Computer's next Macintosh operating system update, System 7.5, expected to be released in September.
Chicago is the Windy City, a toddlin' town, hog-butcher to the world.
If Apple's System 7.5 were a city, it would probably be New Orleans, the Big Easy.
It has approximately 50 new features that make the Macintosh even easier to use.
New Orleans also conjures images of jazz and gumbo and just a hint of mystery.
There is all of that in System 7.5, too.


Dentsply International (XRAY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Provident Life &amp; Accident Insurance Co.(PVB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Forgive, Forget and Don't Dare Get a Hit


Argentines Suspect Iranian Hand in Bombing; Death Toll Hits 80
As the death toll reached 80 today, Argentines asserted that Iran wielded a secret hand in the truck bomb that demolished the main community center here for Argentine Jews one week ago.
"Suspicions fall very heavily on Iran," Ruben Ezra Beraja, a Jewish group leader, said today after meeting with the Argentine President, Carlos Saul Menem.
Mr.
Beraja is president of the Delegation of Argentine Jewish Associations, a federation of Jewish groups that was housed in the building destroyed by the bomb.


As Haitians Are Sent Home, Honduras Offers Refuge


Wilmington Trust Corp.(WILM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Polish Posters, Briefly Derailed, Are Back on Track
In the Communist era, Poland's poster artists were among the world's most acclaimed as they turned out graphically distinctive and politically bold designs.
From the uneven red lettering on a white background that became the famous signature for the Solidarity movement in the 1980's to vivid cultural motifs that often used sly visual metaphors, Polish posters were collected and admired in Europe and the United States for their inventiveness.
After a lean four years since the Communists fell, the Polish poster is back, along with works from other nations, at the 14th Warsaw Poster Biennale, where 425 entries are on display.
A Japanese artist, Mitsuo Katsui, won first prize in the main category of the competition with a hotly disputed entry created with computers.
Poster collectors complained that the gaily colored abstract pattern held no message and was executed as a single copy instead of in multiples, as usual.


Metropolitan Financial (MFC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S.O.C.'s Schiller to Head Turner Sports
HARVEY SCHILLER, the executive director of the United States Olympic Committee since 1990, shifted gears into television yesterday when he was named president of Turner Sports.
Last year, Schiller was considered a candidate for baseball commissioner until baseball opted not to name one.
Schiller fills a new post that places him in charge of acquiring and producing all sports on TBS, TNT and SportSouth, Turner's regional sports network, which ranges from the Atlanta Hawks to World Championship Wrestling.
He has no TV experience, but Schiller, a former Southeastern Conference commissioner, said: "I hope elements of leadership are transferrable. I've been on the other side of negotiating TV contracts, like the S.E.C. football contract and TNT was the cable partner on the Lillehammer and Albertville Olympics."


McCann Sets Up A Creative Unit
McCann-Erickson Worldwide said yesterday that it would open a creative-only satellite unit and it named Jeff Weiss, a former partner and executive creative director at Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss of New York, to head the operation.
Peter Kim, vice chairman and chief strategy officer at McCann Worldwide in New York, confirmed a report about the unit this week in Adweek.
He said the new agency, in addition to seeking outside business, would operate as an internal resource for McCann on behalf of its international clients.


Warner-Lambert Co.(WLA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Healthcare Inc.(USHC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


United Dominion Industries(UDI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Atlantis Plastics Inc.(AGH,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coherent Inc.(COHR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Land of the Free but Also a Home of the Bigoted
Behind the Mask of Chivalry  The Making of the Second Ku Klux Klan  By Nancy MacLean  Illustrated. 292 pages.
Oxford University Press. $30.
Anti-Semitism in America  By Leonard Dinnerstein  369 pages.
Oxford University Press. $25.
It's appropriate to link Nancy Mac Lean's "Behind the Mask of Chivalry," about the Ku Klux Klan, and Leonard Dinnerstein's "Anti-Semitism in America" because racial and religious bigotries are companions.
Historically, they are rooted in ignorance and intolerance.
Both books suggest that old-fashioned demagogy has surfaced in new forms in American politics and broadcasting.


Confirmation Of Jordan As Guardian Of Shrines
It is a safe bet that the reference in the Washington Declaration to Jordan's "special role" in administering the Dome of the Rock, one of Islam's holiest shrines, will inflame a decades-long rivalry between King Hussein and Yasir Arafat.
The gilded, 1,300-year-old octagonal Dome and Al Aksa Mosque rising alongside it in Jerusalem have been the subject of a jurisdictional dispute between Jordanians and Palestinians for years.
It was at the mosque that the King's grandfather and mentor, King Abdullah, was assassinated by a Palestinian militant on July 20, 1951, as the young Hussein stood at his side.


TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Buffalo Bills
The Buffalo Bills yesterday signed the free-agent safety Mike Dumas, a player they considered drafting in 1991 before picking Henry Jones instead.
Coach Marv Levy called Dumas, who was with Houston for the last three years, one of the top 10 special-teams players in the National Football League.


A Galaxy Is Spotted In Process Of Merger
FOR the first time, a dwarf galaxy has been detected as it merges with the Milky Way, researchers say.
While not as spectacular as last week's pyrotechnics on Jupiter, the discovery, reported in the current issue of the journal Nature, may eventually help astronomers affirm existing theories of galaxy formation and evolution.


Patterns
Fashion's Leading Man?
If there seem to be more fashion profiles in Vanity Fair than Vogue these days, if models seem more like Ziegfeld showgirls and runway shows like the plotless Ziegfeld shows themselves, it is purely intentional.


Jordan Vows Swift Ruling On Custody
A Jordanian official said today that his nation would move quickly to resolve the future of the two children of a New Jersey woman who was slain by her husband before he fled with them to his native Jordan.
The official assured the dead woman's sister that custody laws in Jordan would favor her effort to retrieve the children.
"We expect that this will not be a long process," said Awn Khasawneh, a member of the Jordanian Foreign Ministry with the rank of ambassador, who was in Washington with King Hussein for the signing of a peace accord with Israel.


Fight Erupts in Giant Camp
Players called this morning's fight between the Giants rookie defensive tackle Chris Maumalanga and the second-year offensive lineman Greg Bishop the most brutal they had ever seen.
Because of stifling heat and intense competition, fights are common during training camp.
What separated this one from others was how nasty it was and how Coach Dan Reeves reacted afterward.


Single Slaughterhouse Suspected as Tainted-Meat Source
New Jersey health officials said today that they believe a single slaughterhouse was the likely source of hamburger contaminated with the E. coli bacteria that have made at least a dozen people sick in the last week.
The officials said they were working closely with the United States Department of Agriculture to try to identify the slaughterhouse.
Bernard Edelman, a spokesman for the State Health Department, also described as speculative a report by a doctor in Sussex County, Dr.
Sami Yasin of Vernon, that the tainted meat was probably carried to supermarkets in the northern part of the state by a single distributor.
Dr.
Yasin's remarks were included in an article today in The Star-Ledger.


Haiti Is Washington's Dirty Little Secret; Radio for Peace
To the Editor:
The "radio lifeline" for Haitian-Americans living in New York has a counterpart in Haiti ("On Sunday" column, July 10).
People there can tune in three hours a week to Radio for Peace International and hear Radyo Neg Mawon, a program of news and commentary about the crisis and the effort to restore Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's democratically elected President, to power.


Dow Up 6.80, but Broad Market Is Stagnant
Ever since Alan Greenspan hinted last week that a fifth increase in interest rates was possible, stock traders' teeth have been on edge and the stock market stagnant.
Yesterday was more of the same.
Stocks were up slightly but essentially unchanged, with a few blue-chip stocks up in light trading.
The market was sluggish even though bond prices rose, commodity prices dropped slightly and the dollar, for the most part, was stable against Japanese and German currencies -- all conditions for a lift in stock prices.


Lawson Products Inc.(LAWS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Neighbors Agree: Now It Can Be Told
There is a saying in the Talmud that the Messiah will come when he is no longer needed.
And so peace between Jordan and Israel is coming because it already exists.
King Hussein of Jordan and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel did not need much coaxing to come together publicly for the first time today and sign a declaration ending the state of war between their countries.


Terra Industries (TRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ralston-Purina Group (RAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30 1994


People's Bank (PBCT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Goulds Pumps (GULD,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  JORDAN AND ISRAEL SIGN PACT  The leaders of Israel and Jordan signed a declaration ending the 46-year state of war between the countries in an accord with a sweep and detail that seemed to surprise even the major participants.
A1


Haiti Is Washington's Dirty Little Secret; A Mirror on Ourselves
To the Editor:
"No Good Reason to Invade Haiti" (editorial, July 13) states that "what is going on in Haiti affects only Haiti." As I see it, there is no question that United States handling of the Haitian nightmare affects this country directly and reeks of racism.


Witco Corp.(WIT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Outdoor Displays At Telephone Kiosks
Transportation Displays Inc. has been testing an outdoor advertising display that brings electronically transmitted advertising messages, often seen in sports bars and restaurants, to telephone kiosks.
The test display involved fitting a small digital screen on the top of a telephone kiosk above an advertising poster.
It was tested for about a week at a kiosk at 38th Street and Madison Avenue in Manhattan, where it drew the attention of passers-by with advertising messages, spelled out using an L.E.D. (light-emitting display) format, for the New York State Lottery and United Airlines.


Cominco Ltd. (CLT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Of Rwanda and Simpson, Serious and Sensational
By placing the plight of the Rwandan refugees before the plight of O. J. Simpson on the nightly news, network producers are belatedly showing basic journalistic judgment.
Yet the images from Rwanda call up similar images from Somalia and the unhappy consequences they invited.
Every time we begin comforting ourselves that our screens have already delivered scenes of horror that cannot be equaled -- usually pictures of refugees from the cruel indifference of nature and the purposeful cruelty of other humans -- then they are surpassed.
The pictures from Rwanda, those smoky vistas where uncounted innocents have crowded to wait and die, are worse than anything that has gone before.


Cincinnati Financial Corp.(CINF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Relief for Refugees Urged
France urged the world's wealthy nations today to create a secure path from Zaire to Rwanda lined with food and water stations for refugees to return home, saying the lives of two million people were at stake.
"It's the only solution," Junior Health Minister Philippe Douste-Blazy said in a radio interview after a visit to the Zairian border town of Goma.


Eastman Chemical Co.  (EMN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Thompson Link To Moscow Agency
J.
Walter Thompson Europe has formed a joint venture with Ark Communications of Moscow to open an agency in Moscow.
Though terms of the agreement were not disclosed, Thompson said last week that it would hold a minority interest in the new venture.
The agency, not yet named, will have eight employees and be headed by Jozef Onderka, a former partner of Ark, as managing partner and Gotz Turowski, a former account director at Thompson's Frankfurt office, as managing director.
It will serve clients like Kraft Jacobs Suchard, Unilever and Warner-Lambert.


New Case Filed in Prudential Inquiry
After months of focusing on activities of Prudential Securities, regulators have brought the first case against a person tied to the limited partnership scandal at the firm; other cases have named the firm.
The civil case, filed Friday by Idaho securities regulators, names John F. Corbin, a former executive with Graham Resources, which co-sponsored energy partnerships with Prudential throughout most of the 1980's.
He promoted such partnerships for sale to Prudential's retail brokers in the Western states.


Lear Seating Corp.(LEA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fire Department Buries Another Fighter


Atlantic Southeast Airlines Inc.(ASAI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Novel Insanity Defense for Joel Rifkin; Accused Serial Killer's Claims of Adoption-Related Trauma Stir a Bitter Debate
As Joel Rifkin gets ready for a second trial, the decision of his lawyer to argue that the trauma of his adoption led to insanity and caused him to strangle 17 women has prompted a bitter debate among adoptees, adoption attorneys, psychologists and criminologists.
A pretrial hearing concerning his confession to the police is to resume on Tuesday in Suffolk County Court, where he is accused of killing Leah Evens and Lauren Marquez, both 28.
On May 9 in Nassau County Court, Mr.
Rifkin was convicted of killing Tiffany Bresciani, 19, as a jury rejected an insanity defense.
But with a new lawyer, Mr.
Rifkin will offer a different insanity defense, contending that the trauma of his adoption left him so mentally ill that he could not help but kill.


A magazine for American parents offers marketers a double-or-nothing deal.
THE magazine's advertising pitch is, quite evidently, a double-whammy.
But the spiel has never been terribly complicated.
"We simply tell advertisers that they're reaching the heaviest-buying parents they possibly can reach, because they have to buy two of everything," said the magazine's co-founder and editor in chief, Barbara C. Unell.
"And when they ask about cost per thousand, we tell advertisers, 'just divide by two.' "
The publication?
Twins magazine, billed as "the magazine for the parents of multiples." It is the only national magazine that offers advertisers a pure play in the twins market.
The current issue marks the 10th anniversary of the slick-paper, four-color magazine.


Allied Group Inc.(ALGR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hagi Joins Strong Barcelona Side
GHEORGHE HAGI agreed yesterday to a two-year contract with Barcelona and will join a roster that already includes ROMARIO, HRISTO STOITCHKOV and RONALD KOEMAN.
Hagi, a 29-year-old forward, scored three goals for Romania during the World Cup.
Barcelona has won four consecutive Spanish League titles but lost to AC Milan in the final of the European Champions Cup. (AP)


Filling In the Peace Map
Israel and Jordan moved the map of a peaceful Middle East a large step closer to completion yesterday when they agreed to end 46 years of formal belligerency and begin normalizing their relations.
A peace treaty is still months away, but already the two countries are ready to resolve concrete issues like boundaries and water rights, open direct telephone communications across the Jordan and work together against what remains of the Arab economic boycott.
President Clinton rightly placed this Washington Declaration in the sequence that began with the Camp David agreements with Egypt and included last September's accords with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
For the first time in Israel's history, most of its borders are peaceful.
Only Syria and Lebanon remain without agreements, and progress on those fronts may not be far off.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BM GROUP P.L.C., London, a manufacturer of construction equipment and building products, will sell its U.S.
Mitchell Distributing Co., to Marubeni Corp., Osaka, Japan, for a minimum of $25.5 million.


Monk Enjoys Catching Up With the Jets
The ball jumps out of the pitching machine, traveling as if it were shot out of a bazooka.
Standing 10 yards away, Art Monk waits without blinking an eye, without twitching a muscle in his slender frame.
Suddenly, like an invisible predator, his hands fly up to caress the ball the moment it arrives.
His catching motion is so smooth, yet so sure.


Owner Keeping Hands Off
Yankee Stadium has George Steinbrenner worried, which is nothing new.
But its lease, its inability to lure overflowing crowds for a first-place team and its oft-criticized location have the Yankees' principal owner turning to a new form of relaxation:
Watching his ball club catch fire.


Treasury Official Is Disavowing Whitewater Details in His Diary
A senior Treasury official whose diary casts a bad light on the Administration's handling of the Whitewater affair will testify in Congress that his writings do not accurately reflect what occurred, Administration officials and Congressional investigators said today.
In his diary, Joshua L. Steiner, the Treasury Secretary's chief of staff, wrote that White House officials had put "intense pressure" on Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman to remain involved in overseeing the Federal handling of Whitewater.
Then, when Mr.
Altman told senior Clinton advisers in February of his decision to remove himself from the matter, they "told RA that it was unacceptable," the diary says.


King of the Beach Becomes a Career
There was a time when beach volleyball was a statement about the California life style, when 20-something men and women drove to Laguna Beach and Newport Beach at 7 A.M. to get a court and play a few games before the sun and the sand were hot.
Being a beach volleyball player meant instant status in California, and it was there that a new game evolved: a two-man competition, faster and showier than the six-man game played on hard courts or in school gymnasiums.


Oxford Health Plans (OXHP,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


D&amp;K Wholesale Drug Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.32
3.01
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.39
4.43
3.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.79
4.83
3.24
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.25
7.24
5.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.54
7.52
6.67
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.32
8.33
7.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.38
6.37
5.82
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Market Place; Big Board Chairman to Step Down
Proclaiming he had accomplished what he set out to do, William H. Donaldson said yesterday that he would not seek another term as chairman and chief executive of the New York Stock Exchange.
He will leave with the exchange in better shape than when he arrived, but without having become the pre-eminent spokesman for Wall Street that some had hoped he would be.
Mr.
Donaldson, 63, has been chairman since the beginning of 1991, a period that has seen rapid growth in trading volume and a 20 percent cut in Big Board employment as the exchange slashed costs to improve its competitiveness.


INSIDE
New Threats From the Serbs
Bosnian Serbs are threatening to reimpose a blockade on the capital, apparently in response to pressure to accept a peace plan.
Page A9.
Plan to Bar Straitjackets
New York officials want to eliminate straitjackets and limit other restraints in mental hospitals.
Page B4.


Digital's Loss Is Linked To a Revamping Charge
The Digital Equipment Corporation yesterday reported a $1.75 billion loss for the fourth quarter, largely as a result of a $1.2 billion charge to pay for the costs of shrinking the company.
Despite the huge loss, the president and chief executive of Digital, Robert B. Palmer, said, "we have strong indications that we are on the right track" to profitability, perhaps as soon as the end of the calendar year.


Spiegel Inc.(SPGLA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


W. E. Schevill Dies; Authority on Sounds Of Whales Was 88
William Edward Schevill, an authority on whales and the sounds they make, died on Monday at Emerson Hospital in Concord, Mass.
He was 88 and lived in Concord.
The cause was pneumonia, said his wife, Barbara.


As So Often in the Past, A Sideshow in the Offing
Congressional hearings customarily turn on perceptions more than disclosures.
The Senate Watergate committee hearings 21 summers ago won the public's acceptance in large part because the senators appeared reasonably judicial and because Richard M. Nixon's accusers seemed more candid and earnest than his defenders.


Cilcorp Inc.(CER,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Public &amp; Private; The Meter Runs
When Alexa first came to live with Debi and Bill Fell, she was supposed to be hooked up to an apnea monitor every night to see that she was breathing properly.
But the day the four-month-old baby arrived, the monitor did not, and the Fells, who have been foster parents to 32 children over the last seven years and have borne three of their own, took turns staying up all night.
It's the sort of thing you remember about a baby you raised up into a little girl, watched learn to walk and talk, toilet-trained and spoon fed.
It's the sort of thing you remember when the social workers have taken her away and you're left with the photographs, the anecdotes, a palpable anger and an enormous sadness.


Bosnia: Lift the Arms Embargo
If Washington has ever been serious about pushing its allies to lift the unjust arms embargo against the Government of Bosnia, it now has an ideal opportunity to do so.
Bosnian Serbs have defiantly rejected a European-American peace plan and again threaten to blockade Sarajevo.
France and Britain are looking for a way out of their futile U.N. peacekeeping role.
Even U.N.
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali is expressing doubts about the usefulness of any further U.N. role.
With the Clinton Administration rightly refusing to send U.S. troops into the breach, the cleanest, fairest way out for the international community is to untie the hands of the Bosnian Government by ending the arms embargo.
A stronger Bosnia could then act on its own, militarily or diplomatically, to assure its survival and gain back enough territory to allow at least some refugees from Serbian sieges and ethnic cleansings to return to their homes.


Man Sentenced to Prison In Kidnapping of L.I. Girl
At his sentencing today for kidnapping, a tearful John Esposito listened to a statement written by 11-year-old Katie Beers that said he made her "feel dirty" and that he "should go to jail for as long as he can" for holding her captive for 16 days in an underground bunker.
Mr.
Esposito then told the judge that he held Katie captive because he wanted to help her escape her dysfunctional foster home.
"My only hope is that someday Katie will find it in her heart to forgive me," he said.


A Federal Agency, Not the President, Takes Center Stage
Trumpeted for months as Congress's first look at Whitewater, the House Banking Committee hearing today had next to nothing to do with either Ozarks real estate or the Clintons' personal finances.
Rather, the focus was on possible Clinton Administration interference into the complicated procedures whereby the Federal agency overseeing the savings and loan bailout proposes criminal investigations into failed institutions -- in this case, Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan, which was owned by Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton's partner in the Whitewater Development Company.


Coleman Co. (CLN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Home Proves Not So Sweet for Yankees and Key
Save the psychological profile for someone other than Jimmy Key.
Buck Showalter may have come to his defense, but the reason the potential Cy Young winner became so charitable and lost a five-run lead was left up to him to answer.
"It's definitely a physical problem," Key said.
"If I do what I'm supposed to, they don't win that game. The blame is on me."


Employee Benefit Plans (EBP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
JANET JACKSON is singing to raise money for Rwandan refugees.
Ms.
Jackson announced that she would donate the proceeds of concerts at Radio City Music Hall scheduled for last night and tonight to an airlift for the refugees, who are dying in camps in Zaire.


A Burrito Both Crunchy and Creamy
IT'S the yin and yang of the ingredients in this burrito that make it so appealing: the crunchiness of the corn with the creaminess of the avocado.
Combined with a salad of arugula and tomato, it makes a nice summer meal.
Instead of heating the tortillas in an oven or a toaster oven, you can heat them in a very hot skillet with no oil.
But watch carefully: they can crisp in a flash and burn.


Layoffs Possible as Giuliani Seeks $250 Million in Savings
As city agencies prepared to absorb the blow of $250 million in new spending reductions, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he could not rule out layoffs or other painful measures to produce enough savings to keep the city's new budget balanced.
In a letter to the commissioners of each agency, the Mayor's budget director, Abraham M. Lackman, outlined a series of options for coming up with a 2.6 percent cut in spending across the board, which concluded that "layoffs may be necessary to achieve these levels of reductions." Other options included keeping down overtime costs, reorganizing staff assignments, "consolidating services" and other steps that could result in a cut in workers.


Adia Services (ADIA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Now, Microsoft Wants To Gather Information
The Microsoft Corporation, fresh from a Federal antitrust settlement that did little to curb its dominance of the business software market, is now hoping to conquer an emerging field where the company's computer-nerd skills may, or may not, give it an edge: electronic publishing.
Like many traditional paper-and-ink publishers, and many other software companies, Microsoft is busy acquiring information to fill CD-ROM's, shiny disks that look like music CD's but can each contain the equivalent of 250,000 pages of text for playback on personal computers.
When done right, the technology can combine true-to-life video images, sound and animation in a multimedia package that both entertains and educates.


America West Airlines Inc.(AWAQC,NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Smith, a Former Celtic, Gets Out of Prison
CHARLES SMITH, the former Boston Celtics guard convicted in the hit-and-run deaths of two college students, was released from prison yesterday after serving more than two years of his sentence.
Smith, 26, returned to Washington, his hometown.
His lawyer, DENNIS KELLY, said Smith would not grant interviews.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about Rwanda referred incorrectly to the emergency disposal of the bodies of dead refugees.
Relief officials have been given clearance to burn the bodies, but they have not yet begun to do so.


Williams Hits 38th As Giants Inch Closer
Giants 12, Dodgers 5
Matt Williams hit his major league-leading 38th homer and Todd Benzinger drove in three runs last night, leading the San Francisco Giants to a 12-5 victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers at Candlestick Park.


IES Industries Inc.(IES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Mozart Works of 1784, Over the Audience Noise  Mostly Mozart
Audiences at Mostly Mozart are different from other audiences, and not always in a good way.
They are larger and more enthusiastic, it is true, but they are also spectacularly inattentive.
At no other event, I think, would one see a man busily copying addresses into his new Filofax, snapping and unsnapping the binder, and nearby a young woman vigorously sketching in her program with a pencil.
At Mostly Mozart, things drop more often and more loudly than at other concerts; if it has been raining, one hears umbrellas.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article in some editions of Business Day on Friday about the appointment of a president and chief operating officer at the Continental Corporation referred to the executive incorrectly.
Adrian Tocklin is a woman.


Kerr-McGee Corp.(KMG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AT LUNCH WITH: Gary Sinise; A Takeoff Fueled By Passion
Gary Sinise steps onto the patio of a restaurant near Beverly Hills and stops at one table to shake hands with an old friend.
Then at another table.
And finally a third.
He's wearing jeans, a white T-shirt, a sports jacket and small granny glasses with purple lenses.
Other people on the patio glance up quizzically and seem to be whispering, 'Who is this familiar-looking guy?' Mr.
Sinise removes his glasses, sets them on the table and smiles faintly.


Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co. (GRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Networks Start to Tune Out Tabloid Movies
The television-movie mill is already geared up to produce the first docudrama based on the O. J. Simpson case.
Fox hopes to have the film on the air by summer's end.
That's no surprise.
What is more surprising is that only one such made-for-television movie is planned.
ABC, CBS and NBC have so far refused what executives here described as ceaseless pitches from producers for other versions of the Simpson case.


A Film Hit and a Star Do Wonders for 'Gump'
Before it was an enormously successful movie whose sentimentality charmed audiences (and irritated many critics), "Forrest Gump" was just a novel, and not a very well-known one.
When the book, about a slow-witted man whose lack of guile propels him into a series of outlandish adventures, was published in hard cover by Doubleday in 1986, it reportedly sold fewer than 10,000 copies.
That was before "Forrest Gump," the movie, arrived on the scene, bringing sudden attention to phrases like "Life is like a box of chocolates: you never know what you're gonna get." And now with the movie outdoing even the Schwarzenegger extravaganza "True Lies," the novel has taken off, too, with 805,000 copies in print in mass-market paperback, and more copies being churned out all the time.
Its paperback publisher, Pocket Books, has also printed up a quick companion book, "Gumpisms" ("Try not to forget your phone number," is an example); more than 130,000 copies of that are in print.


No Headline
Auto Racing
INTERNATIONAL AUTOMOBILE FEDERATION -- Suspended Michael Schumacher, Formula One driver, from the next two Grand Prix races and took away six points from his standings, for rules violations during a race at Silverstone, England.
Suspended the license of Pierre Aumonier, director of the British Grand Prix, for one year for various infractions.
Baseball


Fieldcrest Cannon (FLD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CalMat Co. (CZM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Italy's Leader Is Swept Closer To Whirlpool of Corruption
Italy's corruption scandal spread further into the country's business and political elite today with an accusation by a senior executive that Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's younger brother, Paolo, had provided money for the executive to pay bribes to Treasury officials.
There was also an announcement by corruption investigators that they were considering issuing an international arrest warrant for a former Prime Minister.


Baltimore No-Names Thriving in C.F.L.
Pro football has returned to Baltimore.
The office door at Memorial Stadium says Colts.
The tickets say Colts.
The media guide says Colts.
But the team is not the Colts.
It's not even the C.F.L.
Colts.
Unsold T-shirts and any other new team products cannot use the name Colts.
Receptionists answer the phones, "Baltimore C.F.L," and people in the office joke about working for "the Horse With No Name."


Sports of The Times; One Mission And a Pair Of Dreams
TWO large red, white and blue buses negotiated their way through midmorning traffic, moving determinedly toward the Charlotte Coliseum.
Despite their size, the buses moved smoothly as they wove in and out of traffic: a quick burst here to exploit an opening, a bold, powerful lunge there to get into a faster lane.
In many ways, the buses were like their passengers -- members of Dream Team II, 15 of the world's best basketball players.
Small quick players like Kevin Johnson and Mark Price.
Big powerful ones like Shaquille O'Neil and Alonzo Mourning.
Players who can move through traffic.


RECORDINGS
The Storm Before Sibelius's Calm
Sibelius's incidental music to "The Tempest" was his last major work except for "Tapiola." It is tempting to see a relation between this choice of subject and the 30-year compositional silence that followed close upon it: Sibelius, like Shakespeare's Prospero, chose to abjure his art, set aside his magic craft.


Hahn Automotive Warehouse Inc.(HAHN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brush Wellman Inc.(BW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Swept Into Office on Health Care Issue, Senator Struggles in Re-election Bid
As the man who put health care on the national agenda, Senator Harris Wofford, who is up for re-election this year, is determined to prove he has something to show for his troubles.
On a recent campaign swing through the Fairgrounds farmers' market here, he seemed oblivious to the summer swelter while he implored voters not to lose faith in his efforts to improve the health system.


How a Dollar Coin Hurts Ordinary Folks
To the Editor:
"Change for a Dollar" (editorial, July 15), recommending the dollar coin, would unleash a round of inflation that would hurt "little people" the most.
Sodas may already be $1 in New York, but everywhere else they are mostly 70 to 80 cents.


Uncovered Short Sales Rise to Another Record on Nasdaq
Uncovered short sales of Nasdaq stocks rose to a record for the third month in a row, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
The association reported a 4.5 percent rise, to a record 835.3 million, in the number of shares borrowed and sold short, but not yet covered by repurchasing them, in the monthlong period ending July 8.
That compares with 799.5 million shares for the month ended June 8.


Rwandan Refugees Caught 'Between Two Deaths'
A group of Rwandan refugees decamped to a roofless stone house held a spirited discussion this afternoon on whether to return to their country.
At a camp just across the road, the volcanic rock was piled with bodies, a jumble of at least 200 thrown on a heap, evidence that a cholera epidemic continues unabated.
The effort to bury the victims, which was running with relative albeit grim efficiency two days ago, has now been overwhelmed by the numbers.
But the refugees who were chatting together today believe -- as others do -- that returning to Rwanda to escape cholera means facing death at the hands of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, the Tutsi-dominated rebel army that is now the Government.


Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co. (GRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Higher Raise Is Provided For M.T.A.
The tentative contract reached between the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and its unionized employees would give bus and subway workers a bigger wage increase than other municipal unions have received recently in return for modest work-rule changes, officials said yesterday.
The pact with the 32,000 mass-transit employees would allow the M.T.A. to hire part-time workers on some new services, speed repairs to buses and reduce the number of workers at bus depots.


Robot on Mountain For Volcano Descent
Researchers placed the Dante II robot atop an Alaskan volcano today, beginning an attempt to send the walking machine into an active crater to see if it can do research in a place too dangerous for humans.
Dante and its support equipment were lifted to Mount Spurr, an active volcano 80 miles west of Anchorage, after several days of poor weather prevented helicopters from operating near the crater rim, said Charles Redmond, a spokesman for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the project's chief sponsor.


Equitable Resources Inc.(EQT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Copier Of Torah, It's a Quest
WORDS come slowly to Neil Yerman.
He scratches his lip, tugs at his chin, leans forward and silently settles into a Rodinesque thinker's pose before uttering a sound.
Maybe his twist on the wordsmith's adage is to speak the way you write.
He writes with a quill.


Attacks on Christian Right Amount to Bigotry; Robertson's Beliefs
To the Editor:
"Merchants of Hate" by Anthony Lewis (column, July 15) is insulting and distasteful.
Mr.
Lewis's attempt to distort the beliefs of the religious broadcaster Pat Robertson is aimed at marginalizing people of faith.


Olympic-Style Fun for Children


Democrats Issue Draft of Health Plan
House Democratic staff members have drafted a summary of health insurance legislation for their leaders to discuss with other Democrats, but the preliminary document does not resolve many delicate issues, like timing.
As expected, the seven-page summary, widely circulated on Capitol Hill today, closely follows the lines of the bill adopted last month by the House Committee on Ways and Means, which aims to provide health insurance to all Americans, financed in large part by mandatory payments by employers.


Buenos Aires Journal; BOOM! Suddenly, the Children See Life Starkly
Moshe Korin looks back with almost a touch of nostalgia to the simpler days of the 1950's, when he and other Jewish teen-agers carried clubs and bicycle chains to defend synagogues from gangs of Argentine neo-Nazis.
"Then, we knew who our enemies were, where they went to university, which cafes they frequented," Mr.
Korin, now principal of a Jewish school, recalled over tea today as his reading glasses lay on a sheaf of Hebrew papers.
"Now, we are up against highly sophisticated groups. International terrorism is now installed in Argentina."


Kemet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jason Inc.(JASN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Top Bridge Teams Gain at Nationals
Play continued here today at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals, with attention focused on the prestigious Spingold Knockout Team Championship.
In the first round of play Monday, all the top-ranked squads in the field of 129 teams breezed to victory.
The defending champions -- Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C.; Richard Freeman of Atlanta; Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla.; Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., and Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman, both of Dallas -- won their match by 229 imps, one of the biggest margins in the 65-year history of the event.
The top-seeded teams, by captain, are: 1, Nickell; 2, Jim Cayne of Manhattan; 3, Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J.; 4, Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex.; 5, George Rapee of Manhattan; 6, Andy Goodman of San Francisco; 7, Ron Gerard of White Plains; 8, Clifford Russell of Miami; 9, Rita Shugart of Pebble Beach, Calif.; 10, Anton Maas of Amstelveen, the Netherlands.
The event ends Sunday.


Hahn Automotive Warehouse Inc.(HAHN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kemper Corp.(KEM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Princess Whose Life Was No Fairy Tale
Audrey Hepburn
By Warren G. Harris
Illustrated. 318 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
Read straight through, the average celebrity biography leaves you feeling glutted and a bit tainted.
It is best read in bits and pieces with the star's recordings or videocassettes at hand: that way you'll feel you are a purposeful and discerning fan, not a craven, besotted one.
There is no point in reading or writing such a book if you are not a fan, and Warren G. Harris is a purposeful, besotted and occasionally craven one.
He tells us that "Audrey Hepburn," his latest celebrity bio, really began when he was a 17-year-old usher at Loew's Valencia Theater in Jamaica, Queens, and saw "Roman Holiday" 10 times in one week.
Loew's Valencia became an evangelical church.
Mr.
Harris became a hard-working celebrity evangelist, turning out texts like "Lucy and Desi," "Gable and Lombard" and "Natalie and R. J.," and spreading the gospel of revelation and adoration.
"Audrey Hepburn" is filled with semi-religious chapter titles like "A Nun in Africa," and "Tending Her Gardens," alongside fairy-tale titles like "Ballerina to Showgirl" and "Stardom Beckons." This tone worked very nicely in her movies, but applied to her fairly straightforward life, it grows wearing very quickly.
So many glowing details, so many arch asides!


G. E. Bentley, 92, Princeton Professor
Gerald Eades Bentley, a longtime Princeton professor who suggested that Izaak Walton's 1653 book on fishing, "The Compleat Angler," was partly copied from a 1577 work by another author, died on Monday at his home in Hightstown, N.J.
He was 92.
Professor Bentley began teaching at Princeton in 1945 and was its Murray Professor of English Literature from 1952 to 1970.


Integrated Health Services Inc.(IHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ex-Lion Must Pay Families of Victims
A jury ruled yesterday that REGGIE ROGERS, formerly of the Detroit Lions, must pay $375,000 to the family of one of three teen-agers killed when he ran a stop sign while drunk and struck their vehicle.
The defensive end was convicted of negligent homicide in a 1988 crash in Pontiac, Mich., and served 12 1/2 months of a 16-24-month prison sentence.
Rogers broke his neck in the crash.
The Oakland County (Mich.) Circuit Court jury decided Rogers was 75 percent responsible for the crash.
Detroit made Rogers the seventh overall pick in the 1987 N.F.L. draft out of the University of Washington.
The Lions released the two-year pro after the accident, saying his injury made him unfit to play football.
Rogers, 30, now plays for Hamilton of the Canadian Football League.


Corrections
A brief sports article yesterday about a fight between two Giants players during practice on Monday misidentified the one who was cut on the face and required stitches.
He was Scott Davis, not Greg Bishop.


A Proposed Rail Link Between Manhattan and Airports Draws Criticism


Amdahl Corp.(AMH,A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Lakers Sign Temple's Jones for Scoring
The Los Angeles Lakers, who drafted EDDIE JONES in hopes that he can provide scoring punch for their lackluster offense, signed the former Temple star Tuesday.
Jones, a 6-foot-6-inch guard taken as the 10th player in the draft, was the Lakers' highest draft choice since JAMES WORTHY, who was the No. 1 overall pick in the 1982 draft.


Corrections
The table of natural gas futures prices in Business Day yesterday included erroneous figures for Monday's trading supplied by Tribune Media Services.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the table may write to the Business Editor, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Loral Corp.(LOR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
ELIE WIESEL returned yesterday to the city where he was born in Romania, paying homage to Jews deported to death camps 50 years ago.
Local authorities made him an honorary citizen of Sighet, a city of 100,000 near the Hungarian border; it had a large Jewish community before World War II.


2-Race Ban for Formula One Leader
Michael Schumacher should have seen it coming.
It's not that the infraction that got him a two-race ban yesterday from the world Formula One championship was so serious.
The worst error committed by Schumacher -- the German driver who is now threatened with seeing the wheels come off a smooth ride to the 1994 world championship -- may be that he simply became too big too fast.
Ruling in Paris, the International Automobile Federation said Schumacher, the winner of six of eight Grand Prix races in 1994 and runner-up in the other two, had been penalized for passing the pole-sitter, Damon Hill of England, on the warm-up lap of the British Grand Prix in Silverstone, England, on July 10 and temporarily ignoring a subsequent black flag.


Colombian Woman Accuses Her New Rochelle Pen Pal of Rape
In hand-decorated letters sent north in delicate homemade envelopes, a Colombian woman for years practiced her English by writing to a pen pal, a man from New Rochelle.
When she came to New York for a visit in 1992, the authorities say, the man raped her and left her pregnant.
The man, Joseph Macri, a 44-year-old house painter, has been on trial in Westchester County Court here on charges of first-degree rape.
The defense contends that the sexual relationship was consensual and that the woman went to the police only after she learned that she was pregnant.


Alleghany Corp.(Y,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Retreating on the Trade Pact
Sam Gibbons, who replaced Dan Rostenkowski as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, came to his new position with a reputation as a dedicated free-trader.
But he tarnished that reputation last week by pushing a number of trade-closing amendments through his committee.
The committee was voting on the Administration's proposed legislation to institute the Uruguay Round trade pact, which the U.S. signed with over 100 other nations in April in Marrakech, Morocco.
The Senate Finance Committee takes up the legislation today.
The most controversial issue concerns "anti-dumping" statutes, which govern how the U.S. will retaliate against countries that export goods at unfairly low prices -- for example, prices below the exporter's manufacturing cost.


Denver May Open Airport in Spite of Glitches
Officials here are considering opening the new Denver International Airport without its high-tech baggage system, which is still plagued with computer glitches more than 10 months after its scheduled debut.
The airport, which was scheduled to open last October, has missed four deadlines.
Interest payments on the $3.7 billion airport are running at about $1 million a day, most of it paid by the airlines, and city officials are now considering opening the airport with the traditional conveyor-belt baggage system.


A Federal Agency, Not the President, Takes Center Stage
Trumpeted for months as Congress's first look at Whitewater, the House Banking Committee hearing today had next to nothing to do with either Ozarks real estate or the Clintons' personal finances.
Rather, the focus was on possible Clinton Administration interference into the complicated procedures whereby the Federal agency overseeing the savings and loan bailout proposes criminal investigations into failed institutions -- in this case, Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan, which was owned by Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton's partner in the Whitewater Development Company.


Cone Mills reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Rico the Rookie Rolling: Homer Wins It for Mets
Rico Brogna did not get five hits tonight at Busch Stadium.
He got only two -- they just happened to be the two that mattered most.
After providing the Mets with two runs on a seventh-inning single, Brogna smacked a two-run homer in the 11th inning to give New York a 10-9 victory over the St.
Louis Cardinals.


Investors Rush to Join Suits Over Derivatives
Investors will continue to join class-action lawsuits over the recently self-destructing financial instruments known as derivatives and "exotic" securities, lawyers are saying.
First there was a rash of suits against mutual funds, brokerage firms and others that were said to have made bad judgments in buying complex, financially engineered products without making investors aware of the risk.
Now, lawyers say, because of continued publicity about problems with derivatives, their phones are still ringing, as investors seek to join the "classes" of investors who contend harm was done to them in risky securities, including collateralized mortgage obligations.


As So Often in the Past, A Sideshow in the Offing
Congressional hearings customarily turn on perceptions more than disclosures.
The Senate Watergate committee hearings 21 summers ago won the public's acceptance in large part because the senators appeared reasonably judicial and because Richard M. Nixon's accusers seemed more candid and earnest than his defenders.


Centerior Energy Corp.(CX,N) reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Mullen Is Chosen For Paddington Job
The Paddington Corporation of Fort Lee, N.J., said yesterday that as expected it had named Mullen Advertising of Wenham, Mass., to become one of its two main agencies, by awarding that agency five of its distilled spirits brands, with billings estimated at $12 million to $15 million.
In addition, Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS of New York, Paddington's other main agency, was named to handle a sixth brand, with billings estimated at $1 million to $2 million.
Those brands had been handled by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising of New York, until that agency was unexpectedly dismissed 11 days ago.


An Italian Tradition in Hoboken


HOUSE COMMITTEE TOLD OF CONTACTS OVER WHITEWATER
The White House counsel, Lloyd N. Cutler, said in a Congressional hearing today that the Administration had broken no laws or ethical rules in its handling of the Whitewater investigations.
But he acknowledged that his predecessor, Bernard W. Nussbaum, had tried to persuade the Deputy Treasury Secretary, a close friend of the President, to remain involved in the investigations.
Mr.
Cutler opened the first of two hearings into Whitewater by presenting the results of his own review of discussions between White House and Treasury officials about the investigations into a failed Arkansas savings and loan owned by the man who was the partner of the President and Hillary Rodham Clinton in their Ozarks real estate venture, the Whitewater Development Company.


Executive Changes
AQUA VIE BEVERAGE CORP., Ketchum, Idaho, appointed John Troyan chief financial officer.
CHANEL INC., New York, appointed Sarah Williams director of marketing for the Chanel women's fragrance.
Art Rivera was named to the new position of director of creative services.


Southdown Inc.(SDW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Phillips Petroleum (P,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Employee Benefit Plans (EBP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Los Angeles Magazine
Joan McCraw, who was formerly vice president of advertising for National Geographic magazine, has been named president and publisher of Los Angeles Magazine, which is owned by Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
Ms.
McCraw will succeed Geoff Miller, a founder and former editor of the magazine, who is retiring after 34 years with the publication.
Before joining National Geographic, Ms.
McCraw held marketing or advertising positions with the Gannett Company, TV Guide, New West magazine and the Petersen Publishing Company.


Interpublic Group of Cos.  (IPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Richard Storrs, 84, Securities Lawyer
Richard Salter Storrs, a retired New York securities lawyer and senior partner in the international law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, died on Sunday at Hilaire Farm in Huntington, L.I.
A resident of Oyster Bay, L.I., he was 84.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Ground Round Restaurants Inc.(GRXR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Schools Chief In Newark Sees Causes For Troubles
Clearly Eugene C. Campbell is a man under siege.
Yet in public the salvos whizzing by seem scarcely to disturb his calm.
After the release last week of a state Education Department report that depicted him as presiding over a mismanaged, failing school district, Mr.
Campbell met the press with a lofty reform package, a cool denial of any wrongdoing and the suggestion that things were not as bad as the state, and many parents, say.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
In a rebellion against business travelers' higher fares, many companies are seeking ways for their employees to squeeze costs and are pressing airlines for better deals.
The new aggressiveness by business could become a nightmare for airlines, which have been plagued by losses and are hoping for increased revenues from business passengers as the economy recovers.  [ Page A1. ]


CHRONICLE
Life has taken a distinct turn for the better for MELBA MOORE, the Tony Award-winning actress and singer, who went on public assistance in December, having been impoverished, she asserted, by her estranged husband and former manager, Charles Huggins.
Tonight, Ms.
Moore, now divorced from Mr.
Huggins though still embroiled in litigation against him, opens in a production of Cole Porter's "Anything Goes" at Montclair State University in Upper Montclair, N.J.
"I'm just trying to survive and keep on going, and I'm much better," she said during a rehearsal break yesterday.
The show runs through Aug. 14.


Kemper Corp.(KEM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


3 Leaders Angered by New Terrorist Attacks
As the prospect of a new round of terrorism threatened to cloud their agreement here, King Hussein of Jordan and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel joined today in condemning violence that could snarl the route toward Middle East peace.
Appearing at a news conference with President Clinton just hours after the bombing of the Israeli Embassy in London, the two leaders denounced the attack, which injured 13 people, and a deadly bombing last week in Argentina as evidence of the hatred that still stood in the way of the peace effort.


Fieldcrest Cannon (FLD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Expands Rwanda Airlift But Bottlenecks There Persist
The United States military airlift operation here is now able to fly about 700 tons daily of food, medicine, and vitally needed equipment to purify and distribute water to cholera-stricken Rwandan refugees in camps in Zaire, Air Force officers said today.
But as the 70-ton C-5 cargo planes continued loading portable water purification plants on the runway of Rhein-Main Air Base this afternoon, Col.
Edward F. McPhillips said the main bottleneck continued to be limited unloading space on the airstrip of the main refugee camp outside Goma, Zaire.


Attacks on Christian Right Amount to Bigotry; Truth in Talk Radio
To the Editor:
Some of Michael Harrison's opinions in defense of talk radio in "The Voice of America" (Op-Ed, July 9) are so patently preposterous as to be laughable.
There is a world of difference, for example, between simple "inaccuracy," as Mr.
Harrison puts it, and the kind of continual, blatant prevarication served up by the likes of Rush Limbaugh.


Attacks on Christian Right Amount to Bigotry; Defining a Listener
To the Editor:
"Limbaugh's Listeners" (letter, July 20) by John F. Christman is incorrect on Arbitron's definition of a listener.
A person who listens to Rush Limbaugh on all five days of a week is counted as one listener when we calculate a weekly cumulative audience.


Expense Account Heyday Over, Companies Demand Cheap Fares
Many American companies, eager to cut costs, are rebelling against the airlines' 16-year-old policy of making business travelers pay higher fares than leisure travelers.
These companies are finding ways for their traveling employees to save money, even if that sometimes means inconveniencing them.
They are also driving harder bargains with the airlines.
Apple Computer Inc., for instance, has set up a network that provides employees, working on computers, options for planning their trips, including information about the potential savings from discounts the company has negotiated with airlines.


An Arafat Calculus
The ease with which President Clinton, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and King Hussein of Jordan got along these last two days was palpable.
They wore their respect for one another on their sleeves, bantering freely, shaking hands with real warmth and clearly enjoying doing business as equals.
And that could be really dangerous -- especially for Yasir Arafat.


Gerber Products Co. (GEB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Walls Adorned By the Adored
Who's hot these days?
The Baldwin brothers of Massapequa, L.I.; Lynda Carter, but only in her Wonder Woman persona; Telly Savalas, at Greek restaurants, mostly.
Passe? James Caan, Mike Tyson, Eric ("Chips") Estrada, Brooke Shields.


Eating Well
THE Clinton Administration has finally named an Administrator for the Food Safety and Inspection Service, the hot seat at the Agriculture Department.
On Aug. 15, Michael R. Taylor, Deputy Commissioner for Policy at the Food and Drug Administration, will become responsible for meat and poultry inspection.
Many highly publicized incidents of illness and death from contaminated meat and poultry have occurred in the last few years, and in an interview this week, Mr.
Taylor acknowledged that consumer interests, not politics, must be the overriding concern for his agency.


THEATER
A Clash of Two Egos On a Triumphant Tour  Synchronicity Space
It is difficult to believe that P. T. Barnum was as laid back, for even a moment, as he is made to seem through a whole year recounted in Seth Hamilton's play "Jenny and Phineas," being presented at Syn chronicity Space, 55 Mercer Street in Soho, through Saturday.


IES Industries Inc.(IES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brunswick Corp.(BC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Straitjackets at End
New York State's Office of Mental Health yesterday proposed ending the use of straitjackets in its mental hospitals under new guidelines that seek to minimize the use of physical restraints in treating patients.
Article, page B4.


Cardinal Health (CDIC,NMS) reports earnings for Year to June 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; As the Federated-Macy merger takes shape, concerns about discounts and spending cutbacks.
THE saga about the future of the Macy's department store chain looks as if it has finally been settled.
Next week, Federated Department Stores, which owns Bloomingdale's and Abraham &amp; Straus, among other famous names, will file a blueprint in Federal bankruptcy court detailing how it plans to merge with the chain's parent, R. H. Macy &amp; Company.


Food Notes
Garage Moves Again
It's not easy to keep up with the owners of the Gourmet Garage, the wholesale-retail produce and food company that has had its headquarters in SoHo for nearly three years.
Two months ago, the owners -- Andrew Arons, Ned Visser and John Gotfried -- moved out of the Vinegar Factory on the Upper East Side, a second location that they had opened just last year.
And on Monday, they will relocate the SoHo store to 453 Broome Street (at Mercer Street), a block from the current address, 47 Wooster Street (at Broome Street).


Haiti, U.S. and the Murk in Between
When a network presents an hourlong special on Haiti, you can be confident that the current military bosses of that sad country will get their lumps.
More surprising in "House on Fire: America's Haitian Crisis" is the force and directness of Peter Jennings's attack on President Clinton's policy, or lack of one.
Mr.
Jennings begins this pungent look at Haiti's tumultuous history and present distress with the promise that he will be asking "whether America should send its young men and women" to put out what the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the deposed President of Haiti, has called a house on fire.
The question is indeed asked.
Mr.
Jennings puts it squarely to Father Aristide: "Of what value are you to the United States?" To which Father Aristide responds, "We are men."


RESULTS PLUS
YACHT RACING  Connor and Koch Even  The fog lifted long enough on Rhode Island Sound off Newport yesterday to give Dennis Conner a second chance to show that he can beat Bill Koch in 12-Meters, the boat class that Conner has dominated in yacht racing.
And Conner seized the opportunity to win the race over the 12.5-mile course by about 35 seconds in the New York Yacht Club's 150th anniversary regatta.
The race was the second this week for the 1992 America's Cup adversaries.
Koch, skipper of the 12-Meter Kiwi Magic, beat Conner on Sunday.
Conner is the skipper of Stars &amp; Stripes '87, the same blue yacht that he steered to his successful America's Cup challenge in 1987.
Kiwi Magic placed third yesterday.
In second place was the 12-Meter Cannonball, skippered by Charles Robertson, New York's regatta event chairman.
TENNIS  Maleeva Is Upset  Angela Lettiere of Vero Beach, Fla., a qualifier playing in her first major tournament on the tour, upset sixth-seeded Katerina Maleeva, 7-6 (7-5), 7-6 (7-3), yesterday in the first round of the $400,000 United States Women's Hardcourt Championships in Stratton Mountain, Vt.
Lettiere had to win three qualifying matches to get into her first Women's Tennis Association tour event.
Against Maleeva, she managed to beat the world's 32d-ranked player. (AP)


Equitable Resources Inc.(EQT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ground Round Restaurants Inc.(GRXR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Errors Ruin Night for Maddux and Braves
Greg Maddux is, by far, the most proficient and unhittable pitcher in the major leagues.
The Atlanta starter took an earned run average of 1.71, by far the best in the major leagues, into a game against Montreal tonight.
In the year of run-amok offense, only one pitcher had an e.r.a. within a run of Maddux (David Cone of Kansas City, at 2.69).


Low Profits Push Dow Down 6.16
Stock traders, having spent much of the year worrying about an inflation that has yet to appear, had a more immediate concern yesterday: souring corporate earnings.
It also did not help the market that bond prices fell and that the dollar declined against most leading currencies.


Kerr-McGee Corp.(KMG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Borough Plan for New York Schools Is Flawed
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has received a New York school governance plan from a special adviser (news analysis, July 14).
Two parts of the report are excellent but a crucial part, the battle plan, is weak.


Interface Inc.(IFSIA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Refuge From Rwanda's Deadly Storm
By the time they took refuge here from the pestilence and death of Rwanda, Japhet Mwizerwa and his family had been driven from their home at gunpoint, penned inside a soccer stadium with other refugees for days and separated from a 19-year-old son.
"There are so many bad memories," said Mr.
Mwizerwa's wife, Alphonsine, who has no idea what has become of her missing son, Inocent.
"The memories keep coming back, and we must be put them behind us. We have prayed and prayed to put them behind us."


How a Dollar Coin Hurts Ordinary Folks; Gilding Susan B.
To the Editor:
Re "Change for a Dollar" (editorial, July 15): The quickest, cheapest way to a dollar coin is to "gold"-plate the Susan B. Anthony dollar.
Our coins need not resemble silver: witness the penny.
I hope we are not paying storage fees for the Anthony dollar.
WILLIAM E. FINNIGAN  Cornwall-on-Hudson, N.Y., July 15, 1994


GATX Corp.(GMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  FEARS SURROUND RWANDANS  Rwandan refugees in camps over the border in Zaire are afraid to stay because of the cholera epidemic and afraid to return to face enemies at home, and relief agencies seem equally confused.
A1  Thousands of children alone are among Rwandan refugees.
A10


From 'Miracle' to Custody Struggle
Three and a half years ago, a stocky suburban firefighter and his wife, a paralegal, brought home a "miracle," they say -- a baby boy who had been given up for adoption by his mother only days earlier.
The couple, who already had a small son of their own, were thrilled.
"The way we've always looked at it," the firefighter said the other day, "is we have two sons, and God just gave us our sons, our miracles, in two different ways."


FIserv Inc.(FISV,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Russia Agrees to Full Withdrawal Of Troops in Estonia by Aug. 31
Moving to end one of the most heated disputes still festering between Russia and a former Soviet republic, Moscow formally agreed today to withdraw its remaining 2,000 troops from Estonia by Aug. 31.
After months of stalled talks, President Lennart Meri of Estonia and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia compromised on a key stumbling block, the fate of the 10,000 former Soviet officers who are living in retirement in Estonia.


At Rockefeller U. Lab, a Death-Threat Mystery
A disgruntled scientist orchestrated a bizarre series of minor acts of sabotage last month at Rockefeller University and wrote threatening letters about two colleagues, apparently out of "professional jealousy," a police official said yesterday.
No one has been charged, though the police say they think they know who put a potentially deadly chemical in some sugar set out for coffee breaks, started a fire in a closet and wrote letters containing death threats against two molecular biologists.


In America; Blacks' Problems, Seen Plain
The speech was delivered in Indianapolis without a lot of flamboyant rhetoric.
It spoke the truth, unadorned, without crude appeals to prejudice.
It was courageous, intelligent and important.
Hugh P. Price, the new president of the National Urban League, said it was time for a new and more realistic approach to the problems plaguing African-Americans.
He warned: "We must not let ourselves, and especially our children, fall into the paranoid trap of thinking that racism accounts for all that plagues us. The global realignment of work and wealth is, if anything, the bigger culprit."


Martin Marietta Corp.(ML,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Off the Menu
Montrachet Chef Moves On
There's an old saw that goes, "All rumors are true -- eventually." And that applies to the persistent one that Debra Ponzek, one of New York's few prominent women chefs, was leaving Montrachet.
Last week, Drew Nieporent, the owner of the restaurant, finally confirmed that Ms.
Ponzek was no longer the executive chef and had been gradually reducing her workload at the restaurant.
Even though she has moved to Milford, Conn., she is still working as a consultant with Myriad Restaurants, Mr.
Nieporent's company.
She said last week that she wanted to take time off to write a book and perhaps try her hand at other aspects of the food business, like retailing.
"I'm not ruling out restaurant work in the future," she said.
"And opening my own restaurant is not out of the question."


Carmike Cinemas Inc.(CKE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tanker Truck Blast Leaves Homes Afire
With a white-hot flash, a roar and a ball of flame that set a half-dozen residential buildings burning like so much tinder, a tanker truck exploded on the Cross-Westchester Expressway in northwest White Plains early this morning.
At least 20 people were injured, according to officials at three local hospitals.
One victim, a pregnant woman, was critically burned, said Barry D. Bowman, a spokesman for Westchester County Medical Center, which has the region's burn center, and which took seven of the injured.


Great Cooks: Susan Spicer; Bold Flavor for Sultry Days
SUSAN SPICER, tanned, trim and wearing a red bandana and a resolute smile, was not having a stellar day.
Ms.
Spicer, a highly acclaimed chef from New Orleans, had come to New York recently to prepare a four-course dinner at Pierre Franey's house on eastern Long Island.


Wine Talk
SUMMER is a time to cast off inhibitions, break with routines and do daring things.
Learn to wind-surf, study Japanese, wear a loud tie.
Get out of the rut.
There is a wine-drinking rut, too.
For most of us, it's cabernet, merlot and chardonnay, with an occasional foray into Beaujolais, even though hundreds -- probably thousands -- of wines are out there.
Isn't it time to push the envelope and discover some new ones?


Browning-Ferris Industries Inc.(BFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Proposal Urges an End to Straitjacket Use
New York State's Office of Mental Health yesterday proposed ending the use of straitjackets in its mental hospitals next year under new guidelines that seek to minimize the use of physical restraints and seclusion in treating patients.
The recommendations come after a two-year investigation that was prompted by the deaths of 18 patients who were being restrained or who were in unsupervised seclusion from 1988 to 1992.


Freeport-McMoRan Resource Partners L.P.  (FRP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Back Home, Brogna Is Man of the Year
The patrons started filing in shortly after 6 A.M., which is when Joe Ro's coffee shop opens its doors.
Joe Ro's is the most popular morning place in Watertown, Conn., a joint where a cast of regulars stops by every morning for a little coffee and the local news.
It is also something of a mini-shrine to Rico Brogna, the Mets' rookie first baseman, who is fast becoming the most famous resident of Watertown.
His picture is on the wall in several places, along with a handful of baseball cards and local newspaper clippings, and the owner of the place, Joe Romano, has a daily Brogna update for those who stop by.


Woman's Work (Unpaid) Stirs a Deputy's Wife
When Caryn Suhr's husband became a deputy with the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department 11 years ago, she never thought she would end up cleaning jail cells.
But Mrs.
Suhr did that and more during the two and a half years that she and her husband, Mark, lived at the department's tiny substation here in Gorman, a remote mountain town 80 miles north of Los Angeles.
And she did it free of charge.
She also answered telephones, monitored police radio calls and played hostess to wayworn tourists, just as the wives of other deputies at the Gorman substation had done for years.


Personal Health; Reasons for garlic's benefits are uncovered.
WHILE the producers of garlic supplements battle over whether consumers are likely to benefit more from a powder or an extract of the "stinking bulb," scientists are zeroing in on exactly what components of garlic might be medically helpful and how the substances work.
The good news is that whatever good garlic does, the effects do not depend upon its culinarily prized but socially scorned scent.


Case Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Foster Wheeler (FWC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Bear Stearns (MCP,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Across the Spectrum Of Dance in France
In July it seems there are more tourists than Parisians in Paris, American tourists especially.
So it was appropriate that the San Francisco Ballet was booked as the final dance attraction at the premier dance forum in town, the grand and storied Palais Garnier opera house.
The San Franciscans finished their engagement on July 10, and on July 17 the Palais Garnier was closed for renovation and won't reopen until February 1996.
On the surface this is a typically eclectic American company, with a diversity of style reflected in its two programs here.
Still, George Balanchine remains the father of classical dance in the United States, and the Balanchine connection in San Francisco is especially strong, with two longtime New York City Ballet dancers as artistic directors: Lew Christensen, who died in late 1984, and Helgi Tomasson.


Interface Inc.(IFSIA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Kemet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


An Epidemic's Orphans Suffer at 'Gate of Hell'
In the doorway of a shacklike building that has been converted to a cholera ward on the grounds of an orphanage, Dr.
Nimet Lallani stood bargaining today for the life of one of her frail, emaciated patients.
"Can you take one more, just one more, please?" Dr.
Lallani appealed to an Israeli medical team that arrived this morning with an offer to take charge of some of the hundreds of children who are under her care.


Moises Alou Key to Expos' Success
Tommy Harper, 15 years a major league player and 16 years a coach in the majors and minors, knows a lot about baseball.
Most of all, he knows enough to admit he doesn't know everything.
So it is that Harper, the hitting instructor for the Montreal Expos, picks the brains of the game's finest whenever and where ever he can.


England Aghast Over a Really Dirty Play
Calamity has come in cricket, England's national game synonymous with the ethos of fair play.
MIKE ATHERTON is being called upon to resign as England's captain only a year after he was hailed as the bright new hope following a string of humiliating international defeats.
Atherton, 26, is accused of tampering with the ball to make it move erratically.
He denies that, but admits he concealed the full facts, and a pocketful of dirt, when questioned by a referee.


Elias Aims to Be a Business Giant
It often seems that college football players from Florida State, Alabama, Nebraska and Oklahoma head for the pros and players from the Ivy League head for corporate corridors and board rooms.
So what is Keith Elias, a nice young man from Princeton, doing here at the Giants' training camp, trying to make the team as a free-agent running back?
"Everything inside me wants to play football," Elias said between today's two practices.
"I'm different. Wherever I go, I find I don't fit in the mainstream. I look at things different from other people. I do things my own way. That makes me sound like a rugged individualist, but I'm not. I'm a mass of contradictions. If you look at it my way, it makes sense."


Quoting Bible and Koran, Two Old Foes Pledge Peace
With words filled with emotion and history, King Hussein of Jordan and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel brought their message of reconciliation to Capitol Hill this morning, reaffirming before Congress their commitment to make peace in the Middle East.
"Mr. Speaker, the state of war between Israel and Jordan is over," King Hussein announced to a minute-long standing ovation in the Capitol.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST ESCAPE FROM ABUSE, BUT NOT NEGLECT
When 5-year-old Adam was fatally beaten by his father, the boy's short life and brutal death became a national symbol of New York City's failure to protect children from abuse in their own homes.
Adam's parents went to prison and his brothers were scattered to foster homes -- where, more than four years later, they remain.
Advocates for children say the brothers' long stay in foster care is symptomatic of another problem: the child welfare system's failure to find stable, permanent homes for children once the abuse stops.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Banta Corp.(BNTA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Not long ago I attended a "Favorite Stories" program given by the Membership Department of the American Museum of Natural History that dealt with the origins and evolution of popular stories and folk tales like "Cinderella."
The evening, of course, evoked much nostalgia.
But a conversation I overheard before the program began led me to reflect on how lacking in sophistication my childhood in Brooklyn some 50-plus years ago had been.


A. C. Green Re-signs With the Suns
The Phoenix Suns signed forward A. C. GREEN to a five-year contract yesterday and also announced that the rookie guard WESLEY PERSON has agreed to a four-year contract.
Green, 30, had been weighing the possibility of exercising an escape clause in the five-year, $15 million contract he signed with Phoenix last summer after eight seasons with the Los Angeles Lakers.
Last season, Green posted the best numbers of his nine-year National Basketball Association career by averaging 14.7 points and 9.2 rebounds per game.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ILLENOVA GENERATING INC., Decatur, Ill., agreed to buy 50 percent of North American Energy Services Issaquah, Wash., an energy services company, for an undisclosed amount.
MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITIES INC., Chicago, a real estate investment trust, completed the acquisition of Dulles Meadows, Chantilly, Va., a 500-site manufactured housing community, for $21.9 million.


Nabisco Earnings Off 40%; The Optimists See a Split-Up
Despite a 40 percent drop in net earnings and flat revenue in its second quarter, RJR Nabisco reported continued expansion in its international tobacco business and strong performance by its food business yesterday, prompting speculation anew on the likelihood of separating the tobacco and food operations.
Earnings were $46 million, or 1 cent a share, down from $77 million, or 6 cents a share, in the second quarter last year for RJR Nabisco, the makers of Winston cigarettes, Oreo cookies, Life Savers and Planters nuts.


Coastal Corp.(CGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Just Look Around Stadium: It's Fans!
It was Peter Liebeskind's grandfather who started taking him to baseball games, which helps explain why Liebeskind and his 5-year-old son Sam were among the crowd of some 35,000 at Yankee Stadium last night, proving that fans will brave the Bronx to support a winning team.
With the Yankees returning from a 10-1 West Coast trip comfortably in first place in the American League East, Jimmy Key on the mound and the Boston Red Sox in the visitors' dugout, it would have taken more than talk of crime and parking problems to keep the throng away from the Stadium.


Wicor Inc.(WIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Accounts
The American Restaurant Group, Newport Beach, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill Advertising, San Francisco, to handle advertising for its Grandy's home-style fast-food chain, previously in-house.
Goldberg Moser, which already handles advertising for its sibling Stuart Anderson's Black Angus and Cattle Company restaurants, was awarded the account without a review.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $4 million. *
Sunsystems of Systems Union Inc., White Plains, to Farago Advertising, New York, to handle the financial management software account, previously at Wurtzel Advertising, New York.
Billings were estimated at $1.5 million.


Forget Assad for Now
The River Jordan no longer runs chilly and cold, and so American diplomats turn their eyes to Syria.
Well, they should turn them back.
President Hafez al-Assad, the failing despot in Damascus, has almost nothing, except the grudging and late recognition of Israel, to offer.
His gamesmanship is no longer fascinating.
His indifference to the moral, historical and sentimental motives of political action is tiresome.


French Premier to Visit Africa To Show Continued Commitment
With France confident that Rwanda's refugee crisis justified its military intervention there last month, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur leaves for Africa Wednesday on a trip aimed at underlining to its former African colonies that France remains their best friend in the West.
French Government officials said Mr.
Balladur's visit to Senegal, the Ivory Coast and Gabon was not prompted by the Rwandan tragedy.
They said that the Governments of all three "understood" France's reasons for sending 2,500 soldiers to protect refugees fleeing Rwanda's civil war.


Coca-Cola Bottling Co.  (COKE,NMS)


The Contrasts of Clinton, Only a TV Click Apart
Bill Clinton's Presidency has always spun from its reel so fast, with scenes of achievement and grace swiftly eclipsed by scenes of dishevelment and awkwardness.
So it did not seem at all odd today to see both on the screen at once, separated only by the click of a tuner.
There was Mr.
Clinton in the White House between Yitzhak Rabin and King Hussein, basking in his second Middle East diplomatic triumph, hearing Jordan's leader say he was "proud to have you as our partner." And there -- click -- was Mr.
Clinton's counsel, Lloyd N. Cutler, parked before a microphone, telling a House committee investigating Whitewater that Administration officials had done nothing wrong, really, but that they shouldn't have done it.


Melville Corp.(MES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Weapons Cut Won't Affect National Security
To the Editor:
Barry M. Blechman makes some good suggestions about reducing military costs in personnel and the purchasing of components in "The New Military Order" (Op-Ed, July 11).
Such reforms could save billions of tax dollars.
However, his rationale for not proposing to cut actual weapons programs is predictably attributed to "national security."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
ABN-Amro Bank N.V.'s New York branch is selling $200 million of 8.25 percent subordinated notes due in 2009 at 99.786 to yield 8.275 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The callable issue is rated Aa2 by Moody's Investors Service.


Ogilvy &amp; Mathe Selected by Wilson
The Wilson Sporting Goods Company of Chicago said yesterday that it had selected Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago to handle its consolidated global advertising account, with billings estimated at $25 million.
For the last two years, DDB Needham Chicago had handled most of the company's business, working on its tennis and racquet sports business, while Grant/ Jacoby of Chicago had handled the golf business.
Ogilvy Chicago was awarded the account after a two-month review that also included two other finalists: DDB Needham Chicago and Foote, Cone &amp; Belding of Chicago.


Unum Corp.(UNM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coleman Is Exonerated
Prosecutors in Detroit yesterday dismissed a rape complaint against the Nets' Derrick Coleman.
The Wayne County prosecutor, John O'Hair, said at a news conference that DNA testing of semen on the woman and her clothes showed that the semen was not Coleman's.
Blood was taken from Coleman to make the determination.


CDI Corp.(CDI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FIserv Inc.(FISV,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


GATX Corp.(GMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Free Reading in the Park
Anna Deavere Smith and the writers Gloria Naylor and Walter Mosley are to give a free reading from their works tomorrow at 8:30 P.M. at the Central Park Summerstage, midpark at 72d Street.
The reading ends the Spoken Word summer series.
Information: (212) 360-2777.


Haiti Plans Ballot Likely to Yield a Replacement for Aristide
Haiti's de facto military Government began today to organize elections that are likely to result in the selection later this year of a new President to replace the country's exiled chief of state, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Meeting in a mansion that was once a guest house for the dictator Jean-Claude (Baby Doc) Duvalier, the permanent electoral council and political parties held what was described as the first of "a series of exploratory encounters" to discuss "the organization of the upcoming elections." A statement issued by the commission said the agenda for the talks included not only legislative and local elections that are already scheduled, but also the presidential succession.


As Keenan's World Turns: Chapter 2 Is a Doozy
The Mike Keenan Affair is not over even if he is a St. Louis Blue.
Punitive action by National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman on Sunday did not end it.
It continues.


BMC Industries Inc.(BMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mexican Challenger: Bold Words, Pale Presence
Barely two months after he came out of nowhere to mount what many Mexicans considered the most serious challenge to the governing party in 65 years, Diego Fernandez de Cevallos has done something nearly as astonishing.
He has almost disappeared.


RECORDINGS
Slow, Quiet and Sparse, In an Elegiac Mood
In an age of specialization, many bands have staked out extremes.
Low, a trio from Duluth, Minn., that performed last week for the New Music Seminar, sticks to the slow, quiet and sparse.
One of the songs on its first album, "I Could Live in Hope" (Vernon Yard/Virgin), describes a woman who "gets rid of things that don't matter," as Low's arrangements do.
The tap of Mimi Parker's brushes on cymbals and the subdued pulse of John Nichols's bass frame Alan Sparhawk's unhurried, reverberating guitar lines, which sound like surf-rock in amber.
Mr.
Sparhawk and Ms.
Parker sing separately or harmonize without raising their voices, sharing choruses as terse as two words: "I fear." The songs are elegiac, not serene, as crescendoes bring suspense without breaking through Low's enigmatic dolor.
JON PARELES


Carpenter Technology (CRS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Explosions Outside Israeli Embassy and a Jewish Office in London Injure 18
A car bomb exploded near the Israeli Embassy here Tuesday, wounding 13 people and bringing warnings from Israeli officials of an international terrorist campaign by radical Islamic groups opposed to Middle East peace efforts.
The blast occurred at 12:10 P.M. in the Kensington district of London on a gated street where cars must be checked by police officers to enter.


Dolphin Suing N.F.L. Over Civil Rights
When Miami Dolphins linebacker Bryan Cox looks back on a 1993 season that unraveled for him -- he was fined by the National Football League for making an obscene gesture during a game in Buffalo, and by season's end he was depressed and had a drinking problem -- he takes his share of the blame.
"I consider myself a once-a-week drinker," Cox said today after practice at the Dolphins' Nova University training camp, where Miami was preparing for Saturday night's opening exhibition game against the Giants.
"But I started drinking four, five times a week and sometimes staying out all night. Do I blame the league for that? No. That's a weakness I had. I'm responsible for my actions."


Foster Wheeler (FWC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


No Headline
"Going back or staying here, either way we die." WILSON NDABATEZE, a Rwandan refugee in Zaire.  [ A1:3. ]


One Top College's Price Tag: Why So Low, and So High?
The faculty, with one professor for every eight students, offers unparalleled access to eager young scholars.
The research facilities include everything from a 24-inch refracting telescope to a library with three-quarters of a million volumes.
And when collegians need a break, there is always the option of a game of squash or a stroll around the 325 lushly planted acres.
Swarthmore is one of a handful of colleges that offer a superb liberal arts curriculum to a bright and diverse student body.
"It's the Lexus of higher education," William Spock, Swarthmore's vice president for finance, says with pride.


Attacks on Christian Right Amount to Bigotry
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis's "Merchants of Hate" (column, July 15), on the dangers of the Christian right, shows the same intolerance he deplores in the Rev.
Jerry Falwell and Randall Terry.
Mr.
Lewis's few accurate warnings about fundamentalist discrimination against women and gays are outweighed by hysterical statements that conservative Christians and pro-lifers threaten our Constitution.


M.D.C. Holdings Inc.(MDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


How a Dollar Coin Hurts Ordinary Folks; Death Blow to Crime
To the Editor:
Re "Change for a Dollar" (editorial, July 15): Not only is America's currency susceptible to counterfeit, but also paper money is essential for most criminal activities.
If we went to a cashless society, we would deal a death blow to crime.
No drug sale could take place without paper money.
The carjacker, the robber and the burglar would also be severely hampered without access to $100 bills.


Freeport-McMoRan Resource Partners L.P.  (FRP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bombing in London Hits Israeli Embassy
A car bomb exploded in front of the Israeli Embassy in London yesterday on a street with a security gate, injuring 13 people.
In Washington, where they spoke to Congress, Prime Minister Rabin and King Hussein denounced the attack as well as the bombing last week of a building housing Jewish organizations in Argentina.


Serbs Threaten to Resume Sarajevo Blockade
Serbian nationalist leaders warned today that they would begin stopping all civilian traffic on the main overland route into Sarajevo on Wednesday, a move that would effectively reimpose a blockade on the Bosnian capital lifted on March 23.
The warning appeared to be a defiant Bosnian Serb response to international pressure to reverse their rejection of an international peace plan for ending the Bosnian war.


Disney Theme Park Slights a Generation
To the Editor:
If the Walt Disney Company builds an amusement park near the Bull Run battlefield in northern Virginia, it will ruin the chances of my generation to feel an important part of American history.
Don't they realize that men died on these grounds?
Now they are making it look like fun.


Integrated Health Services Inc.(IHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Senate Secrecy and Secretary Dalton
When the White House announced the choice of John Dalton as Secretary of the Navy last year, it publicly praised his management skills while concealing his leadership role in a savings and loan failure that cost taxpayers more than $100 million.
The Senate confirmed him unanimously, without debate, after the Armed Services Committee also praised him publicly -- while burying a major business failing and charges by Federal regulators that he had shown "gross negligence" in running the bankrupt Seguin Savings Association in Texas.
That is a shabby performance by both branches.
The White House had a duty to disclose its nominee's business and regulatory problems.
The Senate, which is supposed to monitor the executive branch and inform the public through the confirmation process, kept this important information not only from the public but from most senators as well.


Qtr to June 30 1994 1993


People
*
Michael DePirro was named to the new position of senior vice president and associate creative director at FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York.
He previously held a similar position at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York. *
Peter Horan and Mike Rogers, vice presidents of International Data Group's Marketing Services division, Boston, were promoted to president and executive vice president, respectively.
They succeed Kelly Conlin and Val Landi, who were previously promoted to vice presidents of the parent corporation.


Hernandez Fills in for Mets' Broadcasters
KEITH HERNANDEZ, the former Mets' All-Star first baseman, will do color commentary for the Mets-Pirates games on WWOR-TV Saturday night and Sunday afternoon while the regular broadcasters, RALPH KINER and TIM McCARVER, attend the Hall of Fame ceremonies at Cooperstown, N.Y.


Corrections
A listing of relief groups yesterday, with articles about the disaster in Rwanda, misstated the ZIP code for the Salvation Army, Rwanda Relief.
Its correct address is 615 Slaters Lane, Alexandria, Va. 22313.


Queens Residents Criticize Plan for an Airport Rail Link
A proposed $2.5 billion rail link between Manhattan and the two New York City airports -- the largest public transit project in 50 years -- drew sharp criticism yesterday from residents of several Queens neighborhoods that the automated line would traverse.
Many said the system would damage their areas while benefiting only Manhattan residents.
"They're building this monster for business executives," said Patricia Dolan, president of a homeowners' association in Kew Gardens Hills, who spoke yesterday at the first public hearing on the project's environmental impact statement.
"But the noise and shadows and the filth will be devastating to neighborhoods like mine."


Ace Limited (ACL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Baxter International (BAX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Loral Corp.(LOR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cleveland-Cliffs (CLF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Just Look Around Stadium: It's Fans!
It was Peter Liebeskind's grandfather who started taking him to baseball games, which helps explain why Liebeskind and his 5-year-old son Sam were among the crowd of some 35,000 at Yankee Stadium last night, proving that fans will brave the Bronx to support a winning team.
With the Yankees returning from a 10-1 West Coast trip comfortably in first place in the American League East, Jimmy Key on the mound and the Boston Red Sox in the visitors' dugout, it would have taken more than talk of crime and parking problems to keep the throng away from the Stadium.


One Year Later, Jets' Jones Is Still No. 1
These days, when Marvin Jones leaves the Jets' practice field he doesn't head back to his Point Lookout home to watch television.
He had enough of that.
Maybe more than a person could stand.
How many afternoons can be spent watching the plethora of dysfunctional people baring their secrets?


Interpublic Group of Cos.  (IPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Escaping Abuse but Not Neglect, Children Languish in Foster Care
The 6-year-old boy asked the prosecutor, Deborah Seidenberg, to turn off the lights.
Then, she said, he climbed into her lap and told how his father, Rufus Chisolm, fatally beat his 5-year-old brother, Adam.
The thrashing started when the boys' father caught Adam horsing around with his brothers on the bed.
Adam fled to the kitchen, where his mother, Michelle Mann, told the father that Adam had broken a household rule by eating a piece of her Entenmann's cake.


Stratus Computer Inc.(SRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 22
July 15
July 23
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.5
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.5
3.3
3.2
Gasoline stocks
212.3
213.0
215.2
Distillate stocks
126.4
124.9
117.7
Crude imports, daily
7.4
8.6
6.2
Product imports, daily
3.0
1.6
1.6
Crude stocks
332.0
320.0
355.3
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
94.8
95.7
95.8
Source: American Petroleum Institute


A Kitchen Where Pots Boil and Dramas Bubble Over
The 18th-century farmhouse that belongs to Eric Karpeles and Michael Sell seems a postcard of bucolic tranquillity, sitting among rolling pastures and surrounded by a garden and trees offering shade from a blistering sun.
The scene inside the kitchen is another matter.


Wrong Drugs Given To 1 in 4 of Elderly
CLOSE to a quarter of all Americans 65 or older were given prescriptions for drugs that they should almost never take, a study has found.
Some of the drugs can produce amnesia and confusion, others can cause serious side effects like heart problems or respiratory failure.
And, the investigators said, there is no need to prescribe these drugs to older people, either because safer alternatives are available or because the drugs are simply not needed.


Powersoft
Shares of the Powersoft Corporation, a business-software developer based in Concord, Mass., fell 15 percent yesterday when the company's management warned of a possible slowdown in the third quarter.
Many companies have warned of a slowing of purchases of software and hardware, and have been penalized for their candor by Wall Street.


Avery Dennison Corp.(AVY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Jason Inc.(JASN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


J. R. Johnstone, 85, Chemical Executive
James R. Johnstone, a former vice chairman of the Union Carbide Corporation, died on Saturday at his home in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
He was 85.
Born in Lynn, Mass., Mr.
Johnstone received an electrical-engineering degree from the University of Illinois.
He retired in 1974 after 37 years with Union Carbide.
For much of his career, he was associated with its Carbon Products Division in Minneapolis, Salt Lake City and San Francisco.


Newark's Cheated Schoolchildren
In a five-volume report released last week, the New Jersey State Education Department charged Newark school officials with educational neglect and indifference.
The department said it would move to take control of Newark's schools and gave city officials 20 days to defend themselves in court.
Newark vows a fight, and indeed has offered its own set of remedies.
But there is ample evidence to support aggressive state intervention to save its largest school district.
Newark schools have consistently failed to meet state certification standards instituted in 1984.
A 1988 law allowed the state to take over failing schools, which it has already done in Jersey City and Paterson, the second- and third-largest districts.
But while the state has conducted extensive investigations and applied pressure in the past, Newark schools have not improved.


In School; A gay teacher finds that coming out was difficult, but not as cataclysmic as she had feared.
"Alta's a dyke." Those words, scribbled in the margin of a textbook, sent a chill of fear up Alta Kavanaugh's spine three years ago.
So she slammed the book shut and said nothing to her students or colleagues at Alessandro High School here.
The same words, a few months back, were scratched on a picnic table in the school's sun-baked courtyard.


Bids Soar At Auction By F.C.C.
By the time the Federal Communications Commission's first auction of the public airwaves adjourned for the day today, bids had more than doubled from Monday's surprisingly steep opening round and were still climbing.
"It's a slugfest," said David H. Brock of Metrocall, a paging company in Alexandria, Va., that was not participating in the bidding.
The sale covered 10 nationwide licenses, which are expected to be used for advanced two-way paging services.
"From what I've seen so far, several companies must have budgeted $150 million, $200 million for this auction," Mr.
Brock said.


Times Co. Profit Up 53% As Ad Volume Increases
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it earned $34.3 million in the second quarter, up 53.2 percent from profits of $22.4 million a year earlier.
Most of the increased profit resulted from increases in advertising and circulation revenue at The New York Times and the company's regional newspaper group, as well as improvements in its magazine and broadcasting groups, the company said.
Total revenues for the company rose 31.4 percent, to $635.5 million, from $483.6 million, mainly because of the inclusion of The Boston Globe, which was acquired last October.


Concentrations of Lead in Blood Drop Steeply
As lead additives were phased out of gasoline between 1976 and 1991, the amount of lead circulating in the bloodstreams of Americans dropped by 78 percent, a government study has found.
Public health experts hailed the finding as a major success story.
But another study based on the same data concluded that hundreds of thousands of poor inner-city children were still being exposed to dangerous amounts of lead.


Athletes Honored for Humanitarian Work
Arthur Ashe, the tennis great, CHI CHI RODRIGUEZ, the golfer, and RAFER JOHNSON, the Olympic decathlete, have been selected as the first three inductees into the World Sports Humanitarian Hall of Fame.
The hall, not yet built, will hold its induction ceremony on Nov. 2 in Boise, Idaho.


Northern Telecom Ltd.(NT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Contrasts of Clinton, Only a TV Click Apart
Bill Clinton's Presidency has always spun from its reel so fast, with scenes of achievement and grace swiftly eclipsed by scenes of dishevelment and awkwardness.
So it did not seem at all odd today to see both on the screen at once, separated only by the click of a tuner.
There was Mr.
Clinton in the White House between Yitzhak Rabin and King Hussein, basking in his second Middle East diplomatic triumph, hearing Jordan's leader say he was "proud to have you as our partner." And there -- click -- was Mr.
Clinton's counsel, Lloyd N. Cutler, parked before a microphone, telling a House committee investigating Whitewater that Administration officials had done nothing wrong, really, but that they shouldn't have done it.


Washington Post Co.(WPO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Senate Passes 5% Arts Cut
The Senate approved by voice vote yesterday an appropriations bill that would cut the budget of the National Endowment for the Arts by 5 percent, or $8.5 million, in the 1995 fiscal year.
The endowment's budget for the 1994 fiscal year is $170 million.
Because the House version of the bill calls for a 2 percent cut, a House-Senate conference committee must produce a compromise budget.


Two More Favorites Are Saratoga Victims
The jinx of Saratoga claimed a couple of new victims today, the prize mares Elizabeth Bay and You'd be Surprised, who were both favored at 8-5 to outrun the hex and restore some sanity to the racing season in the Adirondacks.
But they didn't.
Elizabeth Bay stalked the lead for almost a mile and then disappeared into eighth and last place.
And You'd be Surprised took the lead in the homestretch but lost it when a filly named Weekend Madness beat her to the wire by three-quarters of a length to win the $150,000 Saratoga Budweiser Breeders' Cup Handicap.


Where Fame Exceeds Fortune
The companies bidding on the set of properties known as Madison Square Garden are competing for a glamorous group of assets that includes one of the world's most famous arenas, a cable television sports network, an N.B.A. finalist basketball team and a Stanley Cup-winning hockey team.
What the package does not include is a lot of profits.
Consider, for example, that the New York Rangers hockey team lost $3.7 million last year and, as recently as May, was expected to lose $7 million this year.
The Rangers are now expected to edge into the black for 1994 -- but only as a result of the extra ticket sales and additional cable television revenue from the playoff season that culminated in June with the Rangers' first Stanley Cup in 54 years.


New Regatta Reminiscent Of an Old Competition
It was like a reunion here today of former America's Cup scions.
From Peter de Savary of England to Gianfranco Alberini of Italy, names evoking yachting's elite past came here to learn more about a plan for a new international regatta reminiscent of the old America's Cup days.
Officers of the New York Yacht Club staged a news conference at the Marriott Hotel to offer more details of their announcement Sunday of the new International Cup.


A Russian Pyramid Collapses, Burying Belief in Capitalism
Driven by equal doses of panic and greed, thousands of investors swarmed stock exchanges, offices and the headquarters of Russia's largest stock fund today, desperately trying to sell the company's shares, which have lost half their value in less than a day.
With at least five million shareholders, the company, MMM, had become the most visible, and aggressive symbol of the rowdy new capitalism here, churning profits seemingly out of air, and turning everyone from penny- pinching grandmothers to college kids into stock market addicts.


Chinese Repression: Still an Issue
Last year President Clinton found a constructive way to heal the rift between Congress and the White House on China, linking Beijing's trade privileges to modest improvements in its human rights performance.
But this year, after an aggressive business lobbying campaign, the President junked his own solution and extended trade privileges unconditionally.
Now it is up to Congress to try to repair the damage.
It can begin by passing legislation that would re-link tariff rates for certain Chinese goods to minimum human rights standards.
The annual struggles over China's tariffs stem from the outrage many Americans felt when Deng Xiaoping ordered army tanks to mow down students demonstrating for democracy in Beijing's Tiananmen Square five years ago.
But the issue is no longer just Tiananmen.
That one barbaric act unmasked the true nature of a regime that was known abroad mainly for its economic reforms.


Journal; The Wrong Battles
United States troops finally started trickling into Goma, Zaire, last week, well after the wrenching images and stories of Rwandan refugees had saturated the American conscience.
But they were hardly the most conspicuous representatives of our armed forces to make the news over the weekend.
In Saturday's paper alone, you could read about Sgt. 1st Class Ervin M. Graves of Fort Bragg, N.C., who had just received a life sentence for the murder and attempted rape of Lisa Bryant, a 21-year-old second lieutenant whose promising resume included an honors degree from Princeton.
Or about the Citadel, the state-supported military academy in Charleston, S.C., which had just been ordered in another courtroom to admit a woman, Shannon Faulkner, to its Corps of Cadets, and in the process was berated by a Federal judge for squandering public funds in its doomed defense of sexual discrimination.


Airgas Inc.(ARG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Little Faith Never Hurt a Team's Chances


METRO DIGEST
EXPLOSION ON I-287: AMID WRECKAGE, LOOKING FOR ANSWERS
A tractor-trailer slammed into a bridge over an expressway in White Plains, hurling a blazing propane tank through the air like an out-of-control missile and setting off fires that injured 23 people as flames leaped from house to house.
A1.
Billy Covert was upstairs in his family's house when the shutters began to shake, his sister screamed and a flaming propane tank rocketed into their den downstairs.
B6.
The tanker truck's driver had a troubled record, including two license suspensions.
B6.


Abbey Healthcare Group Inc.(ABBY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Coleman Is Cleared but Remains Angry
Derrick Coleman is not satisfied with being cleared of the charge filed against him by a woman who said that he raped her in a Detroit hotel room on July 14.
He said today that he planned to pursue the process of exoneration as publicly as the woman who accused him highlighted the process of accusation.
"She will be made an example of," Coleman said after Tuesday night's Dream Team II exhibition game.


Ford's Profit In 2d Quarter Set a Record
The Ford Motor Company today reported all-time record quarterly earnings of $1.71 billion for the three months ending in June, as strong demand more than doubled the average profit the company made on each car and truck it sold.
Ford attributed the results, which amounted to $1.63 a share, to continued robust sales in the United States and a stronger than expected recovery in the European auto market.


Partisan Jockeying on Health Care Becomes Intense
President Clinton complained today that Republicans moved "further away" from a compromise on health care each time he reached out to them.
Republicans, meanwhile, complained that Democratic leaders were drafting their health care bills in secret and demanded a week to review them before beginning floor debate.
It was a day of partisan positioning and private salesmanship as Democratic leaders neared the end of their efforts to turn measures passed by committees into bills for consideration in the House and Senate.


American Business Products Inc.(ABP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fallon Selected By Black &amp; Decker
The Black &amp; Decker Corporation of Towson, Md., said yesterday that it had selected Fallon McElligott of Minneapolis to handle its United States power tools account.
The account had been at Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago for the last seven years until the company and the agency agreed in May to part ways.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $15 million.
Fallon was awarded the account after a two-month review that included BBDO, Chiat/Day and McCann-Erickson, all of New York, and Mullen Advertising of Wenhem, Mass.
A new campaign is expected to begin in November.


Giuliani Wisely Bides Time on Endorsement in Governor's Race
To the Editor:
Certain members in the leadership of New York's Republican Party are "angered" with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani over his seeming reluctance to endorse the party's choice for governor, George Pataki.
They prefer that the Mayor, one of the highest profile elected Republicans in the state, quickly fall in with the rank and file and throw his considerable political weight behind Mr.
Pataki.
While this may seem expedient to some, it is not necessarily so for Mr.
Giuliani, for New York City or, yes, even the New York Republican Party.


Boston Scientific Corp.(BSX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yankees Will Finish One, Start Another
Melido Perez, Mike Stanley and Steve Howe seemed to have this nice, unspoken agreement among themselves, an agreement spoiled only by a downpour at Yankee Stadium last night and an eighth-inning mental error by Mike Gallego.
As they did in a 1-0 victory over Oakland one week ago, Perez would pitch around trouble, Stanley would support him with power and Howe would again entrench himself as a formidable stopper.


HOUSE APPROVES DESERT PRESERVE
After two months of wrangling and fitful debate, the House voted today to designate 9.4 million acres of California desert as national park land and preserves.
Since the Senate has already passed a similar bill, the House action virtually guarantees that the legislation will become law later this year.
The California Desert Protection Act, which passed 298 to 128, is the largest land-conservation measure approved since the 1980 Alaska Lands Act.
The desert region includes 90 mountain ranges, sand dunes as high as 700 feet, Indian rock paintings, the world's largest forest of cactus-like Joshua trees, the only known dinosaur tracks in California and more than 2,000 species of plants and wildlife, including the endangered desert tortoise.


Bagwell Continues Piling On the R.B.I.
Astros 7, Reds 1
Jeff Bagwell hit his 34th homer and singled home the go-ahead run in the 12th inning yesterday, leading the visiting Houston Astros to a 7-1 victory over the Cincinnati Reds that forged a first-place tie in the National League Central.
Bagwell's 12th-inning single off Scott Service (0-2) -- his major league-leading 103d run batted in in 102 games -- started a six-run rally that let the Astros catch the Reds for the first time since June 15.
The teams are scheduled to finish the season with three games in Houston.


Executive Changes
DELPHI INTERNET SERVICES, Cambridge, Mass., a unit of the News Corporation, appointed Dr.
Alan Baratz chief executive.


Grumman Buildings for L.I. Insurer
In a deal in which both sides benefit, the Robert Plan Corporation said yesterday that it had signed a $50 million, 20-year agreement with the Northrop Grumman Corporation to lease two former Grumman buildings on Long Island.
The transaction, which covers 237,000 square feet of property in Oyster Bay, is the largest commercial real estate transaction on Long Island this year, according to the Edward S. Gordon Company, Robert Plan's real estate broker.


Dr. John V. Taggart, 77, Is Dead; Known for Research on Kidneys
Dr.
John Victor Taggart 3d, who headed the Physiology Department at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons for 20 years and was known for his cellular research on the kidneys, died on Saturday at the Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 77 and lived in Bedford, N.Y.
The cause was heart failure after a long illness, said a spokesman for the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, where he taught and studied.


Italian League Team 'Rents' United States' Lalas for Year
ALEXI LALAS, the defender with the fiery red hair and goatee, was loaned to Padova of the Italian League yesterday for one year by the United States Soccer Federation.
Lalas, a 24-year-old from Detroit, will become the first American-born player in the Italian League, the most competitive and highly paid soccer circuit in the world.
He also had offers from Coventry City in England's Premier League and Bochum in Germany's Bundesliga.


No Headline
"You don't see the obviously mentally ill patient here. It's more your run-of-the-mill bourgeois neurotic." -- ANDREW L. TERNER, an art dealer in Greenwich Village.  [ B2:6. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  U.S.
PLANS BIG BASE IN KIGALI  The United States is preparing to send troops to help establish a big base in Rwanda to bolster the relief effort there.
Military officials said 2,000 to 3,000 troops could be sent into the country, in addition to the 4,000 that Washington has said would join relief efforts outside Rwanda.
A1


Tarpley to Stay in Greece
The former Dallas Mavericks star ROY TARPLEY, his application for reinstatement to the N.B.A. still pending, signed a one-year contract to remain with the Greek champion Olympiakos of Piraeus yesterday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The Export-Import Bank of Japan is negotiating a huge, politically sensitive loan to the Ford Motor Company.
The low-rate loan, which could run to as much as $300 million, would help Ford manufacture right-hand drive autos for export to Japan.  [ D1. ]
Ford reported all-time record quarterly earnings of $1.71 billion for the three months ending in June, as strong demand more than doubled the average profit the company made on every car and truck it sold.  [ D1. ]


CHRONICLE
WILLIAM KENNEDY SMITH settled out of court on Tuesday with a bouncer who had accused him of assault, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Dr.
Smith pleaded no contest to assault and battery charges in November in Arlington County (Va.) District Court, admitting that he had punched the bouncer, Henry C. Cochran, in the face.
Dr.
Smith said he had mistaken him for the friend of a man who had taunted him in a bar earlier in the evening.
The Arlington County General District Court sentenced Dr.
Smith to a year of unsupervised probation and 100 hours of community service.


A District for Mining Of Manhattan's Minds; Psychiatrists Are at Home in the Village
In pursuit of a graduate degree in psychology, Catherine DiNardo takes courses at the New School for Social Research.
But she is getting another kind of education in her chosen field by tending bar at the Rose Cafe, at the corner of Fifth Avenue and Ninth Street in Greenwich Village.
That's because many of the people ordering martinis are psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical social workers and the patients who see them, and their conversation often flits from the best-selling "Listening to Prozac" to various psychoanalytic theories.
"When I first started working here, it was like, 'Oh my God, another one,' " she said.


A Private Gardener Tending Public Idylls
IT'S 6 A.M. on a sultry summer day.
Most residents of Sutton Place have yet to venture forth.
So only the doorkeepers and dog-walkers see Bob Shaver with hose, rake and broom enter the triangular park overlooking the East River where 54th Street ends.
Mr. Shaver's daily routine -- in four gardens -- has begun.


Simpson Is Sued by the Mother of Slain Man
The mother of Ronald L. Goldman, the man stabbed to death along with Nicole Brown Simpson last month, has filed a wrongful-death suit accusing O. J. Simpson of "willfully, wantonly and maliciously" killing him, her lawyer said today.
The suit, which seeks unspecified general and punitive damages from Mr.
Simpson, was filed last month in Los Angeles County Superior Court in Santa Monica, where a judge has scheduled a hearing for March 15.


Burial Teams For Refugees Needed Now
With thousands of unburied bodies threatening to worsen a cholera epidemic, the United Nations made an urgent appeal today to the United States to take over the grisly task of mass burials.
"Anyone who just drives along the road or goes to the camps can see that the situation is very, very critical," said Raymond Wilkinson, spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
"If those bodies stay out for very long, then you are going to get bloated bodies and you're going to get disease."


Army Will Allow Women In 32,000 Combat Posts
The Army is planning to open to women more than 32,000 combat positions that are now closed to them, but strong protests from senior generals forced the civilian Army Secretary to retreat from a much more ambitious plan.
The new plan will allow women into some units that were previously off limits, but will keep them in rear headquarters in many units and restrict their ability to compete for assignments that are necessary to rise to the Army's top ranks.


Blast Engulfed Homes In Flames and Misery
In the wee hours of Wednesday morning, Billy Covert, 22, was enjoying a movie, "Tombstone," and a game of video hockey with two childhood friends upstairs in his family's yellow house at 103 Clinton Street.
Then the black shutters outside began to shake, his 19-year-old sister, Fran, let loose a bloodcurdling scream, and a flaming propane tank rocketed through the trees to land in their den downstairs.
"I personally thought it was a nuclear war," said Mr.
Covert, a senior at the University of New Haven.


Schedule for 1994-95 At the Miller Theater
The pianists Ursula Oppens and Dick Hyman and the Juilliard String Quartet are among the artists who are to appear during the 1994-95 season at the Miller Theater at Columbia University, Broadway and 116th Street, Morningside Heights.
The first performance is to be an all-Beethoven recital by the pianist Russell Sherman on Oct. 5 at 8 P.M.
Also to appear during the season, which is to run through May 3, are the Smithsonian Jazz Masterworks Orchestra, on Oct. 7; the writer Annie Dillard, on Nov. 2; the Moscow Boys Choir, on Dec. 21; the New England Conservatory Contemporary Music Ensemble, on Feb. 24; Janis Brenner and Dancers, and Anita Feldman Tap, on April 2, and the sitarist Nishat Kahn, on May 1.
Mr.
Hyman is to appear on Nov. 11 with the pianist Derek Smith; Ms.
Oppens on Jan. 25 with the composer Fredric Rzewski, and the Juilliard Quartet, with the violist Walter Trampler, on March 9.


Backing Mayor, Board of Education Re-elects President
In a demonstration of the Mayor's control, Rudolph W. Giuliani's allies on the New York City Board of Education re-elected the board's president yesterday and forced Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines to backtrack on a proposed raise for an official the Mayor had sought to dismiss.
The re-election of Carol A. Gresser, the board president whom Mayor Giuliani had endorsed, and that of Irene H. Impellizzeri, the vice president who is one of Mr.
Giuliani's two representatives, were expected.
But the board's four-member majority used the annual balloting as a display of strength, moving and seconding one another's nominations and voting with choreographed dispatch.


The Braves Could Use A Late Pick-Me-Up
The Atlanta Braves give a lot of credit to the Montreal Expos for that team's surge to the head of the class in the National League East.
But the Braves would be remiss in not looking at themselves when trying to figure out why they have landed in the also-ran position behind Montreal.
A complete dissection isn't called for.
Not for a team that could look at all the teams in the majors at the start of play yesterday and see only three -- Montreal, the Chicago White Sox and the Yankees -- with better winning percentages.


It's Contagious: Bonilla Imitates Brogna
Bobby Bonilla's locker is next to Rico Brogna's in the visitor's clubhouse at Busch Stadium, and he has had a grand time these last few days teasing the rookie about his recent prowess at the plate.
"It's terrific," Bonilla said this afternoon, when asked about Brogna's spectacular offensive performance in the first two games of this Mets-Cardinals series.
"He's been carrying us."


Wagner Citadel Presents The 'Ring'
The new production of Wagner's "Ring des Nibelungen" that began here on Tuesday night inspired some booing, and that was a surprise: one would have expected sheer outrage.
This is the festival house that Wagner built, the shrine where 10 operas form the sacred texts repeated year after year.
And in the first new Bayreuth production of the "Ring" since 1988, here were the gods in "Das Rheingold" stripped of all dignity and authority, dressed like grotesque buffoons.
If ever the word deconstruction had a meaning it was here, in the first installment of this "Ring" directed by Alfred Kirchner, designed by a woman known simply as Rosalie, and conducted by James Levine.


Tanker Crashes In a Fiery Blast In Westchester
A tractor-trailer slammed into a bridge over an expressway here early today in a white-hot explosion, hurling a blazing propane tank through the air like an out-of-control missile and touching off fires that injured 23 people as flames hopscotched from house to house.
The driver of the tanker truck died in the bizarre middle-of-the-night accident, which left thousands of rush-hour commuters facing traffic headaches as investigators measured skid marks and surveyed twisted truck parts that were thrown over an embankment onto narrow side streets.


Case of Bangladesh Writer Opens Old Wounds
To the Editor:
"Bangladesh Court Will Rule on Writer" (letter, July 16) by Humayun Kabir, Ambassador of Bangladesh, ignores the concerns many Bangladeshis have about the controversy involving the writer Taslima Nasrin.


Borden Inc.(BN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AMP Inc.(AMP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Messner Withdraws From Digital Review
Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schemetterer Euro RSCG in New York said yesterday that it had withdrawn from the review on the estimated $35 million worldwide account for the Digital Equipment Corporation.
Five primary agencies in the United States and one in France, all of which were eliminated from the review, had previously handled the account.
"Our assessment of Digital and its communication needs, at this time, has led us to believe it would be better for us not to participate further in their review," Bob Schmetterer, a partner at Messner Vetere, said in a statement.


Acuson Corp.(ACN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Israel Accusing Muslim Militants in Recent Bombings in the West
Israeli officials asserted today that a recent terrorist campaign of bombings directed at Israeli and Jewish targets in Britain, Argentina and Panama was the work of radical Muslim fundamentalist forces.
Military strategists here also believe that the fundamentalists are taking aim at secularist Arab governments.
Yigal Pressler, an adviser on terrorism to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, today blamed what he described as "extremist Islamic fundamentalist terrorism" for this new wave of terror.


Jets' Offense Staying San Francisco Style
Year after year, Bill Walsh won games with a dazzling home-grown offense.
Then, in pro football's version of a production line, he churned out disciples, and they took those offensive secrets to the National Football League's far outposts.
The offense Walsh perfected in the 1980's with the San Francisco 49ers is used by his former assistants who are now head coaches: George Seifert of the 49ers, Mike Holmgren of the Packers, Dennis Green of the Vikings and Sam Wyche of the Buccaneers.
It is the offense of choice of such offensive coordinators as Jim Fassel of the Broncos, Paul Hackett of the Chiefs and Bruce Coslet of the Bengals, all former assistants to Walsh.


An Improv Band With a Community Beat


Curbs Proposed on U.S. Queries on Workers' Mental Health
The White House has called for Federal agencies to cease routinely asking workers whose jobs require security clearances about their mental-health history except in the recent past, Administration officials said today.
Officials described the new proposal as part of an effort to insure that Federal scrutiny of workers' personal histories be limited to issues relevant to their current performance.
It would affect civilians and military personnel who apply for any of the more than two million Government jobs and armed-services billets that require security clearances.


Censorship, Gonzalez Style
Henry B. Gonzalez, the Texas Democrat who heads the House Banking Committee, never really wanted to hold Whitewater hearings in the first place.
Now that they are under way he seems determined to make them as unenlightening and unthreatening as possible.
Bowing to Robert Fiske, the independent counsel, Congress had already agreed to exclude the central matter in Mr.
Fiske's continuing investigation -- whether money from Madison Guaranty Trust, an Arkansas savings and loan, was improperly funneled into the Whitewater land venture or President Clinton's gubernatorial campaigns.
That limited the committee to one question: Did Administration officials try inappropriately or unethically to rein in a Federal investigation by the Resolution Trust Corporation into Madison's collapse?


Panels Urge Big Changes In Police Dept.
New York City's Police Department needs major changes at all levels, from beat patrol to headquarters, a series of highly critical internal reports has concluded.
The reports recommend overhauling everything from how precincts are organized, to how patrol officers are rewarded, to how corruption is combated.
If not retooled and redeployed, one of the reports says, the department "will remain in its own private industrial age, ineffective and irrelevant."


Aflac Inc.(AFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Bruguera and Lendl Win  Top-seeded Sergi Bruguera and the six-time champion Ivan Lendl had no problems advancing yesterday in the Player's International in Toronto.
Not so with second-seeded Todd Martin, who withdrew with a leg injury.
He was leading Israel's Amos Mansdorf, 7-6, 3-6, when forced to retire.
The 34-year-old Lendl, seeded 12th, routed Australia's Wally Masur, 6-0, 6-0.
Bruguera, the French Open champion making his debut in the $1.7 million tournament, needed less than an hour to defeat American Jim Grabb, 6-4, 6-2, and move into the third round.
Two other seeded players, No. 5 Petr Korda of the Czech Republic and No. 13 Aaron Krickstein, were upset.
Korda was ousted by Sweden's Thomas Enqvist, 6-4, 6-3, and Chuck Adams downed Krickstein, 6-4, 6-4, in a match between Americans. (AP) Spanish Women on a Roll: Spain's Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Conchita Martinez, the No. 2 and No. 3 players in the world, breezed through opening-round matches yesterday in the $400,000 Acura U.S.
Women's Hardcourts tournament at Stratton Mountain, Vt.
Sanchez Vicario ruined the Women's Tennis Association tour debut of Mashona Washington, a younger sister of MaliVai Washington, 6-2, 6-0, in 46 minutes.
Martinez, the defending champion, needed 62 minutes to defeat Stephanie Rottier of the Netherlands, 6-1, 6-1.
In a second-round match of unseeded players, Angela Lettiere of Vero Beach, Fla., who upset sixth-seeded Katrina Maleeva on Tuesday, lost to Marianne Werdel of San Diego, 6-0, 6-4. (AP)


Arrest Ordered for Brother of Italian Premier
Magistrates in Milan issued an arrest warrant today for the brother of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi in a widening scandal involving dozens of Italian businessmen and Government tax inspectors accused of trading bribes for lenient or fraudulent tax audits.
Confronted with the spread of the investigation, the Prime Minister lashed out in a speech on Monday night against the Milan magistrates conducting it.
The inquiry has led to the arrest over the last several days of many senior business leaders, including the head of the tax office of the Prime Minister's Fininvest corporation.


Savage Cuts in Defense Research
For decades now, the huge Pentagon budget has been used as a backdoor way to finance academic research and the training of graduate students in fields relevant to defense purposes -- and valuable to the civilian economy as well.
But this year the House Appropriations Committee chopped the Pentagon's budget for research at universities by 50 percent -- from $1.8 billion to about $900 million -- and the House went along with it.
The rationale was that, with defense budgets shrinking, defense research had to shrink too.
But some critics think the real reason was pique -- that the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, angered by attacks on its earmarking of funds for projects in members' home districts, chose these cuts to show the mainstream universities and their Congressional champions who's boss.


Christy Henrich, 22, Gymnast Who Suffered From Anorexia
Christy Henrich, a former gymnast of near-Olympic caliber who had eating disorders, died on Tuesday in Research Medical Center in Kansas City, Mo., near her hometown, Independence, Mo.
She was 22.
The cause of death was multiple organ system failure, the hospital said.
A spokeswoman, Clara Scott, said that "basically, everything shut down." Ms.
Henrich had long suffered from two eating disorders, anorexia nervosa and bulimia.


Pataki Will Face Rival in Republican Primary
Virtually insuring the first Republican primary for Governor in 12 years, State Senator George E. Pataki said today that he would not challenge the right of his sole Republican rival, Richard M. Rosenbaum, to get on the ballot.
The primary on Sept. 13 will now pit two factions of the Republican Party in a battle to unseat the three-term Democratic incumbent, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
Mr.
Rosenbaum, a Republican state chairman in the 1970's, comes from the party's more liberal wing once led by Nelson A. Rockefeller.
Mr.
Pataki is supported by the now-dominant conservative branch, whose standard-bearer is United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.


Compromise Frees Crime Funds
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Representative Charles E. Schumer said yesterday that a Congressional compromise had been reached that would allow the New York City Police Department to receive millions of dollars that had been in doubt in the pending Federal crime bill.
The money, Mr.
Giuliani said, would permit the city to buy computers and other advanced technological tools for the department and to hire civilians, both of which would free hundreds of officers now on desk jobs to join the patrol force.


Calendar: Tours, Art And Crafts
Tours and Trips  92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; (212) 996-1100.
A walking tour of literary sites in the Union Square area on Sunday, from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M., is one of the tours and day trips being offered through the end of August.
The fee, for the tour only, is $15; there will be a break for lunch.
Other walking tours will go to Harlem (Aug. 7, with a $15 fee), Ellis Island (Aug. 28, $20) and showrooms in the Decoration and Design Building (Aug. 31, $18).


Hybrid Organization Serves as a Conductor for the Health Care Orchestra
These are heady days for Families USA, an unusual advocacy group that has become the de facto public relations manager of the Clinton Administration's campaign for comprehensive health care legislation.
Using a careful mix of statistics, hard-luck stories and staged political events, Families USA has played an important behind-the-scenes role in shaping public perceptions of the nation's health care problems.


State Says Giuliani's Budget Leaves a Gap of $600 Million
Three days after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani ordered up to $450 million in contingency cuts in the city's budget, the State Comptroller issued a stern critique of New York City's finances yesterday that concluded that the Mayor had still not done enough to avert a budget crunch in the coming months.
In a report that tempered enthusiasm for some of the Mayor's initiatives with criticisms of others, the Comptroller, H. Carl McCall, said the budget still included a gap of more than $600 million, caused by the failure to account for spending on things like overtime and pensions.


One-Day Decorators: Strictly a la Carte
ON a recent muggy morning, Lauri Ward, the owner of Use-What-You-Have Interiors, strode into a prewar apartment on the Upper East Side and got down to the whirlwind business of a one-day design job.
She scrutinized the living room, a snug, cream-colored rectangle crammed with a mix of framed prints, bric-a-brac and furniture that ranged from a handsome drop-leaf table to an awkwardly carved wooden lamp.
Then, after a searching talk with the owner, a businesswoman who bravely announced "Anything can go," she began moving things.


From Head to Toe


In New York and Washington, Greater Vigilance


Baby Delivered in Bid to Save Blast Victim
The fireball that swept through Ana Espinal's home shortly after midnight yesterday put an abrupt end to both her night's sleep and her pregnancy and left her in critical condition.
But shining through the disaster was the birth of her son, six weeks premature but unharmed.
Fighting to save two lives, doctors at Westchester County Medical Center delivered the 4-pound, 6-ounce baby just hours after Mrs.
Espinal, 27, was extensively burned when a propane truck hit the Grant Avenue overpass on Interstate 287 and exploded about 12:35 A.M. yesterday.


CHRONICLE
RAOUL LIONEL FELDER, the divorce lawyer, is making a pilgrimage to Staten Island today to right a wrong.
He is replacing a stolen van that had been specially built for ERIC LOPEZ, a young man with severely deformed hands and feet.
Mr.
Felder plans to present the keys to Mr.
Lopez at his home.
Mr.
Felder said he saw a television news report about the theft of the van belonging to Mr.
Lopez, who has a life-threatening skin disease called Epidermolysis bullosa, which causes severe blistering and defects of the limbs and organs.


21 Enterprise Zones Created, Including 4 in New York City
To encourage economic development in impoverished areas across the state, New York State officials yesterday named 21 special new enterprise zones, including four in New York City, to receive tax breaks and other incentives aimed at attracting business to distressed neighborhoods.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, seeking to spread around one of the few bounties he has to offer as he seeks a fourth term, announced the expansion of the state's existing economic development zone program from the current 19 areas to a total of 40 different locations.


AT HOME WITH: Norma McCorvey; Of Roe, Dreams And Choices
THEIR front door is made of steel now.
"If we stand in front of it, we won't get hit," Norma McCorvey says.
"We put it in after they shot the house up in 1989. They shot up the car, too. Did you see that blue car out front? We call it the Roe-mobile."


Betrayer's Tale: A special report.; A Decade as a Turncoat: Aldrich Ames's Own Story
On a night in Rome in October 1986, Aldrich H. Ames of the Central Intelligence Agency knocked back a stiff drink, pulled a baseball cap low over his face and went to meet his case officer from the Soviet intelligence service, the K.G.B.
In the attic of the Soviet Embassy's residential compound there, the K.G.B. man, Vladimir, opened a bottle of vodka.
Over the first of many glasses, he and Mr.
Ames discussed their hunch that the C.I.A. knew it had a traitor within.
Vladimir was worried: How could Moscow and its mole mislead the agency?
How best to divert attention from Mr.
Ames?


Trial Scheduled for Kidd
JASON KIDD, the Dallas Mavericks' top draft choice and the No. 2 pick over all in the National Basketball Association draft, has been scheduled to stand trial on hit-and-run charges Sept. 30 in Oakland, Calif.
The trial date was set yesterday after attempts to work out a plea bargain between Kidd's lawyer and prosecutors failed.


Kruk Hears Good News
An upbeat JOHN KRUK left a Philadelphia hospital last night after learning that lumps he discovered on his body are apparently not connected to his testicular cancer earlier this year.
"It ain't cancer," the Philadelphia Phillies star said as he walked between buildings at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital.


Corrections
A credit line in Science Times on Tuesday for a drawing of a reception hall of a Roman villa where a fifth-century cemetery for infants has been excavated misspelled the artist's surname.
He is William Aylward.


ANHEUSER-BUSCH COS. (BUD,N)
The Anheuser-Busch Companies reported yesterday that net income for the second quarter rose 4.5 percent from the comparable period a year earlier and that earnings per share rose 8.1 percent.
Net income was $322.5 million, or $1.20 a share, compared with $308.6 million, or $1.11 a share, in the quarter a year earlier.
Operating income was $576.6 million, up 7.5 percent from $536.4 million a year earlier.


Nightmare Of a Crawl For Drivers
Although it stretches for only 11 miles, the Cross Westchester Expressway is one of the most important arteries in the Northeast, linking major thoroughfares like the New England Thruway and the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, the Saw Mill Parkway and the Hutchinson River Parkway.
So when the east-west expressway, also called Interstate 287, was shut down early this morning after a propane tanker hit a concrete overpass and erupted in a ball of flame, severely damaging the overpass, the impact on traffic reverberated for miles and lasted for hours.


AT&amp; T Will Shut Down EO, a Wireless Pioneer
The disappointing market for pen-based computers will claim another victim on Friday, when AT&amp; T plans to shut the operations of EO Inc., which was attempting to pioneer a wireless communicator.
The AT&amp;T Corporation, which owns 52 percent of EO, has made a number of investments in Silicon Valley companies that are trying to design computers and software that recognize handwriting and permit workers in the field to stay connected through electronic mail.


Confusion Abounds as Stocks Head Down
Traders and investors differed yesterday over the outlook for the economy but stock and bond prices both still declined.
Bond traders decided the economy was growing too fast and could spark inflation.
They bid prices down for bonds.
But stock traders concluded it was growing too slowly and could hurt earnings.
They bid prices down for stocks.
The confusion continues the puzzlement that has gripped the markets all summer, as economic data continue to prove ambiguous, the course of the dollar defies Washington policy makers, and the Federal Reserve Board still appears ready to raise interest rates for the fifth time this year.


Hollywood Closing Out a Summer of the Unexpected
Summer only began a month or so ago, but in Hollywood it's almost over.
The 14 weeks between Memorial Day and Labor Day are the richest box-office period of the year for movies, but the results -- or most of them -- are already in, and there are lots of surprises.


Bronx Zoo Baby Boom: It's a Gorilla!
Okpara, Swahili for firstborn, is celebrating his first birthday today with a strawberry-studded cake.
Most likely he will eat just the berries, washing them down with infant formula.
Then the 15-pound baby might beat his tiny chest like King Kong.
Okpara, after a year out of public view, is making his official debut at the Bronx Zoo this morning.
His birth last year set the gorilla world abuzz: his father, a 430-pound western lowland gorilla named Timmy, at the ripe age of 34 or so, was the oldest male gorilla to produce offspring in captivity, as well as the oldest to do so for the first time.


State Says Error by Fingerprint Examiner Was Apparently Fatal
A "tragic human error" by a fingerprint examiner in Albany allowed a man sought on murder charges to slip through the hands of New York City law-enforcement officials, apparently allowing him to kill again, state officials said yesterday.
The man, Andre Foreman -- who used the aliases Andre Freeman and John Breeze and gave false birth dates -- was arrested by New York City police for petty larceny on May 10.


Where Being Right Really Pays Off
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator  By Edwin Lefevre  299 pages.
John Wiley &amp; Sons.
Paperback, $16.95.
"Well, I went home," says Larry Livingstone, the fictionalized protagonist of Edwin Lefevre's "Reminiscences of a Stock Operator," after losing all his money on the New York Stock Exchange at the age of 21.
"But the moment I was back I knew that I had but one mission in life and that was to get a stake and go back to Wall Street. That was the only place in the country where I could trade heavily. Some day, when my game was all right, I'd need such a place. When a man is right he wants to get all that is coming to him for being right."


Dhaka Journal; 'The 2 Women' of Bangladesh: At the Top, at Odds
In Bangladesh, it is enough to mention "the two women" to touch off an impassioned debate.
Whether riding in a rickshaw in this capital's monsoon-swept streets or taking tea in a lawyer's air-conditioned chambers, there is no need to name Khaleda Zia, the Prime Minister, and Hasina Wazed, the opposition leader -- the two leaders, each 48 years old, who have overcome the weight of tradition in this overwhelmingly Muslim country to dominate its political life.


CHRONICLE
PAUL McCARTNEY, who is in the news almost as often for his efforts on behalf of animals as for his music nowadays, has sent his razor, shaving cream and other Gillette products to the company's headquarters in Boston to protest its practice of testing products on animals.
In a letter accompanying the package, which was addressed to Alfred Zeien, the chief executive, Mr.
McCartney wrote: "As a friend of animals, I am not only unsatisfied but outraged. Please send me a refund as advertised on your products, which I intend to donate to People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals."


Indictment Ties Heiress's Disappearance to Horse Scheme
The disappearance of the candy heiress Helen Vorhees Brach has been a mystery for 17 years, defying police, psychics, prayers and a $250,000 reward.
But today, the United States Attorney's office here said that at least part of the riddle had been solved.
In a series of indictments of 23 people from the glamorous and clubby world of horse shows, a well-known local horse trainer was charged in connection with the disappearance of Mrs.
Brach, a 65-year-old pillar of Chicago society and horse owner who was last seen on Feb. 17, 1977, leaving an estate of $30 million.


Argentines Question Iranians
An Argentine investigating judge today questioned two Iranians detained in connection with the truck bomb here on July 18, the first of a series of anti-Jewish bombings in Latin America and Britain.
"At the appropriate moment, I will release information that will knock you over backward," the judge, Juan Jose Galeano, promised reporters after briefing President Carlos Saul Menem on the Iranian connection.


Case of Bangladesh Writer Opens Old Wounds; She Endangers Women
To the Editor:
Your July 16 front-page article on the furor over Taslima Nasrin in Bangladesh notes her failure to attract sufficient support from her feminist and literary peers in the country.


A fulfilled executive chooses the status quo over a chance to sit at the head of the table.
WHEN a guy contends he passed up a big promotion and a transfer from Detroit to New York because he prefers the "values and atmosphere" of the Midwest, it sounds like sour grapes.
Someone else got the promotion or something went wrong.
In Peter Schweitzer's case, the offer to run J. Walter Thompson, one of world's mighty prestige ad agencies, was real.
Most executives would give a right arm for the chance, perhaps the left, too.
Last October, Mr.
Schweitzer accepted the role as heir apparent.
Eight months later he backed out.


Whitewater Inquiry Causes Rift Among Top Treasury Officials
The Whitewater hearings have created a bitter rift between the Treasury Secretary, the Deputy Secretary and the department's top lawyer that officials said today would almost inevitably lead to a shake-up at the department.
The three officials have provided investigators with conflicting accounts of their roles concerning contacts with the White House about the Whitewater case.
As word of the discrepancies have filtered out in recent days, tensions within the Treasury Department have deepened to the point where the lawyer and her clients deeply distrust one another, Administration officials said today.


For Rwandan Refugees, a Grim Routine of Death
There is no "Day in the Life of a Refugee Camp" story.
There is only another day of death.
Eleven-year-old Uwizeyimana sat on a bit of high ground.
She held an umbrella in her right hand, tilted to provide shade for the little girl she held in her arms.
The child appeared to be sleeping.


Blaney Names an Assistant
GREG HERENDA went back to work for GEORGE BLANEY yesterday, accepting an offer to become an assistant basketball coach at Seton Hall.
Herenda, 33, worked for Blaney at Holy Cross from 1989-93, but left after this past season to take an assistant coaching job at Northeastern.
A native of Jersey City, Herenda was a standout player at St.
Peter's Prep. (AP)


Bridge
Form continued to prevail in the major knockout team championships at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals here.
The only major upset in the Spingold Teams last night was the elimination of the fifth-ranked group, led by a veteran, George Rapee of Manhattan.
It lost by 46 imps to Richard Pavlicek Jr. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; Blair Seidler of Fair Lawn, N.J.; Bob Rosen of Delray Beach, Fla., and Andy O'Grady of Miami, the original 60th seed in the field of 129 teams.
Pavlicek and Seidler finished second in the Junior Team Trials on Sunday.


Economic Scene; Who will pay for universal health care? Well-off households.
WHO wants to pay for universal health coverage?
The answer, as the current debate is making all too clear, is no one.
Indeed, for some interests who have campaigned for change -- notably big business -- the whole idea is to shed part of their financial burden.
But as a flock of studies have shown, the contretemps over who pays is a shell game: One way or another, households with above-average incomes, not businesses or government, would almost certainly pick up the tab for broader coverage.
And President Clinton's understandable wish to obscure this reality may prove too clever by half.
"He may end up without a good bill -- or the support to push a mediocre one through Congress," said Uwe Reinhardt, an economist at the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton.


The Pop Life
Far Out Into Interactivity
David Bowie has been exploring strange new worlds, and they're light years away from those of "Space Oddity" and "Starman." "I'm totally in this alien area and it's great," he said by telephone on Tuesday in his first interview since last spring, when his CD-ROM "Jump" was released.
Mr.
Bowie's alien land is interactive multimedia, in which manipulatable pictures, sound, video, animation and text turn users into participants.
His means of travel is the recording studio, where technology and the creative process meet.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.26
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.43
4.39
3.07
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.84
4.79
3.22
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.33
7.25
5.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.61
7.54
6.65
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.39
8.32
7.36
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.38
5.82
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Case of Bangladesh Writer Opens Old Wounds; Bette, as in Lotte
To the Editor:
John O'Connor, in his review of the TNT documentary "All About Bette" (TV Weekend, July 15), seems taken aback (maybe) by the fact that Miss Davis is referred to throughout as Betty, not Bett.


AptarGroup Inc.(ATR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Accounts
* 800-Flowers, Westbury, L.I., to McCann Interactive Chicago, as the first agency to handle interactive creative and technical services for 800-Flowers and 800-Gifthouse.
McCann-Erickson New York already handles the floral and gift company's advertising and marketing account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Men's wear goes American


Should Firefighters Obey Bureaucrats?
To the Editor:
In "On the Fire Line" (Op-Ed, July 13), Mark Rose states, "There will never be an adequate explanation for the death of the 14 firefighters on Storm King Mountain in Colorado." The Government investigation of the fire, he says, "won't make sense."


Beneficial Corp.(BNL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


I.B.M. TO CLOSE KINGSTON, N.Y., PLANT AND SHIFT JOBS
Continuing its consolidation program, the International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it would close its operations in Kingston, N.Y., and transfer its 1,500 people there to Poughkeepsie, 25 miles to the south.
No jobs would be lost in the transfer, I.B.M. officials said.
The Kingston plant -- it opened in 1956, includes 2.4 million square feet of space and at its peak in 1985 employed 7,100 people -- is scheduled to be closed by the end of next year.
I.B.M. estimated it would save $18 million through the move.
I.B.M. is in the midst of an $8.9 billion worldwide restructuring program.
It plans to cut 35,000 jobs through the end of this year, on top of 50,000 job cuts announced last year.
Separately, analysts told Reuters that I.B.M. is expected to announced a reorganization of its IBM PC Company on Friday that would consolidate about nine I.B.M. sites in Raleigh, N.C., and cut about 2,000 jobs at the PC company.


Durable Orders Up 1.3%, Showing Factory Health
In the latest sign of robust health in the nation's manufacturing industries, orders and shipments of cars, industrial machinery and other durable goods rose in June, the Commerce Department announced today.
Stock and bond prices fell sharply on the news, as traders and investors concluded that continued strong growth in the economy made it more likely that the Federal Reserve would raise short-term interest rates soon to prevent the economy from overheating.
Investors also worried about declining earnings.


Allen Group (ALN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Presidential Hopefuls at a Republican Forum Jab at Clinton's Foreign Policy
The Republican Party paraded its foreign policy luminaries at a forum here today to gloat over past triumphs and, more pointedly, condemn President Clinton's leadership.
James A. Baker 3d, the Secretary of State under President Bush and a possible Presidential candidate in 1996, opened the daylong event by saying he had no intention of making "political cheap shots" but that he wanted to offer "constructive criticism" for Mr.
Clinton.


Robert O. Schlaifer, 79, Managerial Economist
Robert O. Schlaifer, an expert on managerial economics and the ingredients that go into business decisions, died on Sunday at his home in Arlington, Mass.
He was 79.
The cause was lung cancer, according to the Harvard Business School, where he was the William Ziegler Professor of Business Administration emeritus.


Ball in a Struggle to Refocus Itself
Executives at the Ball Corporation's headquarters here were as thrilled as any astronomers last December when space shuttle astronauts corrected the fuzzy vision of the Hubble space telescope.
The dazzling repair in orbit used a $50 million package of special mirrors conceived and built by the company's aerospace group in Boulder, Colo.
That technical triumph gave Ball a brief respite from a long-running struggle over how to refocus itself.
Overcapacity and slow growth are bedeviling the company's mainstay can and bottle businesses, and the company's hopes that it could build a highly profitable, billion-dollar aerospace business by the end of the decade have been dashed by steady contractions in space and Defense Department budgets.


Controversy and Conspiracy Tales Make for Crackling Sports Radio
WFAN Radio's revelation Tuesday afternoon of what the station said were selected oral excerpts from the Mike Keenan papers (now part of the Gary Bettman Archives) was a show much like any starring Oprah's dysfunctional families.
There was the rebel son, Mike Keenan, his brother, Neil Smith, and their father, Bob Gutkowski, who sides with one brother (Neil) against the other (Mike) who gets attention only by telling what may be a whopper of a story.


Medimmune
Shares of Medimmune Inc. lost 38.5 percent of their value yesterday, when the company announced the apparent failure of a new therapy.
The company, which is based in Gaithersburg, Md., and manufactures vaccines and other therapeutic treatments, had tried to use an antibody therapy to treat a viral illness that afflicts premature babies.


Sports of The Times; Strike Date? Look Who's Setting One
OUTSIDE the players' entrance at Yankee Stadium, more than four dozen fans were holding pens and pictures and books as a familiar face emerged from a black convertible.
"Donnie, Donnie," they were pleading now.


Pentagon Sends Trainers and Equipment to Cambodian Army
The Defense Department has sent dozens of American military trainers and hundreds of thousands of dollars in equipment to Cambodia in recent weeks to help the Cambodian Army, which has suffered a string of battlefield defeats this year at the hands of the Khmer Rouge rebels.
American officials said it was the first time since the 1970's that the United States had provided direct aid to the Cambodian Army, although they were quick to note that the equipment did not include weapons or ammunition of any sort.


American Annuity Group Inc.(AAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Miscellany
*
Siegel &amp; Gale, New York, a corporate identity company, formed Siegel &amp; Gale Interactive Communications Group.
Steve Dolbow was named to head the unit as senior vice president.
He was previously president at the Tokeneke Group, Darien, Conn.
Wendy Cohen was named to the new position of senior designer.
She was previously an interface designer and senior programming analyst at the Educational Testing Service, Princeton, N.J. *
Mariah Publications Corp., Santa Fe, N.M., the publisher of Outside magazine, has been renamed Mariah Media Inc. to reflect the expansion of the magazine into ventures like "Outside Television," a syndicated hourlong series being developed with the Creative Artists Agency.


Another Go for Foyt?
A.
J.
FOYT, who tearfully announced his retirement from racing more than two years ago, may be ready to race at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway once more.
A Nascar event, the inaugural Brickyard 400, has the 59-year-old racing great poised to return to the track where he won four Indy 500's and qualified for the race a record 35 consecutive years.


Irving Ribicoff, 79, Law Firm's Founder
Irving S. Ribicoff, a founder and retired senior partner of the Hartford law firm of Schatz &amp; Schatz, Ribicoff &amp; Kotkin, died on Monday at a Hartford convalescent home.
A Hartford resident, he was 79.
He suffered a long illness, his family said.


U.S. IS CONSIDERING A BASE IN RWANDA FOR RELIEF TEAMS
The United States is preparing to send troops to help establish a large base in Rwanda to bolster the relief effort in the devastated African nation, Administration officials said today.
Setting up a staging area in the capital, Kigali, would mark an important new phase, committing American troops in Rwanda for the first time.
Military officials said 2,000 to 3,000 troops could be sent into Rwanda, in addition to the 4,000 that Washington has said would join relief efforts outside the country.


Tarkanian Case Is Closed
The former U.N.L.V. basketball coach JERRY TARKANIAN and the university ended three years of litigation Monday, announcing Tarkanian will drop his lawsuits against the school and U.N.L.V. will pay his legal costs.
"This brings a conclusion to the litigation between the university and the individual defendants and the Tarkanians," U.N.L.V.'s interim president, KENNY GUINN, said.


Giuliani Wisely Bides Time on Endorsement in Governor's Race; Lots of Local Talent
To the Editor:
Unmentioned in disclosures about renting favors granted by William W. Koeppel, one of New York's more prominent real estate executives, to Giuliani administration members, is that so many new faces in the administration, the recipients of this apparent largess, are from out of town.


Japanese Offering Ford a Loan
With the Japanese Government struggling to reduce anger over the nation's towering trade surpluses and financially pressed Japanese investors pulling their capital back home, the Export-Import Bank of Japan is negotiating a huge, politically sensitive loan to the Ford Motor Company.
The unusual loan being considered by the Government-controlled bank, which could run as much as $300 million, would be aimed at helping Ford manufacture right-hand-drive autos for export to Japan.
That, in turn, could help reduce the Japanese trade surplus with the United States, which is expected to be as high as $60 billion for 1994.


INSIDE
Radical Muslims Suspected
Israeli officials asserted that a recent campaign of bombings directed at Israeli and Jewish targets was the work of radical Muslim fundamentalist forces.
An Argentine investigator questioned two Iranians.
Page A10.
Overhaul Urged for Police
New York City's Police Department needs major changes at all levels from beat patrol to headquarters, a series of highly critical internal reports have concluded.
Page B1.
Serbs Attack U.N.
Convoy
A week after rejecting a peace plan, Bosnian Serbs attacked a United Nations convoy outside Sarajevo, killing a British peacekeeper.
Later they fired at French forces.
Page A3.
Combat Posts for Women
The Army plans to open to women many combat positions now closed to them, but protests by generals killed a more ambitious plan.
Page A12.
Japan Negotiating Ford Loan
The Export-Import Bank of Japan is negotiating a huge loan to the Ford Motor Company to help build cars for export to Japan.
Page D1.


Assault Weapons Ban Allowed To Stay in Anti-crime Measure
Representative Jack Brooks, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, lost an attempt tonight to knock a ban on assault weapons out of the comprehensive crime bill.
At the same time, however, House Democrats supported Mr.
Brooks's move to exempt pawnbrokers from the Brady law on handgun control.
Mr.
Brooks, a Texas Democrat and fierce opponent of gun control, had threatened to hold up the $30.2 billion crime package if a ban on assault weapons was included, even though both the House and the Senate had passed such bans.


Defector Says North Korea Has 5 A-Bombs and May Make More
The South Korean intelligence agency presented on Wednesday what it said was a high-level North Korean defector who said that, despite repeated denials, the Government in Pyongyang had five nuclear bombs and might soon develop five more.
If his remarkable story is true, Kang Myong Do, 35, may be the most damaging defector ever to escape from North Korea, one of the most closed societies on earth.
His story could also spur a reassessment of efforts to persuade North Korea to abandon its nuclear program.


Good Breeding at the Bronx Zoo


Corrections
A report in the Off the Menu column in The Living Section yesterday about the Shun Lee Palace restaurant, which plans to close tomorrow for renovations and reopen around Sept. 20, misstated its address.
It is at 155 East 55th Street, not West.


Trucker Convicted of Driving While Impaired
The 23-year-old truck driver who was killed when his tanker truck slammed into a highway overpass here this morning had a troubled driving record, including a 1988 conviction for driving while impaired that resulted from a drunk-driving charge and two license suspensions, according to New York State motor vehicle records.
The company that employed him, Paraco Gas of Purchase, N.Y., has also had a troubled history.
The privately held industrial gas distributor, with annual sales of about $17 million, was fined $3,250 in 1992 for eight violations of Federal regulations, including failure to inspect its cargo tanks and keep required records, state transportation officials said.


Will More Fans See Yankees If They Can See Less Bronx?
The latest plan to keep the Yankees in the Bronx would allow fans to come see the Bombers without hardly seeing the Bronx.
This overture in the long-running flirtation between New York and the Yankees is a proposal to build a bridge from the Harlem River Drive in northern Manhattan, directly west of the stadium, to an 11,300-space parking garage in the Bronx.
The garage would be connected to the stadium by a two-block-long enclosed walkway lined with shops and restaurants.


How Writers Thought, for All the World to See
Vladimir Nabokov -- novelist, poet, playwright, chess player and lepidopterist -- is the undisputed star of the literary exhibition now at the Berg Collection of English and American Literature at the New York Public Library.


Governor Presented With Resumes During Announcement on New Enterprise Zones


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Exotic Proteas
Q.
Recently my florist has stocked an extraordinary flower called a protea.
Can I grow this myself? -- Rachel Eagleson, Huntington, L.I.


Keenan's Lawyer Points Finger at Smith
The lawyer who helped prepare Mike Keenan's submissions to the National Hockey League about his contractual status yesterday denied reports that his client conspired with Rangers General Manager Neil Smith to purposely delay paying him his bonus check so he could be free.
"Neither the word nor the concept of conspiracy is included in any of our submissions," said Merle Silverstein, a St.
Louis lawyer.
Rather, he said, the submissions included allegations of actions by Smith to push Keenan out by deliberately withholding the check.


Supercomputer Pioneer Seeks Investor or Buyer
The Thinking Machines Corporation, the company that pioneered the technology for today's fastest supercomputers only to see larger companies invade its market, is in danger of going out of business unless it can find a big investor or buyer soon.
Several industry executives said today that Thinking Machines was negotiating with both Sun Microsystems and AT&amp;T to invest in the company or buy it outright.
If the talks fail, it is unlikely that Thinking Machines will survive, said the executives, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


Allied Products Corp.(ADP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Financing for Times Square Leads to Harsher Criticism
Less than a week before a critical deadline in the long-delayed plan to redevelop Times Square, a new report from one of the project's most prominent critics suggests that the deal for four huge office towers has created a financial quagmire that could cost taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars.
The report, issued this week by the Municipal Art Society, calculated that because of tax abatements the state has promised the developers of the proposed towers, the city and the state would receive from $1.5 billion to $4.2 billion less in taxes paid than they would get from a similar office complex built without subsidies.


Hampton's Bold Prediction: Giants Will Make Playoffs
There is no question that Rodney Hampton is a leader, but you will never see him stand up in the middle of the Giants' locker room to give a George Patton-like speech.
Chances are he will sit quietly by his locker nibbling on a Snickers bar, let the other guys do the talking, then go out and stampede for 150 yards.
So when Hampton today guaranteed that the Giants would make the playoffs, it was an unusually bold statement for someone who is so quiet.
Quiet but powerful.
And it is clear that Hampton, the heart and soul of New York's running game, has quietly become one of the team's most respected players.
That might explain the bold prediction.
Bold because many people expect the Giants to miss the playoffs because of the loss of so many key players, such as Phil Simms and Lawrence Taylor, and 75 percent of the starting secondary.
Hampton dismissed the doomsayers.
His thoughts?
The Giants will get in -- count on it. 'We Believe in Ourselves'
"I heard people say we weren't going to make the playoffs last year," Hampton said.
"Then before you know, we were 3-0 and then people were saying we hadn't played anybody. Then we went to the playoffs. I think the same thing will happen this year. We'll get there. People can doubt us if they want to, but we believe in ourselves and we'll be in the playoffs.


New Multiple Sclerosis Drug Helps Biogen Soar
The stock of Biogen Inc. soared yesterday after the biotechnology company announced promising results in slowing the devastating effects of multiple sclerosis, a disease of the nervous system.
Shares of Biogen jumped $15.25, or 52 percent, to $44.75, in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
Nasdaq reported that 14 million shares were traded.
Biogen has 32 million shares outstanding.


After Two Bombings, Israelis Rebuke Britain on Security
After two car bomb attacks in less than a day against Jewish targets here, Israeli officials today harshly criticized the security provided by Britain in what appeared to be a terrorist campaign by radical Islamic opponents of the Middle East peace effort.
Amid questions about whether the blasts had been part of a plan to attack Jewish interests around the world, possibly with the support of Iran or an Arab government hostile to Israel, the British Foreign Office said a caller purporting to represent Hamas, the radical Islamic group that operates primarily in the West Bank and Gaza, had asserted responsibility for the bombing Tuesday at the Israeli Embassy in London.


Lack of Studies On Sex Limits AIDS Research
A panel of the National Academy of Sciences said today that a lack of studies on sexual behavior and drug use had blocked progress in fighting AIDS.
The committee of the Institute of Medicine, which is part of the academy, said in a report that more research across disciplines was needed to attack AIDS and called for a comprehensive national survey of sexual behavior and drug use, which are the major avenues in the spread of AIDS.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CAPSURE HOLDINGS CORP., Chicago, an oil and gas concern, said it would acquire Universal Surety of America, a property and casualty insurer, for $32 million in cash and common stock.
DT INDUSTRIES, Lebanon, Mo., agreed to acquire Advanced Assembly Automation Inc., Dayton, Ohio.
Both companies are makers of automated production equipment.
Terms were not disclosed.


AirTouch Communications Inc.(ATI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Joel Rifkin Gives Testimony For First Time Since Arrest
After months of sitting silently at the defense table during his first trial, Joel Rifkin eagerly took the witness stand for the first time today at a hearing before his second trial, contending that the police repeatedly ignored his requests for a lawyer when he confessed last year to killing 17 women.
Swaying back and forth, Mr.
Rifkin appeared to relish the challenge of verbally sparring with the prosecutor, Michael Ahearn, an assistant Suffolk County district attorney, even correcting him when he made mistakes.


High Noon Today as Walkout Will Be Set
The owners' formal rejection yesterday of the players' initial proposals for a new collective bargaining agreement set the stage for the executive board of the Players Association to set a strike date today.
The executive board will convene by telephone conference call at noon today.
Union officials, who as of yesterday had not settled on strike date, are expected to recommend one in the middle of next month, possibly Aug. 12 or Aug. 19.
Richard Ravitch, the chief labor executive for major league club owners, acknowledged that a strike date would put added pressure on both sides.


A Poor Solution for Kiryas Joel
At the Satmar Hasidic village of Kiryas Joel, about 50 miles northwest of New York City, some 5,500 schoolchildren attend private religious schools.
But about 200 of the sect's disabled students are taught with public funds in a school that the State Legislature carved out as a special district in 1989.
Hasidic families have thus been allowed to shelter their disabled children from the ridicule and hostility parents fear they would encounter in neighboring public schools because of their distinctive dress and membership in a reclusive community -- while still educating them with public funds.
How far should New York State go to accommodate this group?
The U.S.
Supreme Court says the state went too far by creating a special district to educate them.
Now the Legislature and Gov.
Mario Cuomo have approved a law that tries to get around the Court's objections.
The new law faces another possible court challenge.
But even if it does not violate constitutional barriers against state aid to religion, it represents bad policy.


Baker (Michael) (BKR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Baker Hughes Inc.(BHI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


People
*
Gloria McKenna was named to the new position of senior vice president and director of relationship marketing at Mezzina/Brown, New York.
She was previously a vice president and account director at Chapman Direct, New York. *
Jayne Jamison was named publisher of Child magazine, New York, succeeding Daniel Ambrose, who left.
Ms.
Jamison was previously publisher at American Health magazine, New York.


Review/Fashion; Men's Wear In America Goes (Ah!) American
FINALLY, American men's fashion that looks, well, American.
That's the only word for it.
The Rat Pack -- Dean Martin, Frank Sinatra and Sammy Davis Jr. -- flashing their pinkie rings at Basco.
J.
F.
K. silhouettes at Calvin Klein.
Forrest Gump at John Bartlett.
Bing Crosby on the road to Havana at Barry Bricken.
And a sartorial summit at Franklin D. Roosevelt's Campobello estate at Ralph Lauren.
It seems such a simple notion, American men's wear designers producing prototypical American clothes.
But it was a sign of the power of Giorgio Armani that, for the last five years, many thought that a men's suit, to look new, had to look Italian.


Case of Bangladesh Writer Opens Old Wounds; Victims of Censorship
To the Editor:
Taslima Nasrin's plight has attracted more attention than any such case since the 1989 decree by the Iranian mullahs against Salman Rushdie.
The media sometimes appear to have room for only one Salman Rushdie at a time, when hundreds of writers are at risk from governments and extremist groups that confuse dissent with treason.


1,001 Ways to Tame a Lawn (Weed Whackers Included)
All you need is one day at the International Lawn, Garden and Power Equipment Expo here to want one of those T-shirts that reads, "I fought the lawn and the lawn won."
There was a certain anxiety underlying the frenzied lovemaking to machines this week, as 28,000 dealers, retailers, landscapers and others in the industry fanned out over the scorched grass (think of it as a 500,000-square-foot lawn) at the Kentucky Exposition Center.
They tried out riding mowers that turned on a dime, ergonomically improved chain saws, ultramodern mulch-and-bag mowers, battery-operated weed whackers and chipper vacs -- the new darlings of the suburban yard that eat all those branches and vacuum up all those leaves and grass clippings that the landfills won't take anymore. (Our lawns will bury us!)


Restaurants
The woman on the phone has the most delicious voice: low, slightly husky, completely inviting.
Just calling for a reservation makes you eager to eat at Montrachet.
The entrance to the restaurant is every bit as welcoming.
Walking out of a harried day and into this relaxed and low-key room has an instantly soothing effect.
As the pace slows from rush to glide, shoulders settle two notches lower and voices drop from screech to murmur.


Songs of a Hapless Hooker Who Kept Count
The major exports of Texas these days would seem to be oil, beef and bad musicals about prostitutes.
Barely has the glitter dust settled over "The Best Little Whorehouse Goes Public," a $7 million Broadway fiasco, than here comes "Chippy," a somewhat grittier enterprise that is no less calamitous in its down-home fashion.


New Delay on Charging Simpson Friend
For the second time in two weeks, prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson case postponed a decision today on whether to file charges against Al Cowlings, the driver of the white truck in which Mr.
Simpson eluded the police in a nationally televised freeway chase across Southern California.
A statement released late this afternoon by District Attorney Gil Garcetti said that prosecutors needed "further investigation" before determining whether  Mr.
Cowlings, a lifelong friend of Mr.
Simpson, should face criminal charges for being involved in the often bizarre, 60-mile-long cavalcade that finally ended at Mr.
Simpson's home.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Big drug companies are enlisting pharmacists to promote their drugs rather than those of their competitors, without explicitly telling doctors or patients.
And some doctors and medical ethicists do not like it. [Page A1.]


Corrections
An article and a picture caption on Saturday about plans to rename the Central Park Reservoir in honor of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis misspelled the given name of Mrs.
Onassis' daughter.
She is Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon:
Closing This Weekend


Iran and Allies Are Suspected In Bomb Wave
American and Israeli diplomats and intelligence officials strongly suggested  today that the Government of Iran and the Party of God, a Lebanon-based, Iranian-backed guerrilla group also known as Hezbollah, were responsible for recent terrorist bombings of Jewish targets in Buenos Aires and London.
"The killers involved in those terrible incidents must not -- we will not let them -- succeed," Secretary of State Warren Christopher told a House committee.
While he did not directly assign blame for the attacks, he said: "Groups like Hezbollah that wreak havoc and bloodshed must be defeated. And Hezbollah's patron, Iran, must be contained."


Dollar Up Sharply Vs. the Yen
The dollar rose to its highest level against the Japanese yen in a month yesterday, breaking back through the psychologically important 100 yen level and extending a bounce that began more than a week ago.
Analysts said the main reason for the dollar's rally yesterday was a rumor that the longstanding bilateral trade dispute between the United States and Japan would be resolved by July 31, the deadline Washington has set for deciding whether to take steps toward trade sanctions.


Coleman Files Suit Against Rape Accuser
Two days after prosecutors in Detroit cleared him of a rape charge, saying his blood did not match semen found on his accuser, Nets forward DERRICK COLEMAN filed a four-pronged damage suit yesterday against the woman who made the charge two weeks ago.
In a civil complaint filed in Wayne County (Mich.) Circuit Court, Coleman said the woman, identified as TOIA MAUDETTE REED, had caused him mental anguish, embarrassment and humiliation through malicious prosecution, defamation, false light invasion of privacy and intentional infliction of emotional distress.


2 Studies Suggest Sleep Is Vital in Consolidating Memories
In separate experiments conducted on rats and humans, scientists have found the first direct evidence that memories are consolidated during sleep.
The findings, which are being reported today in the journal Science, have implications for students cramming to pass an examination, people learning new skills like skating and anyone trying to navigate through new surroundings.
They suggest for example, that people learning to ski might improve their performance after a few nights' sleep.


Their Discarded Taxis Wind Up in New York
To the Editor:
If Betty Lawrence, executive director of the Metropolitan Taxicab Board of Trade, thinks a "cool, comfortable ride in a taxi" is a "utopian dream" (letter, July 15), I suggest she travel to Phoenix, Dallas, Houston, New Orleans or other Southern cities where it is really hot and traffic can be as bad as New York's.


Belle Is All Business, On and Off Field
Frank Thomas, Ken Griffey Jr., Albert Belle.
The names dominate the American  League offensive statistics.
Frank Thomas, Ken Griffey Jr., Albert Belle.
They stand 1-2-3 in home runs, total bases, extra-base hits and slugging percentage.


Florida State Chief Calls Players 'Victims'
TALBOT D'ALEMBERTE, Florida State University's president, said yesterday in Washington that if professional eligibility was at risk, agents would have a much harder time tempting college athletes into National Collegiate Athletic Association rules violations.
D'Alemberte made the comments at a Congressional subcommittee hearing to examine whether N.C.A.A. rules restrict the financial rights of student-athletes and contribute to their accepting illegal gifts and cash.
Florida State is scheduled to announce disciplinary measures today against football players involved in a rules-violating shopping spree sponsored by an unregistered agent.
That agent, NATE CEBRUN of Las Vegas, Nev., was sentenced yesterday in Tallahassee, Fla., to 30 days in jail and fined $2,000.


Art in Review
'Graffiti' Zabriskie Gallery 724 Fifth Avenue, near 57th Street Through Sept. 9


Bus Hijackers Kill 4 in Southern Russia
Three children and a woman died today when Russian security forces stormed a  helicopter and captured a group of gunmen who hijacked a bus and demanded a $15  million ransom, the state emergency ministry said.
A ministry spokesman said the children died instantly when a hijacker detonated a grenade, and the woman died later of her injuries.


Giuliani Seeks Continued Federal Funds for Housing Police
Pressing his plan to merge New York City's three police departments, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani sought assurances today that the Federal Government would maintain its financial support for policing the city's housing projects in exchange for a city commitment to maintain or improve police services there.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development now pays about one-third the  cost of supporting the 2,500-member housing force, or roughly $75 million a year.
Any withdrawal of that support could jeopardize Mr.
Giuliani's plan to transform the housing force, along with the transit police force, into a bureau  of the main Police Department.


2 Convicted in Computer Pornography Case
A husband and wife from California were convicted here today of distributing  pornography via computer in a case that raises questions about how to apply the  community standards test of Federal obscenity law to the information superhighway.
The defendants, Robert and Carleen Thomas, both 38, of Milpitas, Calif., were each convicted of 11 counts of transmitting obscenity through interstate phone lines via their members-only computer bulletin board.
Each count carries up to five years in prison and $250,000 fine.


Channel 13 to Pare Budget By Laying Off 60 Employees
Facing a need to cut its budget once again, WNET-TV announced sweeping layoffs yesterday that will affect every department of Channel 13, the public television station that serves New York.
Sixty of 480 positions will be eliminated, station executives said, as Channel 13 pares its budget to $105 million a year.
Two years ago the station's  budget was $137 million.


U.N. Opens Yemen Talks
Representatives of Yemen's Government and its defeated southern secessionists met today for talks sponsored by the United Nations, a tentative step to heal the divisions of their two-month civil war.
A mediator, Lakhdar Brahimi of Algeria, said there was a "good atmosphere" at the three-hour session but that progress would be slow.


Nigerian Opposition Leader on Trial; Protests Grow Violent
Nigeria's jailed opposition leader went on trial for treason today as protests by his supporters turned violent, strikes widened and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson arrived as a special envoy of the White House to mediate the country's political crisis.
It was one of the most violent and chaotic days of the yearlong standoff in Nigeria, Africa's most populous nation.


UAL Lists Cities for Low-Cost Shuttle
United Airlines announced yesterday a list of the West Coast cities to which  it will begin offering 184 daily low-cost short-haul flights on Oct. 1.
The new service, called Shuttle by United, will compete primarily with Southwest Airlines, which already offers low-cost flights in California and other Western states.
Continental Airlines has a Continental Lite service, which offers low-cost flights primarily east of the Mississippi River.


Looking Back at a Life on Four Legs
Picture the sort of horse that might sit at a writing table prettily composing its memoirs, and you have some idea of what the narrator's voice in "Black Beauty" is like.
The screenwriter Caroline Thompson ("Edward Scissorhands," "The Secret Garden"), making her directorial debut, takes a cue from Anna Sewell's well-loved 1877 novel (which is subtitled "The Autobiography  of a Horse") and goes well beyond that book's horse-centric point of view.
So Ms.
Thompson affords her four-legged hero extreme sensitivity, especially  by horse standards.
Black Beauty is heard cataloguing his feelings in exquisite  detail.
With a thoroughness to rival David Copperfield's, he even begins his story at the moment of birth.
Later on, he falls in love, dreams about his mother, rhapsodizes about oats and complains bitterly about wearing a harness with a bit.


Stocks Move Up, With Dow Gaining 10.36
In the latest swing in a seesaw week, the stock market rallied modestly yesterday in moderate trading.
The rise was due in part to a jump in the value of the dollar above 100 yen for the first time in a month, fresh evidence that the dollar's fall may have bottomed out and foreign investors were returning to American assets.


Sports of The Times;Mattingly's Elusive Dream
HE was a 16-year-old high school kid in Evansville, Ind., when he saw Reggie  Jackson on television wallop three towering home runs in one game for the Yankees in the 1977 World Series against the Dodgers.
That's when he first pictured himself in a World Series, for the Yankees.
A World Series he might be  close to now, but a World Series that might elude him again if there is a baseball strike .
"It got me excited when I saw Reggie do that, really pumped me up," Don Mattingly said yesterday in front of his locker at Yankee Stadium before the Red Sox game, his eyes bright with memory.
"I'd always been a Reds fan because we lived relatively close to Cincinnati, but that's when I first started thinking Yankees."


South African Vote Is First in 20 Years
South Africa voted in the General Assembly today for the first time in nearly 20 years.
South Africa was suspended in November 1974 because of its apartheid policies and regained its seat only on June 23 of this year, with the inauguration of President Nelson Mandela after open elections.


Hey, Quit Whining, Keenan Won the Cup
For starters, a belated Thanks, Mike.
While I was never an unqualified Mike Keenan fan -- he sees himself as a New  Age serial winner, the most dangerous role model in sports -- I just can't get my stick around this bash Mike bandwagon.


U.S. Prodding Companies To Activism on Portfolios
The Labor Department, which has long promoted shareholder activism, issued new regulations yesterday to encourage corporations to actively monitor companies in their pension portfolios -- in effect, prodding them to follow the  same aggressive approach used by the pension funds of public agencies to shake up underperforming companies.
The new regulations add weight to the many statements that the department has issued lately to corporations, which so far have been reluctant to criticize or  become involved in the management of other companies, whose shares they hold in  their pension portfolios.


No Headline
I was outside the other day, and within seconds there were dozens on each leg, sticking like glue.
It's always been a problem in summer, but until this year you only had to worry about it at dusk and dawn.
This year they're attacking in the middle of the day."
CAROL DECAPUA, describing mosquitoes. [B4:3.]


For Children
'Shelter and Dreams' Katonah Museum of Art Route 22 at Jay Street Katonah, N.Y. (914) 232-9555 Recommended for all ages Through Nov. 13


Horizon Gets A Clean Bill Of Health
The cruise ship Horizon, suspected as the source in at least seven cases of Legionnaires' disease, is going back into service after extensive cleaning, its  owners said yesterday.
The ship was given a clean bill of health after extensive decontamination efforts, said Bob Howard, a spokesman for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.


3,000 Troops To Back U.N. In Rwanda
More than 3,000 troops from seven nations are to arrive in Rwanda over the next month to carry out United Nations peacekeeping efforts there, officials said here today.
These forces would be in addition to any United States troops that might be sent, and would replace the 2,500 French troops now in Rwanda.


Police Went to Israeli Sites After Tips On Bomb Plots
Out of concern over the possibility of a bomb attack by terrorists, the gray  brick office building that houses the Israeli Mission to the United Nations and  the Israeli Consulate was cordoned off yesterday by heavy concrete barriers and  squads of New York City Police officers.
Security was also stepped up at more than a dozen other places in Manhattan where the Israelis or Jewish organizations have offices, as well as other locations in Brooklyn and the Bronx, including the headquarters of the Lubavitcher Hasidic movement on Eastern Parkway in Crown Heights.


Mothers, Daughters and the Pain of Breast Cancer
When her breast cancer was diagnosed five years ago, Sandra Zook-Fischler said, she spent so much time fighting the disease that she was unable to help her daughter Sabrina, then 22, understand the effect it would have on her own life.
She did not realize, she said, that daughters of women with breast cancer can be torn not only by the fear that their mothers will die, but also by the fear that they, too, will get the disease.
In fact, Mrs.
Zook-Fischler said, by trying to shield her daughter, she played down her own illness and left both of  them little opportunity to share their fears.


Syria Criticizes Jordan
Syria issued its first direct criticism of Jordan today for signing a declaration ending a state of war with Israel, saying Syria itself was in no rush for an "incomplete" peace.
The Government daily Al Baath described the pact as a "surprise development"  and a "violation" of the principles on which the broad Middle East peace effort  was based when it began in 1992 in Madrid.


LDDS Communications Adds to Wiltel Bid
LDDS Communications Inc. has raised its offer for the Wiltel telecommunications unit of the Williams Companies to $2.5 billion, people familiar with the companies said today.
The Williams board considered but did not accept the offer during a three-day retreat in Wyoming that ended on Sunday.
The board rejected an offer of $2 billion in May, but told management to keep talking with LDDS and other possible partners.


WISDOM OF URGING RWANDANS' RETURN DIVIDING OFFICIALS
A dispute has broken out between United Nations officials here and in Geneva  over how strongly agencies should urge the more than a million Rwandan refugees  at the huge camp here to return to their homeland, relief officials said today.
Officials of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees working in Africa say they believe that more should be done to encourage the refugees to go home, including public announcements in the refugee camps about security conditions inside the country.


BURGER KING TO INVEST IN MINORITY-CONTROLLED SUPPLIER
The Burger King Corporation and Hudson Foods Inc. are helping to establish a  minority-controlled supplier of ground-beef products to the fast-food chain.
Burger King, a subsidiary of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. of London, said the new company, called Diversity Food Processing, would build a processing plant in Petersburg, Va.
Diversity will be 62 percent owned by its chief executive, Steve Singleteary of Chicago.
Burger King and Hudson Foods, based in Rogers, Ark., will have equal shares in the remainder of the operation.
Burger King said that  Diversity should become one of the 15 largest companies to be controlled by members of minorities.


Senate Backs 'Protected' School Prayer
The Senate has voted to protect prayer the Supreme Court has allowed in schools, but it rejected a move by Senator Jesse Helms to cut off Federal funds  to states and school districts that prevent it.
Instead, the Senate on Wednesday approved an amendment by Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, that would cut off Education Department  funds if a Federal court finds that a state or local school district has "willfully violated" a court order to allow constitutionally protected prayer.


Rogers Throws Perfect Game for Rangers
Just when Kenny Rogers thought he had lost his perfect game, some help came rushing in.


Columbus Sailed From Galway? Unlikely
To the Editor:
Credit where credit is due, or as the Irish would say, "Fair play to you." Your July 12 article on Galway was balanced.
The reference to the tinkers was indeed accurate.
Local governments have been trying to house them since at least the 1950's.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
American League


BRISTOL-MYERS BUYS 15% STAKE IN RESEARCH COMPANY
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, said yesterday that it had acquired a 15 percent stake in the Cadus Pharmaceutical Corporation for an undisclosed price.
Bristol-Myers, based in New York, will provide the privately held Cadus with as  much as $45 million as part of a three-year research collaboration.
The agreement will help Cadus develop technology based on so-called G-protein receptors, which control cell behavior by acting as gatekeepers of messages entering and leaving cells.
Cadus says it has developed a technology that uses yeast cells to screen thousands of new drugs a day for their effects on G-protein pathways.


Prison Term for Klansman
The grand dragon of the Unified Ku Klux Klan of Connecticut, Massachusetts and Rhode Island was sentenced today to five years and three months in prison for possessing a pipe bomb.
Before the sentencing, William Dodge, 31, of Bristol, who had pleaded guilty, told Judge T. F. Gilroy Daly of Federal District Court: "I would never hurt anybody or anything. I do realize that I made a grave mistake."


In Congress, a Powerful Few Control the Purse
To the Editor:
You shed much-needed light on the appropriations process in Congress with "Sending Money to Home District: Earmarking and the Pork Barrel" (front page, July 13).
However, you perpetuate a widely held belief that pork barrel spending follows the normal constitutional path through Congress and onto the President's desk for approval or veto.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


RESULTS PLUS
YACHT RACING
A Close Call for All-Female Crew It was a close call yesterday for Matador , the 85-foot sloop being crewed by  Bill Koch's America's Cup women's team off Newport, R.I.
Jockeying to edge out her opponent near the race committee's start boat, the helmsman, Leslie Egnot, had to duck her boat behind the committee boat to avoid a collision with Matador 's nearest rival, the maxi-yacht, Longobarda.
Matador  raised a protest flag immediately afterward.
Matador  finished seventh on corrected time; Longobarda was eighth.
In first was Full Cry, skippered by Kevin Mahaney.
The race was part of the New York Yacht Club's 150th anniversary Sesquicentennial Regatta.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Best Quarter Ever: G.M. Earns $1.92 Billion
The General Motors Corporation said today that it made more money in its second quarter than in any three-month period of its history, as yet another automotive earnings record tumbled in the surging American car and truck market.
For the quarter that ended in June, G.M. earned $1.92 billion, or $2.23 a common share, more than twice the $889 million it made in the period a year earlier.
Rebounding from a loss of $33 million last year, G.M.'s crucial North American operations contributed the most to the bottom line in the quarter, $723 million.


Legal Services, Still Embattled
The election of Bill Clinton ended 12 years of White House abuse and neglect  of the Legal Services Corporation, the Federal body that subsidizes hundreds of  law offices devoted to representing the poor.
The program still has enemies in Congress, however, and only last week had to rally to survive an attack on the Senate floor.


Lord Delfont, 84, Theatrical Producer
Lord Delfont, a Russian immigrant who made his fortune in show business and produced numerous plays and musicals in London and New York, including "Funny Girl" on Broadway, died on Thursday at his home in Angmering, England.
He was 84.
The cause was a heart attack, said his nephew, Ian Freeman.


For Baseball Fans, It's Not So Perfect
On the day major league players voted for a walkout on Aug. 12 if they have not reached a new collective bargaining agreement with the owners, pitcher Kenny Rogers of the Texas Rangers rang up nothing but putouts in beating the California Angels, 4-0.
The strike would be the eighth work stoppage in the last 23 years.
The perfect game was the 12th in history.


WLR FOODS TO BUY TURKEY ASSETS OF CUDDY FARMS
WLR Foods Inc. agreed yesterday to acquire the turkey processing and production assets of Cuddy Farms Inc. for about $73.8 million in cash and stock.
The agreement calls for WLR to pay $43 million in cash and issue common shares for the balance.
After the transaction is completed, Cuddy Farms will own 9 percent to 10.5 percent of WLR's stock.
The Cuddy Farms acquisition will catapult WLR, now the nation's fourth-largest turkey processor, to the No. 2 spot and provide another potential weapon in its takeover battle with Tyson Foods Inc.
Tyson has made a $30-a-share hostile offer for WLR, which is scheduled to expire today.
WLR's shares fell $1.75 yesterday, to $25.50, on the  New York Stock Exchange.


A Battle Over Regulating Insurers
A simmering dispute between state insurance commissioners and state legislators over regulation of the country's 6,000 insurance companies is leaving an opening for an alternative that neither group wants -- Federal regulation.
Galvanized by the failure of several large insurance companies in the early 1990's, state insurance commissioners have tried to ward off the threat of Federal regulation by adopting tougher, more uniform regulations of their own.
But they are being challenged by some state legislators, who support the principle of state regulation but contend that commissioners are usurping the rights of elected officials.


The Spoken Word
DRAMATIC READING BY MARIAN SELDES, Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, at 55th Street, Manhattan.
The actress will read from works by Euripides, J. P. Donleavy, Anne Sexton, Tennyson and others.
Today at 1 P.M. (A chamber music concert will precede the reading, at 12:30 P.M.) Free.
Part of the Free Theater  Project.
Information: (212) 874-2225.


Dublin Journal;A Kennedy Pleases the Irish, Piques Some Envoys
When Jean Kennedy Smith became the American Ambassador here 13 months ago, she was reasonably sure that given the adulation the Irish have for anyone related to John F. Kennedy, she would be well received.
And she was.
As she travels around the country, leaving Dublin two or three times a week,  the tall, slender, 66-year-old Ambassador is treated like the sister of a sainted martyr, or at least like a rock star, compelled to sign dozens of autographs and to pose for snapshots to take home for Uncle Tim and Grandma Bridget.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;For a Texas agency and its client, Subaru, a new campaign could enhance brand identities.
THE test drive is over for Temerlin McClain, the Texas advertising agency that declared its operating independence two years ago from the Bozell Inc. network.
Now the real road show is about to begin.
After beating out agencies on Madison Avenue to win the $70 million Subaru of America Inc. account in January, Temerlin McClain is set to start its first big  campaign for the auto maker in mid-August.
The campaign, which will include television, print and outdoor ads, will coincide with the introduction of Subaru's redesigned Legacy compact car to the United States market.


Stillman's Yuppies, a Bit Older, in Spain
Anyone familiar with Whit Stillman's captivating 1990 "Metropolitan" knows that his precise, urbane intelligence is a true tonic on screen.
Both of his films, the second of which is the equally appealing new "Barcelona," have an offbeat, amusing specificity that is distinctive and rare.
Each film is firmly rooted in subject matter of no great universal familiarity. ("Metropolitan," set in the uneasy world of New York debutantes and their escorts, was by far the simpler to describe.) And each radiates the film maker's fervent, occasionally crazy confidence in the legitimacy of his interests.
Mr.
Stillman can be dead serious about, say, NATO without sacrificing a gently sardonic tone.
And he's capable of linking theories of salesmanship with thoughts of love.
He makes odd, tender, uncategorizable films that must utterly confound the market researchers whose opinions shape Hollywood.
Good.


Law Firms and Harassment
A sexual harassment suit against the world's largest law firm illustrates widespread problems in the structure and attitudes of firms nationwide, experts  say.
Page B7.


Back to the Land: South African Blacks Walk a Legal and Economic Maze
Stanford Mtselu does not measure the drapes, but there is no mistaking his proprietary air as he visits the dairy farms that green the rain-drenched coastal hills of the region called Tsi tsikamma.
"How often do you milk each day?" Mr.
Mtselu, a black retired stock clerk, asks one white dairyman as they admire the oats and rye that stretch beyond the  farmer's picture window.
"How's your electricity here?" he asks another.
"Is it  expensive?"


Art in Review
'Summer Salon' Bonni Benrubi Gallery 52 East 76th Street Manhattan Through Aug. 26


A Twister's Deadly Destruction


Minorities Get More Mortgages
A group of financial regulatory agencies announced today that the number of mortgages issued to black and Hispanic borrowers rose sharply last year, but that these applicants remained substantially more likely than whites to be denied home loans.
The group, the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, which is made up of five agencies, announced that the number of home loans issued to blacks rose 36.1 percent last year while the number issued to Hispanic borrowers climbed 23.6 percent.
For whites, the increase was 17.1 percent.


Forest Fires Are Unabated In Far West
A fire that destroyed 13 homes near the Entiat River on Tuesday and Wednesday here in north-central Washington's Wenatchee National Forest swelled to 54,000 acres by this morning, state officials said.
Fire-fighting supervisors updated their estimate of the fire's size from 20,000 acres on Wednesday night to almost three times that size today, based on  heat-detecting infrared photos taken on an early-morning surveillance flight, said Roland Emetaz, a spokesman for the Multi-Agency Coordination Center in Portland, Ore.


Court Again Rejects District That Aimed for Black Majority
For the second time in seven months, a Federal court in Louisiana has rejected the lines of a Congressional district drawn to create a black majority.
In place of the district, which cut on a diagonal from the northwestern part  of the state to the southeast, the three-judge panel of the Federal District Court in Shreveport on Monday redrew many of the lines of Louisiana's Congressional districts.
Under the court's new plan, Louisiana would be left with only one black-majority district because the disputed district, the 4th, would have less than a 30 percent black majority of voters.


For Palestinians, Nothing Has Improved
To the Editor:
Abba Eban's goal of Arab-Israeli peace is not furthered by his rationalizations of the policies of Israel's Labor governments in "Hussein, King of Realpolitik" (Op-Ed, July 20).


25 and Under
Although it opened just a few weeks ago, First, an East Village storefront with an eclectic mix of foods, is already a happy place to eat.
The owners, Stephen Billings, Joanne Coraci and Samuel DeMarco, seeing how Blue Ribbon has built a thriving late-night crowd in SoHo, hope to do the same thing on First Avenue, serving food until 2 or 3 A.M. nightly.
But the food, with nods to Mexico, Thailand, Japan, France and Italy, is delicious at any hour.
Mr.
DeMarco, the chef, last cooked at Luxe, a luxury Manhattan restaurant that closed this year.
Now he has taken a less-expensive turn that does not sacrifice creativity.
Crisp squid rings ($6.50), for example, are far superior to ordinary fried calamari.
This dish is an artful composition of squid perfectly fried in a salt-tinged batter and arranged around slices of sweet-and-spicy pickled ginger and slivers of marinated seaweed, with a small bowl of wasabi-flavored mayonnaise.


The Road Is Long for the Mariners
The longest road trip in Seattle Mariners' history was extended yesterday when the Players Association rejected Tacoma's Cheney Stadium as an alternate site to the Kingdome, rendered unsafe by faulty ceiling tiles.
Seattle had a nine-game homestand scheduled to begin Tuesday.
The Mariners will likely be visitors for all of those games.
"This is a severe disappointment," said CHUCK ARMSTRONG, the Mariners' president. (AP)


Wild Card in a Game of Dirty Tricks
FOR a movie industry enamored of cartoon heroes, Jim Carrey ought to be a dream come true.
With his sparkling, silly grin and his true talent for physical clowning, Mr.
Carrey comes as close to being an animated creature as a live actor ever could.
Add to that a goofy, ingenuous screen persona with obvious appeal for children and you have the not-so-surprising popularity of "Ace Ventura: Pet Detective," the lowball hit of the winter season.
Now, primed for broader success in vehicles better tailored to his talents, Mr.
Carrey returns in "The Mask," an astonishingly lazy and perfunctory effort that does little to realize his comic potential.
Listless as it is, "The Mask" succeeds in illustrating two of the more troubling cinematic trends of the moment.


PHARMACISTS HELP DRUG PROMOTIONS
Without explicitly telling doctors or patients, major drug companies are enlisting pharmacists to promote their drugs rather than those of their competitors.
And some doctors and medical ethicists don't like it.
Take the many neighborhood pharmacists who serve participants in Medco, a company that buys drugs from manufacturers and sells them through pharmacies and mail orders to 38 million Americans.


King Hussein Invites Aunt of 2 Abducted Children to Jordan
King Hussein of Jordan has invited the legal guardian of two children whose father has admitted killing their mother to attend a custody hearing in his country.
American officials said they interpreted the invitation to mean that the children would soon be returned to the United States.
The King, who is here to sign a peace treaty with Israel, issued the invitation today.
New Jersey's senators, Bill Bradley and Frank R. Lautenberg, and three New Jersey Representatives, met with him and top Jordanian officials for about 45 minutes in his hotel to talk about the case.
They emerged to say that the King had invited the children's aunt and legal guardian, Nesime Dokur of Paterson, N.J., to come to Amman as his guest.
Mrs.
Dokur was appointed the children's legal guardian by a New Jersey judge on Friday.


Clippers Become Fitch's Fifth N.B.A. Team
BILL FITCH, who guided the Boston Celtics to the 1981 National Basketball Association championship, was hired as coach of the Los Angeles Clippers yesterday.
The Clippers will be the fifth team he will have coached in the league.
"It's a fine opportunity," said the 60-year-old Fitch.
"I've been in tougher situations before."
The Clippers are trying to rebuild after missing the playoffs in 1993-94 and losing their marquee player, DOMINIQUE WILKINS, to free agency and the Boston Celtics.
The Clippers (27-55) finished last in the Pacific Division last season.
The Clippers had been without a coach for 73 days, since dismissing BOB WEISS on May 16.
In 21 previous seasons as an N.B.A. coach, Fitch spent nine years with Cleveland, four in Boston, five in Houston and three with New Jersey.
Fitch has  coached more games (1,722) than any other N.B.A. coach and has a career record of 845-877. (AP)


Mozart and Haydn From 1784, More or Less
Last summer, Lincoln Center sought to enliven its Mostly Mozart Festival by jumping on the thematic-programming bandwagon, having Mozart share the spotlight each week with another Classical or early Romantic composer.
Partly because the  festival has always offered these kinds of pairings, and partly because the programming often did not match the announced concept, this effort came in for some derision.
So this year Lincoln Center dreamed up a few more focused themes, one of which -- Vienna, circa 1784 -- is being explored this week at Avery Fisher Hall.
The final installments are tonight and tomorrow evening.
You may be wondering, what kind of theme is 1784?
Good question.
It was hardly a watershed, politically or musically.
Mozart, then 28, was fairly prolific; when wasn't he?
The works he composed that year were mature, certainly, and sometimes excitingly virtuosic, but they hardly have the depth of his works from, say, his final year, 1791.


Diner's Journal
What they would make of the cozy and beautifully lighted dining room is anybody's guess.
They would certainly approve of the civilized sound level, but  the room is far more casual than anything to which they were accustomed.
They would marvel at the menu too, although it is certainly familiar these days.
It offers pasta, risotto, lots of fish and all the familiar trendy vegetables.


INSIDE
Giuliani Plans Health Clinics


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST
OUCH! SLAP! THE PESKY SOUNDS OF SUMMER


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about an agreement by the Robert Plan Corporation to lease two buildings on Long Island from the Northrop Grumman Corporation misstated their location.
The buildings are in the village of Bethpage, not the village of Oyster Bay.
Bethpage is in the Town of Oyster Bay.


SmithKline Ulcer Drug Challenged
SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. was dealt a second setback today in its regulatory  quest to turn its prescription ulcer drug Tagamet into an over-the-counter treatment for heartburn.
Two panels of advisers to the Food and Drug Administration recommended against approving the drug for over-the-counter sale, saying they were worried it might react with patients' other drugs.


Albus Will Have His Gallery
As usual, he will be overshadowed by some of the biggest names in golf, but JIM ALBUS will probably have his largest galleries of the year when the $650,000 Northville Long Island Classic Senior PGA event gets under way today at the Meadow Brook Club in Jericho, L.I.
Albus, 54, was the head pro at the nearby Piping Rock Club for 14 years.
In 20 tournaments since joining the Senior Tour in 1990, he has earned $635,048 to stand fifth on the prize money list.
The Seniors' top 10 money winners are entered in the 78-player, 54-hole event as well as Walt Zembreski, the 59-year-old former construction worker from Mahwah, N.J., who tied for second a year ago and Gene Borek, the teaching pro from White Plains who took one of four qualifying berths.


Manning Set to Sign With Suns
Danny Manning, the free agent forward from the Atlanta Hawks, has all but signed with the Phoenix Suns.
"We have already agreed that we are going to agree," said Ron Grinker, Manning's agent, who was meeting with Suns' officials tonight.


Leader Used N.A.A.C.P. Money To Settle a Sex Harassment Case
Without the knowledge of his board of directors, the executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People committed the financially troubled organization last year to payment of as much as $332,400 to a former employee who had threatened to sue him for sexual harassment, according to court records and N.A.A.C.P. officials.
In an out-of-court settlement between the executive director, the Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., and Mary E. Stansel, who was a deputy of his for a month last year, he agreed that she would be paid two lump sums totaling $50,000 and then six monthly installments of $5,400 each.
Court records show that she has actually received at least $77,000 of that money.


ADOBE PLANS DIVESTITURE OF ALDUS'S FREEHAND SOFTWARE
Adobe Systems Inc. will divest itself of the Aldus Corporation's Freehand software so the companies can proceed with their merger plans, the Federal Trade Commission said Wednesday.
When the companies announced the merger in March, the F.T.C. objected that the $500 million deal would combine the only two companies  that sell the professional-illustration software, creating a monopolistic market.
The F.T.C. agreed to permit the merger after Adobe said it would divest itself of the software to the Altsys Corporation, which developed it.
Altsys still receives royalties on the program, amounting to 50 percent of its $7.5 million revenue in 1993.


Supporters Of Farrakhan Are Assailed For Exclusion
School officials said today that they were surprised to learn that women were barred from attending a speech by Louis Farrakhan at a public high school on Tuesday night.
They said the action violated an agreement they had made with supporters of Mr.
Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam, and they vowed that it would not happen again.
The Assistant Superintendent of Schools in Hartford, Nicholas LaRosa, said Mr.
Farrakhan's representatives had promised school officials that his speech would be open to everyone.
"Apparently, they changed their minds at the last minute," Mr.
LaRosa said on Wednesday.


In Congress, a Powerful Few Control the Purse;Phantom Spending Cuts
To the Editor:
Your July 19 Congressional Memo suggests that the sponsors of the A to Z spending-cut plan "may be more interested in talking about reducing the deficit  than in actually doing so" because they haven't proposed any spending-cut amendments for appropriations bills.
More likely, they understand that such spending-cut amendments, because of the Congressional budget system, will almost certainly have no effect on the deficit.


Gallego Atones As Yankees Split a Pair
Mike Gallego spoiled Mike Gallego's night on Wednesday as he forgot how many  outs there were and could not sleep because his rare mental error almost deprived the Yankees of a victory.
Gallego redeemed himself with the decisive hit in the completion of the suspended game yesterday and pushed the Yankees to  a 4-3 victory in 11 innings.
Joe Hesketh followed Gallego's effort by spoiling the afternoon for him and the other Yankees who swung feebly at his pitches.
Hesketh made sure the Yankees would not snatch two victories in one day by depriving them of anything but two  hits into the eighth inning in Boston's 1-0 triumph.


AC&amp;R Is Divided Into Specialty Units
AC&amp;R Advertising, a member of the Bates Worldwide network in New York, has been reorganized, as expected, into two separate specialty divisions.


That's Life' Is Extended to an Open-Ended Run
That's Life," a musical revue about contemporary Jewish life, has been converted to an open-ended run at Playhouse 91, 316 East 91st Street, Manhattan. The production, conceived and directed by Helen Butleroff, is the finale of the  Jewish Repertory Theater's 20th season. Performances: Tuesdays and Thursdays at  8 P.M.; Wednesdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 8 P.M. and Sundays at 2 and 7 P.M. Tickets: $30. Information: (212) 831-2000.


Columbus Sailed From Galway? Unlikely;Choctaw Connection
To the Editor:
Your July 12 Galway Journal reports: "A monument to Columbus was recently defaced with the word 'Choctaw' in black print. Officials suspect it was the work of American visitors who feel Columbus ravaged American Indians."


Bonilla Is Joining In On Offensive Explosion
The first home run went over the wall in right field.
The second one sailed into the left-field seats.
And, for a few moments, Bobby Bonilla felt like the power hitter everyone had expected him to be.
Then he thought about the offensive leaders in the National League and felt deflated a bit.


INTERGROUP HEALTHCARE SAID TO BE SEEKING SALE
The Intergroup Healthcare Corporation said yesterday that it and its majority shareholder were negotiating a sale of the company to an unidentified health care concern.
The company's shares surged $9.50, to $47.50, in Nasdaq trading, where its 25 percent gain was among the best of the day.
Thomas-Davis Medical Centers, a group of doctors that owns 63 percent of Intergroup's stock, hired Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in December to explore the sale of their stake.
Some analysts speculated that Intergroup, an operator of health maintenance organizations based in Tucson, Ariz., could bring a price of about $50 or $51 a  share, or more than $500 million.
One possible buyer was reported to be Wellpoint Health Network Inc., whose stock plunged $5.50 yesterday, to $25, after the company reported lower-than-expected earnings.


Kohlberg, Kravis Affiliates To Join to Cut Health Costs
The takeover firm that spent billions to buy RJR Nabisco and other companies  through leveraged buyouts in the 1980's is trying to shave its health care costs in the 90's.
Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company is forming a coalition of the companies it controls that would negotiate with health care providers for a better deal than the companies now get individually.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8


CHRYSLER TO RAISE PRICES 2% ON 1995 MODELS
The Chrysler Corporation said yesterday that it would raise United States prices on 1995 models an average of 2 percent, the smallest increase of the Big  Three auto makers.
Earlier, Ford said it would raise prices an average of 2.2 percent on 1995 models and General Motors said it would increase prices 2.5 percent.
Chrysler did not release prices on individual models, but said that prices would increase an average of 1.5 percent, or $281, from those for comparably equipped 1994 models.
Prices for trucks, including the company's popular minivans, will increase an average 2.3 percent, or $497.


CHRONICLE
Haven't quite firmed up your summer vacation plans yet?
That's O.K.
PRESIDENT CLINTON doesn't know yet when he'll be able to get away from the office, either.
With the health-care debate reaching fever pitch and Congress threatening to  postpone its summer recess beyond its scheduled start on Aug. 12, all that Mr.
Clinton has told his aides is that the First Family will go to the Massachusetts island of Martha's Vineyard probably for a few weeks before Labor Day.


Accounts


I.M.F. to Help Ukraine to Rejuvenate Economy
The head of the International Monetary Fund met with Ukraine's new President  this week and said they would work together to develop an economic program that  could open the door for the $4 billion aid package promised to Ukraine at the economic summit meeting this month in Naples.
The fund's managing director, Michel Camdessus, announced "the beginning of something important and positive for Ukraine" after meeting on Wednesday with President Leonid D. Kuchma, who took office on July 18.
If the program is successful, the first part of a $700 million loan could be issued by October, officials said.


Trip to History for Boston Teen-Agers: To the South of the CivilRights Fight
In a once whites-only hotel here, three gray-haired black men who 30 years ago had risked their lives to change the world were telling the young people how it was in Mississippi.
Owen Brooks, 65, Charles Moore, 68, and Willy Long, 59, talked about the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.
The sit-ins, the boycotts, the marches.
The white students who came by bus from the North to register black voters.
The meetings in churches when the Klan was burning churches.


From Budget Office, Surprising Findings
The Congressional Budget Office has found that the health insurance bill from the Senate Finance Committee would insure 20 million of the estimated 39 million Americans who now lack coverage and save the Federal Government money in the process.
The Finance Committee bill would not require either employers or individuals  to buy insurance, relying instead on changes in insurance laws and on subsidies  for people with incomes up to twice the Federal poverty level, or about $28,000  for a family of four.
The bill provides that if 95 percent of Americans are not  insured by 2002, a commission would recommend what Congress should do next, and  Congress would be required to consider the proposal quickly.


By Word And Deed, Giant Gets Attention
Last week during a meeting with the team, Coach Dan Reeves was telling players who had to do extra running that they had a choice when to do it: either before practice or after it.
A hand went up toward the back of the room.
It belonged to defensive lineman Chris Maumalanga.
A rookie.
"I'm not running," Maumalanga declared.
"I won't be there." The entire room went dead silent as players looked at each other in disbelief.
A rookie mouthing off to a coach who has been to three Super Bowls and is considered one of the best minds in the game?
Defensive coordinator Mike Nolan, who was standing right behind the lineman, almost went into shock.


A $1.8 Million Bid Wins 2 Empty Prison Barges
Two prison barges that have been floating empty in New York Harbor for two years and have cost New York City more than $1 million a year to maintain have been sold for $1.8 million, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday.
The winning bid was twice the price the city expected to get for the barges.
But the bid was far short of the $41 million that it cost the city to acquire and renovate the barges in the late 1980's as a stopgap solution to overcrowded jails.


New Man in Backfield Gives Jets Versatility
Anthony Johnson may have been a native-born hero in Indiana -- a high school  football star in South Bend and a college star for Notre Dame's national champions.
But the Indianapolis Colts, who made him a second-round draft choice  in 1990, also made him an afterthought.
In Johnson's four years with the Colts, they always seemed to have one glamorous star.
First, it was Eric Dickerson, the running back; Johnson, who played the same position, had to wait.
Then it was Jeff George, the Indianapolis-bred quarterback.
When Dickerson and George wore out their welcome  and moved on, it could have been Johnson's turn.
It was not.
Three months ago, with the second choice in the National Football league draft, the Colts grabbed  Marshall Faulk, the dazzling running back from San Diego State.


Control Board Faults Saving Estimates in Mayor's Budget
The state's Financial Control Board declared yesterday that Mayor Rudolph W.  Giuliani had done little to solve New York City's long-term financial problems in spite of an austere budget that cuts spending by $1.1 billion and eliminates  15,000 municipal jobs.
Although the board praised the Mayor's efforts to reverse the trend of growing budgets for the first time in 16 years, it concluded that New York faced budget gaps of $2 billion to $3 billion in the coming years because spending continued to grow faster than revenues.


Iranian in Argentine Blast: Tinker, Refugee, Liar, Spy?
Is the Iranian refugee who blamed Iran for the huge truck bombing here a failed houseware salesman from Isfahan who wanted United States visas for his family?
Or is he a highly informed defector from the top ranks of the Iranian Foreign Ministry?
A battle of faxes and news conferences erupted today over the credibility of  Monousheh Moatamer, the Iranian dissident who reportedly identified four Iranian diplomats as the planners of the bombing that killed about 100 people at a Jewish community center here last week.


Sounds Around Town
A Return at Tramps


New York's Budget Gap Widens
Barely a month after Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the New York City Council nailed down a supposedly balanced budget, the Mayor has suddenly ordered city agencies to cut an additional quarter-billion dollars from this year's spending  and prepare to cut $200 million more if need be.
He contends that the cuts were  part of his original plan and no one should be surprised.
Leaving this double talk aside, he is moving in the right direction -- but still too slowly.
Two responsible monitors of the city's finances now say that, even counting the new cuts, the budget for the year that began July 1 is still far from balanced -- and that Mr.
Giuliani has done too little to improve prospects for future years.
In separate reports, State Comptroller Carl McCall and the staff of the Financial Control Board found gaps in the budget of at least $500 million
-- after allowing for the new round of cuts.
They said the gaps could become even worse if some risky assumptions about revenues and savings failed to pan out.


Fidelity's Bet on Macy Debt Paid Off
Perhaps the most active behind-the-scenes player in the Macy-Federated drama  was Fidelity Investments, the giant mutual fund com pany.
Fidelity is no stranger to the close-knit world of bankruptcy investing, where it has used its substantial financial muscle to influence the outcome of several big bankruptcy cases including Bally's Grand, Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino and Mcorp.


Mercedes Bid for Bus Maker
Mercedes-Benz A.G. said today that it had made an offer for Kaessbohrer, Europe's largest builder of luxury touring buses.
A spokesman confirmed that Mercedes had made a bid for Karl Kaessbohrer Fahrzeugwerke G.m.b.H., a privately owned company that makes Setra buses.
He gave no financial details.


Galarraga Lost For the Season
Two hit batsmen helped the Colorado Rockies put today's game out of reach and pulled them closer to first place.
The cost, though, may have been too high.
Andres Galarraga was lost for the season when he had his right hand fractured by a pitch in Colorado's 5-1 victory over the San Francisco Giants.
Galarraga finishes batting .319 with 31 home runs and 85 runs batted in.


In Korea, Posturing and Delay
In an attempt to discredit North Korea, South Korean intelligence trotted out a defector on Wednesday who said the North had five nuclear bombs.
Although Seoul has now distanced itself from his claim, this was the latest in a series of spats that erupted after the North took offense at the South's unwillingness  to offer condolences on the death of President Kim Il Sung.
The sparring could slow resumption of negotiations critical to talking the North out of its nuclear program.
North Korea is unlikely to abandon that program unless its broader political  and security concerns are met.
Those concerns cannot be addressed by Washington  and Pyongyang alone.
South Korea needs to be constructive about advancing its own dialogue with the North.


High-Flying Bids for Use Of Airwaves
Bidders in the nation's first attempt to auction off a portion of the airwaves pushed prices beyond $600 million as they conducted a fourth straight day of bidding at a downtown hotel here.
Most people expected Friday would be the day that determines the victors for  the 10 nationwide licenses for a new generation of advanced paging and messaging services.
The five most attractive of these licenses are likely to sell for at least $80 million each.
But few people were willing to make firm predictions because almost nothing had gone as expected since the bidding opened on Monday.


Times Mirror Games Venture
The Times Mirror Company has agreed to take a minority stake in Rocket Science Games, a new Northern California company aiming for leadership in the next generation of video game software.
The Los Angeles Times, published by Times Mirror, reported the deal would be  the first since the company announced in June that it was spinning off its cable television operations to concentrate on new forms of digital programming.


Lost Civilization Yields Its Riches As Thieves Fall Out
A FALLING-OUT among thieves and a trail of looted treasure led in 1987 to one of the most spectacular archeological discoveries of this century: the glittering royal tombs of the Moche civilization, which dominated northern Peru  from A.D. 100 to 800, centuries before the rise of the Inca Empire.
From time to time, the villagers of Sipan had supplemented their incomes plundering ancient cemeteries and adobe pyramids of the Moche (pronounced MOH-chay).
One night, while digging deep into an eroded pyramid, they broke into one of the richest funerary chambers ever looted.
They filled gunnysacks with decorated ceramic vessels and gold and silver objects.
After an argument over the division of the loot, one of the dissatisfied thieves went to the police, who confiscated the material and learned of its source.


VALUE HEALTH TO ACQUIRE LARGE MAIL-ORDER PHARMACY
Value Health Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the nation's fifth-largest mail-order pharmacy for one million shares of common stock.
The acquisition includes closely held Prescription Drug Service Inc., based in Hauppauge, L.I., and an affiliated company, Prescription Drug Service West Inc., based in Chandler, Ariz.
The two companies have 2.2 million customers and have combined annual revenue of more than $50 million.
Value Health, based in Avon, Conn., is a leading provider of specialty managed-care benefit programs and health care information services.
Value Health's stock rose 12.5 cents, to $43.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Tough Maryland Smoking Law Is on Hold
A judge has put the nation's toughest ban on workplace smoking on hold, saying opponents had proved it could hurt some businesses.
The regulation, which was scheduled to take effect on Aug. 1, is being challenged in court by restaurants, tobacco companies and other businesses.


City and State to Announce Program of Arts Grants
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani are to announce a program today in which New York City and the state would provide a total of $10 million  to cultural institutions in the city that can raise matching private money.
The program is intended not only to increase financing for the arts, but also to encourage arts groups to raise more private money and improve the public's access to the arts.
It is a result of an agreement made in February between city officials and leaders of the arts world, who offered to raise $10 million in private contributions if the Mayor restored $4.2 million in arts financing that he wanted to cut from the city's budget and if the city and the state matched the pledge with $5 million each.


INTEGON TO BUY TRAVELERS SUBSIDIARY FOR $142 MILLION
The Travelers Indemnity Company said yesterday that it would sell its Bankers and Shippers Insurance Company subsidiary to the Integon Corporation for $142 million.
Travelers Indemnity, based in Hartford, is a division of Travelers Inc.
Integon, based in Winston-Salem, N.C., is a property casualty insurer that primarily sells individual auto insurance in the Southeast.
Under the agreement, Travelers will sell the nonstandard automobile insurance lines that are the bulk of Bankers and Shippers' business and retain the rest of the unit's operations.
Integon's stock rose $1yesterday, to $18.625, on the New York Stock  Exchange, while shares of Travelers fell 37.5 cents, to $32.875.


Pope's Envoy In Mexico Met Hunted Men
The Roman Catholic Bishop who is the Pope's official representative in Mexico admits that last December and January he secretly met with two known drug traffickers identified by law enforcement officials as the presumed killers of a Catholic Cardinal in May 1993.
In a written statement, the Bishop, Jeronimo Prigione, said he received the traffickers, Ramon and Benjamin Arellano, at his home in Mexico City on two separate occasions.
He said that they were private meetings, not the sacrament of confession, but that he was still prohibited by church law from disclosing what was said.


Champion Team Loses in Spingold
There was a major upset in the Spingold Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals here on Wednesday.
The defending champions in the Women's Knockout Teams, headed by Gail Greenberg of Manhattan, lost a quaterfinal match by 9 imps to Sally Woolsey of Kensington, Calif., Joann Glasson of Morrisville, Penn., Joann Manfield of Philadelphia, Jo Anne Casen of Boca Raton, Fla., Jan Martel of Davis, Calif., and Georgiana Gates of Houston.
In today's semifinal, the Gates team faces a foursome led by Sue Picus of Manhattan.
In the other semifinal, experienced squads headed by Kathie Wei-Sender of Nashville and Janice Seamon of Miami are in opposition.


When the Biggest Firm Faces Sexual Harassment Suit
Martin R. Greenstein was a superstar at Baker &amp; McKenzie, a swaggering bear of a man with a gift for attracting lucrative clients and a standard of perfection that admitted few mistakes.
Rena Weeks was a neophyte legal secretary, in over her head in the firm's intellectual property division, where she misaddressed envelopes, made typographical errors and had trouble transferring telephone calls.


CHRONICLE
DONNA SHALALA, Mr.
Clinton's Secretary of Health and Human Services, will forego her annual summer trek with friends in the wilderness.
"My adventure this summer is health-care reform," she said yesterday.
For now, she can revel in memories that have been stirred by a letter from her childhood softball coach, GEORGE STEINBRENNER.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
The Arthur Ashe Foundation for the Defeat of AIDS, New York, to Rubin-Ehrenthal &amp; Associates, New York, to promote the third annual Arthur Ashe  AIDS Tennis Challenge.


President's Team Faces the Lawmakers


Hockey Groups Reach Pact
Amateur and professional hockey officials have reached agreement on a three-year plan of cooperation intended to further spread the appeal of hockey beyond the United States and Canada and to insure maximum participation of National Hockey League players in the Olympics.
The two groups will work with Olympic officials to try to adopt a schedule for the hockey competition at the 1998 Winter Games in Nagano, Japan, that would be convenient for N.H.L. players.
Their agreement was announced by the National Hockey League's commissioner, Gary Bettman, and Rene Fasel, president of the International Ice Hockey Federation, which governs amateur hockey internationally.


Prices of Pork Bellied Drop Amid Large Supply of Hogs
Pork belly futures sank to their lowest price in nearly five years yesterday  as a result of a hefty supply of hogs.
On other commodity markets, coffee prices fell while crude oil prices rose.
The Commodity Research Bureau's index of 21 commodities fell 0.38 point, to 232.20.


Getting to Know Grandpa Under Penalty of Death
The Chamber By John Grisham 486 pages. Doubleday. $24.95.


Investing in the Inner City;Small-Business Owner Sees Revitalized Future
Jose Aguiar is the Kleener King.
The alliterative name is plastered in royal blue and yellow lettering on the  12 stores he owns in the Bronx and upper Manhattan.
And if Mr.
Aguiar has his way, it may soon become a household phrase in many more inner-city neighborhoods, emblazoned on a small fleet of trucks shuttling clothing back and forth between his dry-cleaning plant and dozens of Kleener Kings in northern New York City.


Derailing a Big Bankruptcy Plan
Last September, when top executives of R. H. Macy &amp; Company began laboring in earnest on a plan to get the retailer out of bankruptcy court, their goals were  clearly to keep their fabled department store company independent and themselves at the helm.
They came close to achieving both.
But in the end, Macy lost its independence to Federated Department Stores Inc., which owns Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and other regional chains, because its chief executive could not keep his directors in line, particularly Laurence A. Tisch, who was a big investor in Macy before its troubles and played an unusual role in the bankruptcy maneuverings.


Market Place;As markets sputter sideways, big stock fund groups rake in cash.
THE stock market is going nowhere very fast.
But that isn't for a lack of cash from mutual fund investors.
Both Fidelity Investments, the nation's largest fund group, and T. Rowe Price, another major group, said yesterday that the flow of investor cash into equity funds picked up significantly in July.
But some other fund groups, including ones that are sold through brokers rather than directly to the public, reported declines.


Players Ready To Take Bitter Pill
When he chose his profession years ago, Mike Greenwell never anticipated that part of his job description would include "polling his constituents." He figured that was something you did in a Senate subcommittee hearing.
"This is baseball, right?" said Greenwell, a Boston Red Sox outfielder and co-player representative along with Roger Clemens.
"Let's be honest: We don't plan to give in and they don't. This game is in trouble."


DOW CHEMICAL CO. (DOW,N)
The Dow Chemical Company said yesterday that its second-quarter net income climbed 69 percent on a slight gain in revenue, pushed up by strong volume and price increases in its plastics division.
Net income rose to $251 million, or 91 cents a share.
Wall Street had been expecting about 88 cents a share.
Excluding one-time charges in last year's quarter, Dow's per-share results increased 21 percent.


Cultural Clashes in the 50's
In 1956, Phillippe is a French exchange student at a Virginia college where tradition is sacred.
He picks up a certain amount about the local culture, but that doesn't mean he's ready to live by it.
When he finds himself outside a blues club in the black section of town, chased and harassed by the locals, he can only run around the parking lot yelling out the truth: "I'm not a redneck! I am not a Southern gentlemen! I am French!"
In fact, that difference saves him.
The black musicians (Charles S. Dutton and Hinton Battle, in roles that are too brief) remember how well they were treated in Paris and take Phillippe inside to hear them play.
It is the liveliest scene in "Foreign Student," a small, sincere film that burdens poor Phillippe's one semester in the Shenandoah Valley with the weight of American culture and history in the 1950's.


New Chief of Youth Services To Face Deficit and Disarray
Next week, Alfred B. Curtis Jr. begins his job as Commissioner of the Department of Youth Services, a city agency with a $70 million-plus budget and what Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani calls a multi-million-dollar deficit.
But Mr.
Curtis, who is 36 years old and an assistant vice president at Chemical Bank, will confront more than belt-tightening.
The department, which coordinates thousands of youth programs throughout the city, from tutoring sessions to athletic activities, has been in disarray since May, when a dispute  erupted that some say has virtually disabled operations.


A Quest for a Long-Buried Truth About a U.F.O
Given the inherent improbability of the story, Jeremy Kagan, who directed and co-produced "Roswell," deserves credit for putting together as tense a drama as  he has.
For most of its 90 minutes, this tale, based on an actual incident, of one man's effort to uncover the truth about a strange occurrence in the New Mexico desert in 1947, maintains an engrossing course.
The beset hero is Maj.
Jesse Marcel, an Army Air Force intelligence officer at a base near Roswell, N.M., where the debris from some sort of crash is at first reported to be from an unidentified object. (It makes the sheep nervous.)  But before you can say flying saucer, Marcel, effectively underplayed by Kyle MacLachlan, becomes the fall guy as the Washington establishment undertakes what may be the most far-fetched cover-up in the history of cover-up movies.


Bosnia Peace Map: Serbs and the West at Loggerheads
After several months with virtually no movement in the Bosnian war, the prospect of major changes, none of them to the liking of the West, is propelling the foreign authors of a peace plan to scramble to save it before the dire scenario they envision can unfold.
With the Bosnian Serbs again tightening their siege of Sarajevo, Western officials see an increasing likelihood that NATO air power will be used against  them, leading to Serbian reprisals against United Nations troops and a subsequent withdrawal of some peacekeepers.


Life and Death Decision at the Border
Antoine Nsangira, a farmer, sold his mattress.
Then he hired a taxi and drove 30 miles from the refugee camp at Katale to the border crossing into Rwanda at Gisenyi.
"I wanted to check it out, to see if it was safe," he said.
He stood at the simple metal pole that swings out to allow travelers to pass into Rwanda.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt
*
Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corp. is selling $110 million of medium-term notes due in 1997 at 100 to yield 6.85 percent through Nationsbanc Capital Markets.
The issue is callable in one year.


Tax Charges Are Added in Prostitution Case
Heidi Fleiss, who already faces state prostitution and drug charges, was indicted today on Federal charges of conspiring to hide hundreds of thousands of dollars that prosecutors say she amassed running a top Hollywood prostitution operation.
The 14-count Federal indictment also accuses Ms.
Fleiss's father, Dr.
Paul Fleiss, a 60-year-old Los Angeles pediatrician, of helping to conceal his daughter's income from the authorities.
Neither Dr.
Fleiss nor Ms.
Fleiss's lawyer immediately returned phone calls seeking comment.


Sounds Around Town
Pop and Funk


Art in Review
Willem de Kooning 'Selected Works, 1950's-1980's' C&amp;M Arts 45 East 78th Street Manhattan Through Aug. 12


John Cates Jr., 82, A Former Diplomat
John Martin Cates Jr., a retired lawyer and former Foreign Service officer, died on July 14 while on a visit to Santo Domingo, in the Dominican Republic.
He was 82 and lived in Nassau, the Bahamas.
The cause was a stroke, his family said.


Ouch! Slap! The Air Is Filled With the Sounds of Summer
The mosquitoes rising out of the Great Meadows marsh here remind Edward Dennehy, a former Marine, of World War II.
No, not as big as B-29's.
As thick as on Pacific islands.
"We have to stay indoors all the time," he said. "We feel like prisoners."


Where Generations Created Memories Of Summer
THERE was a time when the best one-wall handball in the world was played at the Brighton Beach Baths in Brooklyn.
Thousands would crowd into its three swimming pools; men would smoke cigars and pat one another on the back; women would vie for the title of prettiest expectant mother.
On weekends, performers from Milton Berle to Lionel Hampton to Herman's Hermits entertained in a band shell resembling nothing so much as half a bagel.
Scores of mah-jongg players clicked their 144 tiles with the concentration of nervous assassins.
People competed so furiously in egg-cream and knish-eating contests that you can guess what happened.
Each endless summer, the vain would wrap reflectors around their neck to capture a perfect tan.


Corrections
The Outdoors column in the sports pages on Tuesday, about the Penobscot River near Bangor, Me., misstated the location of the proposed Basin Mills Dam.
It would be about four miles upstream of the current Veazie Dam, not downstream.


Autopsy on Driver in Explosion Finds No Drugs
The 23-year-old driver of a propane tanker truck that exploded in a white-hot blast on a major highway here early Wednesday had no drugs or alcohol in his body at the time of the accident, according to results of an autopsy released today by the Westchester County Medical Examiner's office.
The autopsy report, however, answered only one of many questions still lingering after the blinding explosion that killed the driver, left 23 people injured, damaged homes on both sides of the Cross Westchester Expressway and created a traffic nightmare during the morning rush hour.


At the Bar;Defense lawyer turns the tables on the prosecutors but pays a price.
It was the moment every criminal defense lawyer dreads: The witness was about to identify the person sitting in the defendant's chair as the perpetrator -- and the case's sole witness was a police officer.
In DuPage County Circuit Court, Ronald H. LaMorte, a police officer in Wood Dale, Ill., had just described his investigation at the scene of a traffic accident.
He told how the cars had been positioned and how the defendant could not produce his driver's license, which had been revoked.


Handling the Press
At some point during the opening day of hearings into the Whitewater affair,  the principal theme of the White House became clear: if Clinton Administration officials behaved questionably by sharing confidential information about the Whitewater investigation, they did so largely to respond to the press.
It was a point made repeatedly on Tuesday by Lloyd N. Cutler, special counsel to the White House, in his daylong testimony before the House Banking Committee.


42d Street Puts On Heavy Makeup and Smiles a Summer Smile
Putting in its second summertime appearance, "The 42d Street Art Project" threatens to become an annual event, but it's still too soon to tell whether it  is really worth the effort.
There's something pleasant and marginally uplifting  about seeing 24 contemporary artists and designers take their best shots, in a relaxed summery sort of way, on a strip of real estate as rife with raunchy vitality and decay as 42d Street between Broadway and Eighth Avenue in Manhattan.
Intended for pedestrian consumption, the show is a mildly entertaining walk-through, with very little that holds the attention for very long and almost no artist shown to real advantage.
Ultimately, the street's powerful cacophony wins out, sweeping all before it like the trashy force of manmade nature that it is.
This year's version includes a couple of holdovers from last year's, neither  distinguished, which seem to have become a permanent part of the Times Square landscape.
One is the blocklong sign adorned with brightly colored chairs that shouts "Everybody" in black capital letters on a taxicab-yellow billboard between Broadway and Seventh Avenue, and seems as much an advertisement for some mysterious product as an exhortation to community.
The other is Dick Elliott's "Noise Reducing Apparatus, No. 1," a wall of 18,000 safety reflectors in red, yellow, blue and green that has all the simplicity, but little of the charm, of  folk art.


Treasury Official Acted Properly in Whitewater Investigation
To the Editor:
subject of the meeting that Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman had with White House personnel on Feb. 2, 1994.
Mr.
Altman did not give the White House a briefing on the Madison criminal investigation, as asserted in "Whitewater, Now  on Capitol Hill" (editorial, July 24).


Suspicious Fire Kills Unidentified Man
An unidentified man, whom the Fire Department described as a squatter, died yesterday in a suspicious fire in a vacant industrial building in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn, the department said.
The victim, described as a white man about 35 years old, was pulled from the  building at 320 Freeman Street, between Provost and Green Avenues, by firefighters, said Firefighter Cosmo Romeo, a department spokesman.
The man, suffering from severe smoke inhalation, was taken to Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan, where he was pronounced dead.


Home Video
Coming releases reflect an interesting cross between present and future in home video.
On the futuristic side, for example, is "For All Mankind," Al Reinert's acclaimed 1989 documentary about the Apollo moon missions, to be released by Voyager this fall on CD-ROM.
Available for both Macintosh and Windows platforms, the disk includes the film with 16-bit stereo sound, an original soundtrack by Brian Eno and many extras, among them biographies and other writings by Andrew Chaikin, the author of the new book "A Man on the Moon: The Voyages of the Apollo Astronauts" (Viking).
The disk will cost $39.95 and be available from Voyager and in bookstores, museums and software outlets. (Information: 800-446-2001.) Although it isn't a video-store item per se, the documentary offers a taste of the computer-based "edutainment" programming the home video industry might provide in its own stores if and when typical video CD-ROM's make major moves beyond games.


Residents Say Airport Rail Link Would Congest East Side Traffic
Upper East Side residents criticized yesterday a proposed rail link between Manhattan and the two New York City airports, saying the $2.5 billion system --  intended to bypass traffic congestion in Queens -- would create far too much traffic in their neighborhood.
About 150 people attending an East Side public hearing on the system applauded a succession of speakers who condemned or ridiculed the Port Authority's plan to build a 22-mile automated train system to the airports.
The  majority of critics focused on the single Manhattan station in the plan, envisioned as an underground terminal near East 59th Street and Third Avenue.


ACCORD REACHED ON SWEEPING BILL TO BATTLE CRIME
House and Senate negotiators today approved a sweeping $30.2 billion anti-crime bill providing for 100,000 new police officers, a ban on some assault weapons and the death penalty for scores of crimes.
President Clinton hailed the bill as "the toughest, largest, smartest Federal attack on crime in the history of our country." But critics, including some law-enforcement officials, called it a social-welfare boondoggle and, in the words of Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois, "the whole Emerald City of Oz."


Chimes Band Wins in Mud
The first week of the Saratoga racing season closed today with more rain, mud and scratched horses.
But it also closed with a ringing victory for Wayne Lukas  when his colt Chimes Band, who looked like a contender for the Triple Crown races last spring, won the first division of the Screen King Stakes over Ledford by five lengths.
The second division of the race was won by Mr.
Shawklit, who ran second in the Bay Shore at Aqueduct last spring but who also didn't make it to the Kentucky Derby.
Today's stakes, featuring the second tier of 3-year-old colts, was run in two divisions because 15 horses had been entered, too many for the track to handle, although four were scratched.


DELTA AIRLINES INC. (DAL,N)
Delta Air Lines Inc. posted a net loss of $249.8 million, or $5.50 a share, for its fiscal fourth quarter after taking a $413.7 million pretax charge to eliminate 20 percent of its work force.
Without the charge, the Atlanta-based airline reported a profit from operations of $10.8 million, up about 50 percent from the 1993 quarter.
But it posted loss of 33 cents a share after payment of preferred dividends.
Wall Street had been expecting a loss of about 28 cents a share.


CHRONICLE
STEVEN SPIELBERG will use his earnings from the film "Schindler's List" to establish a foundation named for Oskar Schindler, the hero of the movie, and devoted to Jewish causes and issues.
He has named MARGERY TABANKIN its executive director.
Ms.
Tabankin holds the same position at both the Barbra Streisand Foundation  and the Hollywood Women's Political Committee, which includes 225 of the film industry's most influential women.
She will keep her post at the foundation, but she is relinquishing the one on the committee.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ANTEC CORP., Rolling Meadows, Ill., will buy Keptel Inc., Tinton Falls, N.J., a telecommunications equipment company, for about $84 million.
IMASCO LTD., Montreal, a tobacco, fast-food and retailing company, will buy back up to 3 million common shares, approximately 2.5 percent of its 118.5 million shares outstanding.


New Church-Mafia Enmity Is Seen
One year after powerful bombs damaged cultural and church monuments in Italy, investigators announced recently that they had issued eight arrest warrants and  detained two suspects.
Four other suspects, they said, were already in jail.
But what was perhaps most striking in their announcement was the motive they  imputed to the Mafia for wanting to bomb Roman Catholic churches, most notably the venerable cathedral church of Pope John Paul II, San Giovanni in Laterano.


As Haitians Protest, Security Council Considers Use of Force in Haiti


Lindsay in Hospital After Feeling Faint
Former Mayor John V. Lindsay was taken by ambulance to Columbia-Presbyterian  Medical Center yesterday morning after becoming dizzy on a steamy platform at Grand Central Terminal.
The hospital called his condition stable but said he was being admitted for observation.
The 72-year-old Mr.
Lindsay, apparently suffering from heat exhaustion, felt  faint as he stood on Track 18 about 10:15 A.M. and was taken to the hospital by  the Emergency Medical Service, the police said.
It was unclear how long he might be hospitalized.


Minority Journalists Gather To Share Hopes and Concerns
More than 6,000 minority journalists are meeting here to advance what their leaders say is a goal of making newsrooms and reporting more inclusive of all Americans.
But the executives sent here to speak from many of the nation's most influential news organizations are almost all white.


Artist Blends Himself Into a Hopper Show
American Dreaming: Edward Hopper and Jack Pierson" at the Whitney Museum of  American Art has a lot going for it. It's a shrewdly conceived, atmospheric, easy-to-like little show, though one that depends a bit too much on a certain kind of stylishness for its own good.
The exhibition, part of the Whitney's Collection in Context series, might be  described as a one-sided collaboration between Hopper (1882-1967) and the young  American multimedia artist Jack Pierson (born 1960), who was invited to make selections from the museum's enormous Hopper holdings and intersperse them with  work of his own.


EUROPE CLEARS MCI-BRITISH TELECOM ALLIANCE
The European Commission cleared a proposed alliance yesterday between the MCI Communications Corporation and British Telecommunications P.L.C. to provide global telecommunications services to multinational companies.
The ruling involves a plan by British Telecom to take a 20 percent stake worth $4.3 billion in MCI, a deal already approved by the Federal Comunications Commission in Washington.
The companies will also create a joint venture known as Concert to provide services like data transmission, video conferencing and global calling cards.
The European Commission said that Concert would restrict competition but  that it qualified for an exemption from European Union rules because it would offer significant advantages to consumers.


I.B.M. TO CLOSE AMBRA PERSONAL COMPUTER SUBSIDIARY
I.B.M. will close the Ambra Computer Corporation, a two-year-old subsidiary formed to make inexpensive personal computers to be sold directly to customers,  analysts said yesterday.
The move is one of several cost-cutting moves to be announced today in I.B.M.'s personal computer division.
Ambra was conceived as I.B.M.'s answer to low-priced competitors like Dell Computer and Gateway 2000 Inc.
Ambra, based in Raleigh, N.C., sold computers through phone and catalogue orders rather than through I.B.M.'s sales force and wholesalers.


Panel Says U.S. Space Research Is Lagging
The National Research Council is worried that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is allowing space research to languish as it waits for the  space station to be built.
The council, an arm of the National Academy of Sciences, recommends that shuttle missions devoted to science be added to take up the slack.
"A more ambitious plan for science over the interim decade leading to full utilization" of the space station "should be developed and matched with appropriate budgetary resources," the council's space studies board told the space agency's administrator, Daniel S. Goldin, in a letter released today.


The Best Balance on High-Tech Exports
Iraq and other states have used seemingly innocuous machine tools and chemicals to manufacture nuclear and chemical arms.
That is why the United States and other industrial powers have long sought to restrict the export of dual-use products that have civilian applications but can also be used in making weapons.
Although such restrictions have barred sales of less than one-tenth of 1 percent of all U.S. exports, American manufacturers still chafe at the restraints on trade.
Unfortunately, the House has heeded them and is considering a bill that goes too far to ease the restraints.
A bill now before the Senate strikes a better balance.


S.E.C. Looks At Ex-Fed Official's Role
A former governor of the Federal Reserve System has become the target of an inquiry by the Securities and Exchange Commission over the possible misuse of secret central bank information.
The S.E.C. is looking into whether the former governor, Wayne D. Angell, illegally received or passed on inside information this spring.
At the time he was warning clients that the Federal Reserve was likely to raise interest rates significantly.
Mr.
Angell, who completed an eight-year term at the Fed in  February and became chief economist at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in April, said there was nothing to investigate.


Vietnam Plans Oil Approvals
Vietnam plans to grant exploration licenses in two oil blocks off its southeast coast after recent finds by Japanese and Malaysian companies, the head of the state oil company said today.
Vietnam has received many proposals from foreign concerns wanting to develop  the blocks, the chairman of PetroVietnam, Ho Si Thoang, said at an oil industry  conference."Practically all of blocks 16 and 9 will be open for new concessions," he said.


Players Association Sets Strike Date of Aug. 12
Major league baseball players, resisting the owners' effort to change the game's economic system, are poised to strike two weeks from today if they and the 28 club owners cannot reach a new collective bargaining agreement by then.
Voting unanimously by telephone conference call yesterday, the 31 players who make up the Players Association executive board agreed that the players would strike games beginning with the Aug. 12 schedule.
It would be baseball's fifth strike and eighth work stoppage in the past 23 seasons.


Morrison and Mercer: It's 2 Fights, 2 Draws
Once they almost fought for boxing's biggest prize.
Now they are just trying  to keep their careers afloat.
Tommy Morrison and Ray Mercer both failed to produce a victory tonight.
Each  fought to a draw against second-rank opponents with no cachet, not to mention experience.


Abroad at Home;Middle East Ironies
Even Israelis who are usually skeptical of peace with Arabs are happy about the rapprochement with King Hussein of Jordan.
For them he is the very model of  a moderate Arab leader.
In that there is much irony.
Israel could have made a deal with King Hussein decades ago.
He was ready to  exchange peace and recognition of Israel for return of the territory won from him in the war of 1967.


Panel Delays Vote on GATT
The Senate Finance Committee delayed an expected vote today on financing for  a new global free-trade agreement when last-minute changes by the Administration failed to satisfy senators.
Committee members were skeptical that the Administration's proposed changes would raise enough money to offset Government revenue that will be lost when the trade pact reduces or eliminates many tariffs.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who heads the committee,  told lawmakers that the changes prevented a full committee vote on financing.


New Jobless Claims Fall
Workers returning from summer furloughs in the automobile and textile industries helped push first-time claims for state unemployment benefits to their lowest level in four months, the Government reported today.
The Labor Department said initial claims dropped 59,000 in the week that ended last Saturday, to a seasonally adjusted 331,000 from the previous week's revised 390,000.
The decrease was the biggest in five months and much larger than the modest 7,000 decline that most economists had predicted in advance of the report.


Orioles Swept, Indians in 1st
Eddie Murray homered twice and Tony Pena hit a solo shot as the Cleveland Indians completed their first doubleheader sweep in more than four years last night with a 5-2 victory over the Baltimore Orioles.
Cleveland's first doubleheader sweep since May 1990 vaulted the Indians into first place in the American League Central Division, one game ahead of the Chicago White Sox, who lost 5-3 in Kansas City.
Baltimore has lost seven of nine.
In the first game, Albert Belle continued his home-run binge and Sandy Alomar hit a three-run drive, providing Jack Morris (10-6) with more than enough offensive support in the Indians' 7-2 victory.
Alomar and Belle both connected off Mike Mussina (14-5).
Belle's solo homer was his 33rd of the season and seventh in the last nine games.


Harold M. Mayer, 78, Teacher, Urban Planner and Geographer
Dr.
Harold M. Mayer, a geographer, urban planner and professor at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, died on Saturday at his home in Milwaukee.
He was 78.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his family said.


District's Delegate to Congress Builds Bridge Between Capital and Capitol
When Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly defended her handling of the District of Columbia's finances before a House subcommittee this month, some of the toughest questioning came from an unexpected quarter: the representative of the  District of Columbia, Eleanor Holmes Norton.
As Mrs.
Kelly argued that she had laid off as many city employees as she could and had no alternatives to bring order to a city on the brink of financial ruin, Ms.
Norton interrupted again and again.


A Happy Recap: Hall-of-Fame Career
His voice is a warm and welcoming instrument, a permanent part of the relaxed rhythms of baseball in New York that makes you hope Bob Murphy will call Mets games forever.
He's 69 years old now, in the 33d year of his cuddly New York embrace, as original a Met as any, a chunky and cheerful Oklahoman who makes us taste baseball as if we were in Shea beside him.
Years ago, when Murphy split his time between television and radio, I thought he was too much a homer, too eager to gloss over bad news or bad plays.
Now I know better.
He will never lambaste Pete Smith for a bad outing or ferret out firecracker perpetrators.
He just tells the story of a game better than most without the silly digressions that make John Sterling, WABC's Yankees announcer, so unlistenable.


U.S. Wants Quick Retaliation Against Serbian Attacks
In the face of renewed attacks by Bosnian Serbs on Muslim enclaves and United Nations peacekeepers, the United States is pressing for quick retaliation, American and European officials said today.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher is scheduled to meet in Geneva on Saturday with the Foreign Ministers of Britain, France, Germany and Russia, and  is expected to urge tighter economic sanctions and stricter enforcement of United Nations-designated safe areas.


President to Step Down At Long Island Rail Road
Charles W. Hoppe, whose leadership of the Long Island Rail Road was strongly  criticized when thousands of commuters were stranded during last winter's crippling snowstorm, announced his resignation today as the railroad's president and general manager.
While improving the on-time performance of the nation's busiest commuter line and even attracting several thousand new riders, Mr.
Hoppe never recovered from  a report by the inspector general of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority questioning management decisions during the storm in February, which disabled much of the railroad and left tens of thousands of riders waiting for hours at icy stations.


Files Detail Years of Spying on Bernstein
For more than three decades starting in the 1940's, the Federal Bureau of Investigation obsessively documented the activities of Leonard Bernstein, especially his associations with groups listed as subversive or communist, and,  in the 1960's, his support for the civil rights and antiwar movements, newly released files show.
The F.B.I. never established that Mr.
Bernstein, who died in 1990, was a member of the Communist Party.
Indeed, he vehemently denied it under oath in 1953, and soon after that, the bureau acknowledged finding no communist ties.


Inside Art
A Sculpture Suit


U.S. Wants Quick Retaliation Against Serbian Attacks;Russia Is Hopeful
With a weekend deadline approaching on Bosnia, Russia still expects the Bosnian Serbs to accept the peace plan drawn up by the major powers, the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, said today.


Giuliani Plans To Open 16 Clinics
In an effort to improve health care for New York City's poor and to offer an  alternative to overcrowded hospital emergency rooms, the Giuliani administration is planning to open 16 new health clinics to be run by private nonprofit agencies.
The clinics, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's first major health initiative, are expected to open in the next two years and will provide additional basic care by expanding capacity by 500,000 medical visits each year.
Several studies have  estimated that the unmet need for routine care amounts to three million visits a year.


Japanese Stocks Higher
Stocks traded higher here today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 201.54 points, or 1 percent, to 20,449.39.
On Thursday, the index rose 110.62 points.


Art in Review
'On Paper' 'Abstraction in American Art' Michael Rosenfeld Gallery 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Aug. 17


Kevin Carter, a Pulitzer Winner For Sudan Photo, Is Dead at 33
Kevin Carter, the South African photographer whose image of a starving Sudanese toddler stalked by a vulture won him a Pulitzer Prize this year, was found dead on Wednesday night, apparently a suicide, the police said today.
He was 33.
The police said Mr.
Carter's body and several letters to friends and family were discovered in his pickup truck, parked in a Johannesburg suburb.
They said  an inquest showed he died of carbon monoxide poisoning.


Harvard Goes With Crowd On Admission
Hoping to make the process of applying to college less grueling, Harvard and  Radcliffe Colleges have decided to accept the same common application form that  is used by 137 other private, mostly small colleges around the country.
Students who use the eight-page Common Application will be able to fill out the one form, photocopy it and send those copies to colleges like New York University, Oberlin, Swarthmore and Williams, which also accept the common form.
Radcliffe is the last of the erstwhile Seven Sisters colleges (Vassar is now co-educational) to accept the Common Application and Harvard is the first college in the Ivy League to do so.
Dartmouth plans to use it when the class of  2000 applies, college officials said.


Art in Review
'Crash' Thread Waxing Space 476 Broadway, at Broome Street SoHo Through Aug. 15


The Credit Card That Pays Legal Bills
Lawyers' reluctance to turn bill collector is probably matched only by some clients' reluctance to pay up.
Four years ago a California company began offering a way to ease the pain on both sides.
It introduced a kind of credit card, advancing clients a line of credit for legal fees and thus taking over from lawyers the task of collection.
The program offered by the company, Lawcard, gave clients the opportunity to  make small payments over time and guaranteed that lawyers would be paid regularly and in full, minus a service charge.


Centigram
After the market closed on Wednesday, Centigram Communications, a fast-growing maker of telecommunications equipment based in San Jose, Calif., reported a 46 percent rise in third-quarter profits, to 30 cents a share.
But analysts had expected 32 cents a share, and the stock tumbled by 23 percent in Nasdaq trading yesterday.


Boy, 15, Slashed at High School in Queens
A 15-year-old boy was slashed by another youth yesterday at Andrew Jackson High School in Cambria Heights, Queens, where both teen-agers were attending summer school, the police said.
Ron Barry of Queens was cut on the neck about 11 A.M., and was in stable condition last night at Mary Immaculate City Hospital, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Art in Review
'Non-Objective Photography Between the Wars' Houk Friedman Gallery 851 Madison Avenue (near 70th Street) Through Sept. 2


Ex-Aide Explains His Whitewater Role to House Panel
A group of present and former White House officials paraded before the House  committee investigating the Whitewater affair today, several of them insisting that they did not press a senior Treasury Department official and friend of the  President to remain involved in a politically sensitive investigation of an Arkansas savings and loan.
The primary witness today was Bernard W. Nussbaum, the former White House counsel who spent much of the morning answering questions before the House Banking Committee about his role in Whitewater-related matters.


Bonds Rally on Rumors Of Purchase by Saudis
The bond market rallied sharply yesterday, bolstered by a stronger dollar and speculation that Saudi Arabia had bought a large block of notes.
The Treasury's 30-year bond rose 20/32 of a point, or $6.25 per $1,000 bond.
Its yield fell to 7.54 percent, from 7.61 percent on Wednesday.


From Lottery to Love In a New York Fairy Tale
There is a miracle at the center of "It Could Happen to You," the blandly named romantic comedy that had the punchier working title "Cop Gives Waitress $2 Million Tip." The original title plays itself out early in the film when the cop, Nicolas Cage, runs out of cash to tip the coffee-shop waitress, Bridget Fonda.
He offers to share a lottery ticket instead, and the next day wins $4 million.
But that quirk of fate is nothing beside another odds-defying event: two good-hearted people find each other in New York City.
Now that's a miracle,  at least in the scheme of this movie, a sometimes awkward mix of savviness and schmaltz.
The other miracle is that the two stars of "It Could Happen to You" keep it sailing over a script that is often as predictable and flat as the movie's new title.
In one of the brighter touches, Charlie (Mr. Cage) is introduced carrying a blind man across the street and delivering a baby on a bus, presumably all in  a day's work.
He is so impossibly selfless that the story begins with a fairy-tale prologue, in which a man named Angel says: "Once upon a time in New York there was a cop named Charlie. He was a very decent guy."


AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP INC. (AIG,N)
The American International Group Inc., the country's most profitable insurance company, reported strong gains in all its major businesses yesterday as profits in the second quarter rose 14.4 percent, to $549.7 million, or $1.74  a share.
Wall Street had been expecting about $1.64 a share.
In the property-insurance business, where intense competition for commercial  accounts has led to price cutting that has caused many other companies to pay more in claims than they collect in premiums, American International continued to collect more in premiums than it paid in claims.
Pretax profits for property  insurance totaled $379.2 million, up 14.1 percent from the comparable period a year earlier.


The Struggling Class Hops Across the Channel
When Al, the unemployed Yorkshire construction worker in John Godber's "April in Paris" at the Staller Center here, wanly describes himself as redundant, he's referring to his professional status.
But the adjective has far broader applications in this slight, wistful two-character comedy, performed by the Hull Truck Theater Company, the troupe from northern England of which Mr.
Godber is artistic director.
For Al (Iain Rogerson) and his wife, Bet (Susan Cookson), life in their tiny, blank-walled home is indeed an anesthetizing series of redundancies: repeated squabbles over household chores and limited options for filling time.
The view to the grave stretches before them as an uninterrupted, monochromatic corridor.
And Al, who has taken up painting since losing his job, finds that no matter how hard he tries, he always creates the same picture: a gray-toned landscape showing a tree and a factory.


Conference Officials Weighing Bowl Bids
As conference commissioners began weighing bids yesterday that could bring college football more than $50 million a year from just three bowl games, four Florida State football players were suspended for taking part in an agent-financed shopping spree last year.
The two developments pointed up the economic anomalies of college football, a multibillion-dollar business built upon players barred from receiving more than  their scholarships.


Sports of The Times;Redefining The Yankees' Community
THE walk to Yankee Stadium took about 10 minutes: Down the 155th Street viaduct, over the blue Macombs Dam Bridge, over the Major Deegan Expressway, down and around the street leading to the employees' parking lot.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a Congressional Budget Office analysis of the health care bill passed by the Senate Finance Committee referred incorrectly in  some editions to the number of Americans who would obtain health insurance under the bill.
The report said 20 million, not 23 million, of the 39 million Americans without health insurance would be added to insurance rolls by the Finance Committee bill.


News Accounts Presaged Trouble
Like events out of sync, the violent drama in Pensacola, Fla., yesterday was  strangely foreshadowed in television talk-show appearances since spring 1993 by  the man arrested in the killings and in an almost prescient national magazine article last February that focused on the suspect and all the victims.
Only two days after an abortion doctor, David Gunn, was shot to death near a clinic in Pensacola in March 1993, the militant abortion opponent accused in yesterday's shootings, Paul Hill, called NBC's "Phil Donahue Show." He set up an appearance and flew to New York to announce that Dr.
Gunn had deserved to die.


Teaching Teachers to Orchestrate Opera-Making
In a sunny classroom at Yale University, 35 elementary-school teachers are sitting on the floor, connecting the bare ends of wires to small porcelain lighting fixtures and caulking the connections for safety.
They are about to affix these to wooden boards, and when they add the finishing touch -- tin reflectors, adapted from large coffee cans -- they will have produced makeshift but functional footlights.
These teachers, from schools all over the Northeast, as well as 23 teachers from abroad, are spending 10 days as guests of the Metropolitan Opera Guild, learning how to produce an opera.
Or more correctly, they are learning how to teach the skills involved in opera production to their students.


Regulation of Propane Haulers, Long in Dispute, Is Not Strict Enough, Critics Say
The regulation of companies that dispatch propane trucks, like the one involved in the highway explosion in White Plains that injured 23 people and destroyed much of a quiet neighborhood earlier this week, has long been the subject of controversy among highway safety experts and Federal officials.
Some critics say Federal regulations place too much trust in fuel companies  to police themselves and are not strict enough to prevent drivers from being overworked.
Investigators looking into the White Plains crash said yesterday that the driver, Peter G. Conway, who was killed, had been on duty for 15 hours  when he crashed into the highway overpass.


Palestinian Authority Blocks Pro-Jordanian Publications
In a sign of rising tensions between the P.L.O. and Jordan, Palestinian officials blocked the distribution of a pro-Jordanian newspaper and a weekly magazine in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, forcing them to cease publication today.
A statement by the Palestinian self-rule authority in Gaza and Jericho accused the newspaper, An Nahar, of advocating "a line that contradicts the national interests of the Palestinian people."


Simms Also Watches Changing Of the Guard at Quarterback
When the Giants play the Miami Dolphins in the first game of the post-Phil Simms era, all eyes will be on the two young Giants quarterbacks.
Especially those of Simms.
A regular fan now, he is shaping his entire day around the game.
The lawn will be cut and errands done by the night when he will sit down and watch "every darn play."
Just don't ask Simms for his opinion about which one is better, Dave Brown or Kent Graham.
"Even when I'm on the golf course, people ask me about the quarterbacks," said Simms, now an analyst with ESPN.
"But I won't even tell my wife."


LTV CORP. (LTV,N)
The LTV Corporation surprised Wall Street's most optimistic forecasters yesterday, when it reported second-quarter earnings of $37.5 million, or 40 cents a share.
A consensus of analysts' estimates had been that the company would earn 23 cents a share, and the highest prediction was for 34 cents a share.


Azinger Returning to Tour Next Week
PAUL AZINGER, who has spent this year undergoing treatment for cancer, will return to the PGA Tour next week at the Buick Open in Saginaw, Mich.
Azinger, 34, had the best season of his career in 1993 with three victories including the 1993 P.G.A.
Championship and $1.4 million in winnings.
Doctors then discovered lymphoma in his right shoulder and started Azinger on treatment that kept him out of competition for seven months. (AP)


Hughes Hopes to Go Global
Hughes Communications Inc. said yesterday that it wanted to expand its proposed $660 million United States satellite communications network and make it a $3.2 billion global network.
Hughes Communications, a unit of GM Hughes Electronics Inc., said it had filed an amendment with the Federal Communications Commission on Thursday to expand the Spaceway network proposal the company had filed with the F.C.C. in December.
That plan has yet to be approved.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy


Executive Changes
GATX CORP., Chicago, appointed Ronald Zech president and chief operating officer.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


Gunshots Hit Missile In Train Shipment
An intercontinental missile being shipped by rail from Wyoming was hit by apparently random gunfire that caused at least $11 million in damage, the Air Force said today.
Bullets gashed the first and second stages of the $70 million missile, an MX, but it was not in danger of exploding, officials said.
Some parts will be salvaged for use elsewhere, the Air Force said.


CHRONICLE
Who would have expected BILL MURRAY to speak at a meeting titled, "The International Conference on Sturgeon Biodiversity and Conservation"?
But there the comedian was at the American Museum of Natural History in New York on Thursday evening, expounding on the sturgeon and other matters before 200 scientists who had gathered for two days of scholarly deliberations on how to halt the global decline of the giant fish.
The conference, which ends today, was organized by the Hudson River Foundation.


CASCADE COMMUNICATIONS' SHARES SOAR ON FIRST DAY
Shares of the Cascade Communications Corporation, a maker of computer networking equipment, soared in their first day of trading.
The company's initial public offering was priced Thursday night at $15.
In Nasdaq trading yesterday, Cascade closed at $24.375 on trading volume of 2.6 million shares.
When the company filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission in May, it predicted it would sell its shares for between $11 and $13 each.
Cascade manufactures wide-area-network switches needed to transfer data between computer networks.


Health Care Mergers Should Worry Consumers;The Doctor Go-Round
To the Editor:
Re "Frayed Nerves of People Without Health Coverage" (front page, July 11): The unfortunate experiences of Trinidad Estrada illustrates additional burdens such people bear.
Ms.
Estrada says she had an operation on her foot, costing $300.
For some reason it was not successful and now the doctor is telling her she needs another operation, to cost $1,000.


Tanker Driver on Duty 15 Hours Before Fatal Crash, Official Says
The driver of the propane tanker truck that crashed here early Wednesday in a fiery explosion had been on duty for the previous 15 hours and was making his third run of the day when the accident occurred, a spokesman for the National Transportation Safety Board said tonight.
The spokesman, Michael Benson, said investigators were considering fatigue as one of several factors that might have caused the accident, which killed the driver and injured 23 other people.
But he said it was still not known how many  breaks the driver, Peter G. Conway, 23, had taken during his workday on Tuesday  or how far he had driven before the crash about 12:30 A.M.
Wednesday.


In Sudan, Slavery Is a Criminal Offense;Berbers in Mauritania
To the Editor:
Charles Jacobs and Mohamed Athie, in "Bought and Sold" (Op-Ed, July 13), describe the existence of slavery in Mauritania and other areas of North Africa.
I visited a Berber family in Mauritania in 1977, when I was a Peace Corps volunteer in neighboring Senegal.


Federated and Macy File Plan for Reorganization
Federated Department Stores Inc. and R. H. Macy &amp; Company filed a formal plan of reorganization yesterday that will get Macy out of bankruptcy protection by merging the two longtime rival retail companies.
In papers filed in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, the companies indicated that they had advanced their target date for getting Macy out of bankruptcy protection to December, from January.


Farmers' Receipts Fall 2.9%
Lower prices for three major crops corn, soybeans and wheat -- caused a 2.9 percent drop this month in prices farmers received for their raw goods, the Agriculture Department reported today.
The drop from June to July was the fourth straight month of decline in the All Farm Products Index, a composite of crops, fruit, vegetables, livestock, dairy animals and poultry.


Health Care Mergers Should Worry Consumers;Californians to Vote
To the Editor:
One million voters in California have successfully placed on the ballot for November the question whether Californians favor single-payer, Canadian-style health care, which removes the private insurance industry from its stranglehold  on health care.


Judge Criticized Over Penalty Promised in Car-Death Trial
Alicia Figueroa has kept a copy of the trial transcript from June 21.
She thinks it is good to have as evidence.
She doesn't hold onto it, though, to remember the remarks of Supreme Court Justice Melvin S. Barasch.
Those words, in which the judge said he would not imprison the driver who ran down her husband, but would fine him, have haunted Mrs.
Figueroa from the moment they were spoken.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4


CHRONICLE
A woman who once had a two-year affair with HENRY G. CISNEROS, the United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, filed a lawsuit yesterday, charging him with fraud and breach of contract, The Associated Press reported.
The suit was brought by LINDA MEDLAR, who was hired in 1986 by Mr.
Cisneros,  then Mayor of San Antonio, as a fund-raiser.
He has acknowledged being romantically involved with her when he was Mayor.
The suit claims that he has ceased making payments of $4,000 a month to her that were part of an oral agreement the two reached in 1990.


Dollar In a Broad Decline But Is Steady Against Yen
The dollar fell against the German mark and other currencies yesterday after  a Government report showing slower-than-expected economic growth convinced many  traders that the Federal Reserve is less likely to raise interest rates soon.
But the dollar remained steady against the Japanese yen on speculation that American and Japanese negotiators are making progress in talks aimed at curbing Japan's swollen trade surplus with the United States.


More Rwandans Trek Home
As a growing number of Rwandans head home from refugee camps, doctors are screening them for cholera to prevent epidemics paralleling the catastrophe in Zaire.
Page 3.


There's No Place Like the Road for Jones
In bullpen circles he's known as a "touch and feel" pitcher, someone who needs a few innings and outs to properly show his worth.
An offense sensitive to his needs doesn't hurt, either.


Vigilante Gets Probation
A man fed up with drug dealing in his neighborhood has been put on probation  for a year for pulling a shotgun on two undercover police officers on July 8 to  thwart what he thought was a drug deal.
The defendant, Harold Edward Moore, 51, was also sentenced on Thursday to 50  hours of community service.
He pleaded no contest to aggravated assault.


Editors' Note
An article yesterday about Congressional agreement on crime legislation characterized the bill as "one of the few major promises President Clinton made  in the 1992 campaign that he has been able to turn into law."
The characterization of Mr.
Clinton's record was overly broad.
A number of initiatives for which he promised support in 1992 have been passed since he took office.
Some of the most important were a deficit reduction bill, the North American Free Trade Agreement, rules allowing abortion counseling in federally financed clinics, a waiting period for handgun purchases and a national service program.


Grant Leaves the Bulls To Help Solidify Magic
The Orlando Magic opened a salary slot to sign the free agent forward Horace  Grant tonight by trading Scott Skiles and a first-round draft pick to the Washington Bullets for a second-round pick.
The signing of Grant, who was a key  member of the Chicago Bulls during their run as three-time National Basketball Association champions, was announced at a news conference here tonight.
"It's going to be a great season for us," said Grant, who had talked publicly about his desire to play for the Magic for about a year.
"We're not going to get knocked out in the first round if I have anything to say about it."


Lifesaving Aid for Rwanda
Massacres.
Civil war.
Inflammatory broadcasts.
Panic.
And now, disease and more death.
The horrors that Rwandans have inflicted on other Rwandans this year challenge comprehension.
Militias of the Hutu majority butchered hundreds of thousands of their Tutsi  compatriots during the spring.
Tutsi-led rebels raced to take over the country and halt the slaughter.
Radio broadcasts by Hutu hate-mongers panicked millions  of Hutu villagers into fleeing their homes in terror that they would be killed.
More than a million refugees now languish in cholera-infested camps in Zaire.


Where News Is an Obsession;In the Hamptons, Competition for Readers Is No Summer Picnic
Word of the break-in at Peggy Siegal's weekend home spread fast.
Within days, The East Hampton Star, a local weekly newspaper, had broken the story.
A few days later, a reporter for a rival Hamptons weekly tipped off a columnist for a major metropolitan daily, who wrote it up as yet another scintillating tidbit  from summer central on Long Island's East End.


The Failed House Health Bill
The health-care bill that the Democratic leadership will take to the full House for debate early next month would do more harm than good.
Though it starts off correctly -- achieving universal coverage by requiring employers to pay for  most of the cost of insuring their workers -- it proposes insurance "reforms" that would bury the most innovative, cost-effective plans that many Americans routinely choose today.
The bill would be a victory for highly paid physicians and would reward those in Congress who want to control the huge health-care industry.
But it would be a defeat for patients who expect high-quality care at a reasonable price.


U.S. SENDING FORCE OF 200 TO REOPEN RWANDAN AIRPORT
President Clinton ordered a sharply limited detachment of 200 American troops into Rwanda today to open the country's major airport for relief flights, asserting that the United States "will not cease its efforts until the dying stops" in refugee camps there and in nearby Zaire.
But in a clear allusion to the military's relief effort in Somalia, where dozens of soldiers died in combat, the White House insisted that United States forces would be restricted to aiding refugees and would stay far out of Rwanda's gruesome civil war.


WMX TECHNOLOGIES TO BUY REST OF CHEMICAL WASTE
WMX Technologies Inc. proposed late on Thursday to buy the 21 percent stake in Chemical Waste Management Inc. that it does not already own, but Chemical Waste stockholders promptly sued yesterday to block the deal.
Under the proposal, each stockholder of Chemical Waste Management other than WMX would receive 0.27 of a WMX Technologies share for each share of Chemical Waste they own.
The deal is worth about $363 million at current prices.
WMX closed yesterday on the Big Board at $29, up 12.5 cents..
That means Chemical Waste stockholders would get $7.86 a share worth of WMX stock at the current price.
Chemical Waste closed up 37.5 cents, at $8.25, on the Big Board.
The three lawsuits charged both companies and directors with a breach of fiduciary duties, saying the plaintiffs were squeezing out minority shareholders.


Kelly One of Seven Joining Hall Today
Two years into his career with the Cleveland Browns, about the only way LEROY KELLY was going to get into the Pro Football Hall of Fame was to drive for an hour and buy a ticket.
Then JIM BROWN unexpectedly retired and Kelly rushed in,  all the way to the Hall of Fame.
Today he will be inducted with Cowboys running  back TONY DORSETT and defensive tackle RANDY WHITE, Vikings Coach BUD GRANT, 49ers cornerback JIMMY JOHNSON and JACKIE SMITH, a tight end for the St.
Louis Cardinals and Cowboys.
After the ceremony, the Atlanta Falcons and San Diego Chargers will meet in  the annual Hall of Fame exhibition game. (AP)


Bomb Kills Three in Madrid, and Police Blame Basque Separatists


COMPANY BRIEFS
CAMPBELL SOUP CO., Camden, N.J., will close its ramen noodle plant in Sidney, Ohio, leaving the company with two similar plants elsewhere.
The Sidney plant's  100 employees will receive severance benefits.


AETNA LIFE &amp; CASUALTY CO. (AET,N)
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company said yesterday that its profits fell 9.4  percent in the second quarter, mainly because of a charge of $64 million relating to hazardous waste site cases.
Aetna, an insurer based in Hartford, reported earnings of $132.4 million, or  $1.17 a share, for the three months that ended on June 30, compared with $146.1  million, or $1.32 a share, in the corresponding period a year ago.
Revenues were $4.40 billion, up from $4.35 billion.


1,000 Marines Called In to Fight Northwest Blazes as 2 FirefightersDie
President Clinton yesterday ordered 1,000 marines from Camp Pendleton, Calif., into Western states to help battle wildfires as the firefighting effort  turned deadly when a tanker plane crashed in Montana, killing two crew members and touching off yet another blaze.
The plane went down near the Flathead Indian Reservation, about 20 miles west of Missoula, starting a fire that quickly spread over 10 acres, the Forest Service said.


Bono Trade to Chiefs Is Finally Official
The Kansas City Chiefs learned yesterday that National Football League Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE had finally given formal approval to the May 2 trade in which they acquired quarterback STEVE BONO from the San Francisco 49ers.
Chiefs President CARL PETERSON read a statement from Tagliabue saying, "I do not find clear proof of a violation of league rules and policies." (AP)


XEROX CORP. (XRX,N)
The Xerox Corporation reported yesterday that its second-quarter profits jumped 50 percent, in part because of rising productivity and higher equipment sales.
Xerox, the giant copier maker based in Stamford, Conn., earned $168 million,  or $1.31 a share, in the three months that ended on June 30, compared with $112  million, or 96 cents a share, in the period a year earlier.
Revenues rose 4 percent, to $3.58 billion from $3.43 billion.


8 in Family Injured as Car Jumps the Curb
Eight members of a Jersey City family were injured yesterday afternoon when a car slammed into them as they stood on the sidewalk at a street corner in Washington Heights, the police said.
The driver, an unidentified man thought to be in his late teens, fled the accident scene at West 167th Street and Audubon Avenue, leaving behind the 1983  Chevrolet Caprice he had been driving, the police said.


Americans in Haiti Fear an Invasion
More than a dozen American warships are now stationed just off Haiti with the stated purpose of protecting the Americans living here.
But many of the people who are supposed to feel reassured say they would be a lot happier if the ships  would sail away and leave them alone.
"We are safe down here, and have been for many years," said Mickey McLaney, who came to Haiti two decades ago to run a hotel and a swimsuit business, neither of which is now open.
"We don't need that kind of help. Before they put  this embargo on, we were doing just fine."


The Labor Negotiations: Ball's in Whose Court?
On the day major league baseball players set Aug. 12 as their strike date, Richard Ravitch put the ball in Donald Fehr's court.
But yesterday, Fehr deflated the ball.
A salary cap by any other name, he said, is still a salary cap.
Fehr, the players' labor leader, was responding to Ravitch's repeated request to the players that they respond to the owners' desire to know "what it will cost us to play baseball."


Police Captain Who Killed Himself Is Mourned


Some House Democrats Like Plan but Not Political Risks
Several House Democrats said today that they generally supported the health care plan put forth by their leaders but that they were worried about how to pay for it and acknowledged that they did not yet have the votes to pass it.
"This week there seemed a greater willingness to accept the plan," said Representative Barbara B. Kennelly, Democrat of Connecticut and a chief deputy whip.
"But it remains to be seen when people are called on to vote."


Former Club Player Shares Seniors Lead
He is one of about a dozen former club pros who in middle age find themselves making more money playing golf against some of the game's legends than they ever dreamed of doing in their prime.
Yet, 59-year-old Jimmy Powell has been most noteworthy on the Senior Tour for being the father of 7 and the grandfather of 11.
For about two hours today, his family tree was secondary.
Following an opening-round 66 at the Meadow Brook Club, Powell was atop the leader board in the Northville Long Island Classic, ahead of such players as Jack Nicklaus, Lee  Trevino, Ray Floyd, Dave Stockton and Jim Colbert.


Man Dies After Stabbing
A 72-year-old Brooklyn man died yesterday after being repeatedly stabbed and  beaten in front of his home, the police said.
The police said the man, George Basilikos, was killed about 12:30 P.M. and that they believe the slaying may stem from an argument he had with some of his  neighbors, said Sgt.
Jim Coleman, a police spokesman.


I Lombardi' Put Off Till '95
The rained-out New York Grand Opera performance of "I Lombardi" by Verdi has  been rescheduled for next season.
The performance, last Wednesday in Central Park, was halted by rain.
It will not be repeated on the originally announced rain date, which was Monday.
Instead, "I Lombardi" will open the 1995 summer season of New York Grand Opera's "Viva, Verdi" festival, preceding the four operas originally announced.


Cunningham Ready To Come Back Again
In 1991, in the first game of the National Football League season and Rich Kotite's first game as coach of the Philadelphia Eagles, his quarterback, Randall Cunningham, tore up his left knee and was lost for the year.
In 1993, in the fourth game of the season against the Giants, Cunningham broke his left leg and was lost for the year.
So, after lunch today, why was Cunningham stretched out on the locker-room floor with an ice bag placed on a propped-up right knee?
And at the Jets' training camp?


Two Favorites Running On Different Tracks Today
At the northern end of the battlefield for 3-year-olds, Tabasco Cat drew the  No. 3 post position today as the overwhelming favorite in the Jim Dandy Stakes at Saratoga Race Course on Sunday.
At the southern end, Holy Bull drew the No. 3 post as the overwhelming favorite in the Haskell Invitational at Monmouth Park in New Jersey the same day.
Both colts will be taking major steps toward their meeting in three weeks in  the $750,000 Travers Stakes at Saratoga, "the summertime Kentucky Derby," and one of them is likely to emerge as the champion pro tem of the Triple Crown
class of 3-year-old colts.
But both will be carrying top weight of 126 pounds and will be giving away as much as 14 pounds to their rivals.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Carnegie Hall, Beethoven And Masur Wind It Up Carnegie Hall


DEATH OF A DOCTOR: THE MORAL DEBATE -- Abortion Doctor and BodyguardSlain in Florida; A Cause Worth Killing For? Debate Splits Abortion Foes
Exactly three months ago, nearly 100 anti-abortion leaders met at a Chicago hotel to plan their future.
But their weekend gathering at the Radisson Lincolnwood Hotel quickly turned  into a heated two-day debate on a chilling question that has split their ranks: Is the killing of doctors who perform abortions morally justified?


PEPCID DRUG REJECTED ON OVER-THE-COUNTER SALES
Merck &amp; Company must provide additional information that its ulcer drug Pepcid is effective at treating and preventing heartburn before it can be sold without a doctor's prescription, a Food and Drug Administration panel ruled yesterday.
The ruling comes a day after the same group of medical experts rejected a similar appeal by SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. to sell its Tagamet over  the counter as a heartburn treatment.
Merck shares closed at $29.625 yesterday, down 12.5 cents, before the F.D.A. ruling was announced.
Merck is traded on the New York Stock Exchange.


Early Jefferson Portrait Stolen
The earliest known life portrait of Thomas Jefferson was stolen on Thursday night from a studio where it had been sent for reproduction, the police said today.
The painting, from 1786, is owned by Charles Francis Adams of Dover, Mass., a sixth-generation descendant of John Adams, the second President of the United States.


Heal the 'Bad Paper' Veterans
American involvement in Vietnam ended two decades ago, and the wounds suffered during the conflict are finally healing.
The nation has built memorials to our men and women who fought and died in the war.
American companies are establishing business relationships in Hanoi.
Hollywood continues to reinterpret how the war touched our national psyche.
There is, however, unfinished business.
More than 560,000 Vietnam-era veterans received less-than-honorable discharges for such offenses as being absent without leave, using or selling drugs or assaulting their superiors.
A great number were in combat.
Because of their "bad paper," these veterans are not eligible for health and other benefits available to veterans with honorable discharges.


EX-OFFICER OF PRUDENTIAL TO PAY PENALTIES
A Federal court yesterday ordered Bede Howard, a former vice president at Prudential Securities Inc., to pay more than $700,000 in penalties for defrauding his investment clients.
The order, issued by Judge Alfred M. Wolin of the United States District Court in New Jersey, was announced by the Securities  and Exchange Commission, which filed suit against Mr.
Howard on Jan. 21.
The S.E.C. contended that Mr.
Howard, a former vice president in Prudential Securities' office in Morristown, N.J., had persuaded several of his clients to  put money in investment vehicles he knew were fictitious.
Mr.
Howard, who is also known as Howard Bede, is said to have told clients to make checks out to him when they agreed to invest in these phony financial products.
Prudential Securities never saw the money, an S.E.C. enforcement attorney said at the time.


Expos Make Most Of 2 Hits In Inning
Expos 8, Marlins 4 Montreal broke open a tie game with a four-run seventh inning on only two hits as the Expos beat the Florida Marlins, 8-4, in Miami.


Ugo Carusi, 92, Immigrants' Son Who Helped Wartime Refugees
Ugo Carusi, an immigrants' son who became the United States immigration commissioner in World War II and then helped to resettle hundreds of thousands of European refugees during the Truman and Eisenhower Administrations, died on July 21 at his home in Washington.
He was 92.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


INSIDE


Senate G.O.P. Sees Altman as Its Focus In Whitewater Case
With no Democrat willing to come to his defense, Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman came under blistering attack today by the Republicans who opened the Senate's Whitewater hearings by calling on him to resign for mishandling the Whitewater investigation and misleading Congress.
The Republicans also released testimony by a White House official that they said contradicted statements that Mr.
Altman made about Whitewater in late February to the Senate Banking Committee.
At the time, he acknowledged that the  White House and Treasury officials had discussed an investigation into Madison Guarantee Savings and Loan, a failed Arkansas savings and loan owned by the Clintons' partner in the Whitewater Development Company.


Convertibles Mix Stock and Bond Features
Funds that invest in convertible securities mix some features of both stocks  and bonds, and the winners listed here have behaved more like equities than bonds in recent years.
The top 10 funds mostly emphasized smaller companies, piggybacking on the rally in that sector over the last three years.
Many of them owned lower-rated issues, and benefited from the junk bond rally, too.


James Luther Adams, 92, Theologian and Ethicist
James Luther Adams, a theologian who was an authority on ethics, died on Tuesday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 92.
The cause was heart failure, said Jack Kleis of the Rogers Funeral Home in Cambridge.


Confirmation for Breyer


Burden of Holocaust
To the Editor:
Ismar Schorsch is more solicitous of today's German youth, who he thinks should not suffer from association with the Holocaust, than he is of descendants of Jews who were killed (letter, July 23).
To use the word "myth" in connection  with the Holocaust Museum plays into the hands of Holocaust deniers.
And to ask  Jews to temper "feelings of hatred" shifts the moral burden from the Germans to  their victims.


Driver Charged in Deaths
A 17-year-old girl who was driving a Jeep that flipped over and killed two passengers at an informal pep rally in May has been charged in their deaths.
The Passaic County Prosecutor, Ronald S. Fava, said on Thursday that the girl had been charged in juvenile court with two counts of death by auto in the deaths of Jaclyn Coriale, 14, and Paula Antonucci, 16.


Mortgage Rates Rise
The interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged 8.57 percent this  week, up from 8.52 percent last week, according to a national survey released on Thursday by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
The average rate was the highest since July 14, when the average was 8.72 percent.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 5.54 percent, up from 5.46 percent last week.
Fifteen-year mortgages averaged 8.09 percent this week, up from 8.01 percent a week earlier.


Dr. Erwin Ringel, 73, an Austrian Writer
Erwin Ringel, a prominent Austrian social critic and the author of a best-selling book on anti-Semitism, died on Thursday.
He was 73.
The cause was a heart attack.
Dr.
Ringel used a wheelchair in later life because he had multiple sclerosis.


Bridge
Teams headed by Kathie Wei-Sender of Nashville and Sally Woolsey of Kensington, Calif., won strong semifinal victories on Thursday night to reach the final of the Women's Knockout Teams at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
The experienced Wei-Sender team, including Lisa Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., Carol Sanders of Nashville, Lynn Deas of Schenectady, N.Y., and Beth Palmer of Silver Spring, Md., is not at full strength, in the absence of Betty Kennedy of Shreveport, La., because of a family illness.
But in the semifinal, they won by 30 imps against a group led by Janice Seamon of Miami, Fla.


Ambitious Plans for Iraqi Oil
Expressing confidence that the United Nations embargo on Iraqi oil exports will be lifted by early next year, Iraq's Oil Minister is preparing to triple oil production over the next few years from an initial two million barrels a day.
Revenues from the increasing oil production could offset the cost of the reparations that Iraq must pay for its 1990 invasion of Kuwait.
But it could also put pressure on world oil prices, unless demand keeps growing and production declines elsewhere.


Public &amp; Private;Done In By Day Care
Sometimes you just can't win for losing.
Particularly if you're a single mother in America.
Jennifer Ireland got pregnant when she was 15.
She was a cheerleader; her boyfriend was the captain of the football team.
She decided to have a baby rather than an abortion, graduated third in her high school class, and won a scholarship to the University of Michigan.
When she moved to Ann Arbor she took  with her Maranda Ireland-Smith, now 3.
Maranda was enrolled in a licensed day-care home, where a woman cared for her own two children and three others.


Health Care Mergers Should Worry Consumers;No Car, but Insured
To the Editor:
Re "Frayed Nerves of People Without Health Coverage" (front page, July 11): I live in a $300-a-month hotel on Lexington Avenue in New York City.
I don't have  a house on a golf course.
But I do have health insurance that I pay for myself.


Treasure Beneath the Sea
Yesterday, Madeleine K. Albright, the United States representative to the United Nations, signed an agreement amending the deep seabed mining part of the  Convention on the Law of the Sea.
This agreement crowns a 10-year effort to eliminate treaty provisions irreconcilable with free market principles.
Because of these provisions, the U.S. refused to sign the convention.
In announcing that decision, President Ronald Reagan said the 16 other parts of the convention were "consistent with United States interests and . . . serve well the interests of all nations."


Sometimes the Order of the Day Is Just Maintaining Order
It was a far, far cry from the controlled mayhem of Robert's Rules of Order.
The fracas started when passions were stirred in the House Banking Committee's Whitewater hearings.


DEATH OF A DOCTOR: THE OVERVIEW -- Abortion Doctor and Bodyguard Slainin Florida; Protester Is Arrested in Pensacola's 2d Clinic Killing
For the second time in 17 months, an abortion doctor was shot to death outside a women's clinic in this Florida Panhandle city today.
Only moments after the shooting, in which a volunteer security escort for the doctor was also killed, the police arrested Paul J. Hill, a well-known anti-abortion protester here, and charged him with two counts of murder.


JAZZ
Swing's Precise Possibilities, As Seen by Davern and Wilber 92d Street Y


LONDON FOG CLOSING U.S. PLANTS OVER UNION DISPUTE
London Fog Industries said yesterday that it would close its last three United States manufacturing plants by the end of October, putting 700 people out of work, after failing to settle a dispute with its main union.
The maker of raincoats and other outerwear said it cost $18 more to produce a garment in its  domestic plants than overseas.
Officials of the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers could not immediately be reached for comment.
Workers at the Baltimore, Hancock and Williamsport, Md., plants were notified of the closings yesterday morning.
London Fog, best known for its trench coats, was founded in Baltimore in 1922.


10,000 Stampede as Russian Stock Collapses
Russia's largest investment company virtually collapsed today as more than 10,000 outraged stockholders stampeded the colonnaded headquarters of Moscow's commodities exchange, smashing windows as they tried desperately to unload their shares in the plummeting fund.
After promising on Thursday that it would begin to buy back stock for the equivalent of about $60 a share, officials of the troubled company, MMM, announced this morning that they had cut the value to almost nothing.


Vanity Presses Beware: This Is No Country Boy
NO rules, no reason to rhyme.
That's what John Waldo Adams thinks is wrong with poetry today.
He admits he's not your typical poet, but he thinks free verse is a free-for-all.
Feelings are fine, but objectivity is ideal.
"If everyone just wrote about their feelings, all the trees on the earth couldn't make the volume," he said.
"Today, it's not what you do, but how you feel. With me it's what you do."


Italian Premier Offers to Limit Role in Business Holdings
Struggling to shield his Government from further buffeting, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi proposed today the creation of complex legal mechanisms to separate his business empire, which is under investigation by Italian magistrates, from his personal control.
Opposition politicians immediately denounced the move as sleight of hand designed to mask continuing control of the Prime Minister's vast television and  other business interests.


Cooling Waves


Belle's Suspension Trimmed to Six Days
The Great Albert Belle Corked-Bat Incident was resolved quietly yesterday, rendering unnecessary an appeal hearing that could have been filled with charges and countercharges of chicanery, mystery, burglary and carpentry.
Belle, the Cleveland Indians' star slugger, withdrew his appeal of a 10-day suspension for allegedly using a corked bat, and Bobby Brown, on his last day as American League president, reduced the penalty to six days and seven games.


Some Immortals Romp On Cooperstown Stages
Holy cow!
As immortals mustered here today for the annual induction weekend of the Baseball Hall of Fame with, notably, the belated ascension of Phil Rizzuto, the Major League Baseball Players Association announced a strike date for next month and a Mudvillian gloom descended on Cooperstown.


Bratton Tears the Police Down to Build Them Up
Crises are usually not something that police commissioners embrace, but William J. Bratton says he is purposefully promoting the message that his department is in dire straits to propel his campaign to "re-engineer the culture of the department."
Previous commissioners would surely have tried to minimize, or not even have sought, a series of stinging internal reports released earlier this week that describe the department as "ineffective and irrelevant," drowning in paperwork,  crippled by antiquated computers and lacking in training and tactical equipment  to fight crime and internal corruption.


Tagliabue, Simms Make Up
When Phil Simms's phone rang on Thursday afternoon, the last person he expected it to be was National Football League Commissioner Paul Tagliabue.
Tagliabue, after all, had made some comments recently regarding the salary cap and the end of Simms' career as Giants quarterback that greatly angered Simms.
But there's nothing like a little communication to straighten out a problem.
Simms said he and Tagliabue "buried the hatchet" during the lengthy telephone conversation.
"Let me just say this," Simms said.
"I have regretted the harshness of my statement. I did have the opportunity to talk with him and it was a good conversation. Today I feel much better about everything.


No Headline
Up to now, the killings have been on one side, with 30 million dead babies
and hundreds of dead and maimed mothers.
On the other side, there are two dead doctors.
Maybe the balance is going to start to shift." -- DON TRESHMAN, director of Rescue America. [26:2.]


In Sudan, Slavery Is a Criminal Offense
To the Editor:
"Bought and Sold," by Charles Jacobs and Mohamed Athie (Op-Ed, July 13), on slavery in Northern Africa, is inaccurate in several important respects.


Rates Fall And Stock Prices Rise
Short- and long-term interest rates fell sharply yesterday and stocks jumped, as traders and investors concluded that the most recent economic reports indicated that the Federal Reserve Board would not push up interest rates as much or as quickly as they had previously thought.
The catalyst for the markets was the Commerce Department's early morning report that gross domestic product, the sum of economic activity in the second quarter, grew by only 3.7 percent after inflation.
Because consumer spending grew by only 1.2 percent in the second quarter, down from an average of 4.2 percent over the previous three quarters, while business inventories rose rapidly, economists said that businesses might soon cut back on production, thereby helping reduce economic growth in the current quarter to less than 3 percent.


Americans Buying More On Credit
Americans are piling on the debt, with monthly totals for car loans, credit cards and other installment loans growing at a ferocious pace in recent months.
The increase, in part a result of pent-up consumer demand, casts some doubt  on the widely held notion that consumers emerged from the last recession financially savvier and less willing to take on high-cost debt.


Cuomo Vetoes Bill Giving Workers Say on Discipline
Rejecting the entreaties of organized labor, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo vetoed a bill today that would have given public employees greater say over who disciplines them.
New York City police officials and the Giuliani administration had vigorously opposed the legislation, saying it would undermine their ability to dismiss corrupt police officers.


Q &amp; A


Health Care Mergers Should Worry Consumers;Dole's Benefits
To the Editor:
When Hillary Rodham Clinton suggested to Senator Bob Dole that all Americans  should be entitled to the health benefits enjoyed by him and millions of Federal employees, Senator Dole, instead of discussing the proposition on its merits, dismissed it as a "cheap shot."


Heart &amp; Soul Editor
Stephanie Stokes Oliver, the editor of Essence, has been named editor in chief of Heart &amp; Soul, a health magazine aimed at black readers.
Ms.
Oliver has  been at Essence, a black life-style publication, for 16 years and has been its editor since 1986.
Before joining Essence, she was the fashion and beauty merchandising editor at Glamour.
Reginald Ware, publisher of Heart &amp; Soul, said  that in January the quarterly magazine would start publishing six times a year.
It will also raise the circulation it guarantees to advertisers to 200,000 from  125,000.
Heart &amp; Soul was started by Rodale Press and Ware Communications last year.


Health Care Mergers Should Worry Consumers;Unfair to Pizza Hut
To the Editor:
The Health Care Reform Project's advertisement in the July 17 New York Times  needs to be investigated for truth in advertising.


TOP AMERICA ONLINE INVESTOR SELLS HALF OF STAKE
America Online Inc.'s most prominent investor, Paul Allen, has sold 733,000 shares, or more than half his stake in the company, his spokeswoman said.
"It was a good time to realize some profits," said Susan Pierson, Mr.
Allen's spokeswoman.
She would not say whether Mr.
Allen planned to sell any more shares.
Before yesterday, Mr.
Allen, a co-founder of the Microsoft Corporation with his high school friend William Gates, owned about 18 percent of the common shares of America Online, which provides news, electronic mail services and entertainment to its customers through modem-equipped personal computers.
The large share sale apparently spooked investors.
Shares of America Online fell $5 yesterday, to $55.625, on trading of 2.2 million shares.
Mr.
Allen now owns 698,000 shares, or about 9 percent of the shares outstanding.


PRICECOSTCO APPROVES A PLAN TO SPIN OFF ASSETS
Pricecostco Inc. said yesterday that its board had approved its previously announced plan to spin off its commercial real estate operations and other assets.
The spinoff, to be called Price Enterprises Inc., will be accomplished by an exchange offer for the estimated 27 million shares in the new company.
Pricecostco shareholders will be offered the chance to exchange one share of Pricecostco for a share of Price Enterprises.
There are about 217 million Pricecostco shares.
Pricecostco is the operator of the country's second-biggest  chain of warehouse club stores.
Last year the Price Company merged with the Costco Wholesale Corporation.
The assets include commercial real estate, four warehouse properties, a 51 percent stake in Pricecostco's 50/50 Mexican joint venture, a 51 percent interest in certain international rights and a 51 percent  stake in Quest operations, an electronic catalogue.
The assets represented less  than 10 percent of the company's earnings on a pretax basis in the first quarter.


Bright Skies in Mexico Bode Well for A.D.R.'s
IT'S getting sunny in Mexico again, and one way investors can bask in the warmth without heading south is through American depository receipts.
But they should know that the storm clouds have just parted.
In Mexico earlier this year, "everything that could go wrong did go wrong," said Maria-Elena Carrion, a vice president at Bankers Trust.
Kidnappings, the Chiapas rebellion, a political assassination and nail-biting over the Aug. 21 presidential election brought the Mexican market, the Bolsa, 20 percent off its  all-time high of 2,895, reached Feb. 9.


Samuel Chavkin Journalist and Author, 81
Samuel Chavkin, journalist and author, died on Tuesday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 81 and lived in Manhattan and Amagansett, L.I.
The cause was heart disease, said his son-in-law, Nicholas Freudenberg.


Sides Spar As Judge Sets Date For Simpson
A judge today ordered O. J. Simpson to go to trial on Sept. 19, as his defense lawyers accused prosecutors of not aggressively pursuing and sharing leads that might clear him before the trial.
In a brief court hearing this morning, a lead defense lawyer, Johnnie Cochran Jr., contended that the police had not given enough credence to a witness who had given a statement "totally inconsistent with the theory of a lone assailant" in the fatal stabbings of Mr.
Simpson's former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend Ronald L. Goldman on June 12.
Mr.
Cochran also accused prosecutors of dismissively interviewing "witnesses that have theories of multiple assailants of different ethnic background than Mr. Simpson."


Troubles in Nigeria Send Oil and Cocoa Up Sharply
Rioting and labor strife in Nigeria drove crude oil and cocoa prices up sharply yesterday on worries the unrest would disrupt exports from the African nation.
Striking Nigerian oil workers demanded that Royal Dutch/Shell's Nigerian subsidiary halt all production in the country.


Cuts and Relocations for I.B.M.'s PC Unit
Three months after taking over I.B.M.'s faltering personal computer business, G. Richard Thoman yesterday confirmed analysts' speculation that the company would lay off up to 2,000 workers, consolidate operations and close its Ambra unit in an effort to recapture the market lead from the Compaq Computer Corporation.
Mr.
Thoman told the 10,000 employees of the IBM PC Company yesterday that he would reduce the work force by 1,500 to 2,000 people and consolidate many of the unit's North American operations at Research Park Triangle in Raleigh, N.C.


Robot Explorer Starts Trek to Volcano's Heart
An eight-legged robot named Dante II came alive on the rim of an Alaskan volcano yesterday, taking its first steps toward exploring an active crater and  toward proving that it could extend the reach of human scientists into such dangerous places.
The robot began its trek into the dark inferno of the smoldering crater at 6:30 P.M., Eastern time, after being delayed for several days by balky components and unfavorable weather in the vicinity of Mount Spurr, a volcano 80  miles west of Anchorage.
During its first day of operation, Dante walked more than 100 feet through snow and mud without incident.


Airwaves Auctions Bring $833 Million For U.S. Treasury
The Federal Government set out to sell blue sky this week, and it succeeded beyond anybody's wildest expectations.
Concluding an unprecedented experiment to auction off the nation's airwaves,  the Federal Communications Commission raised $617 million today from the the sale of 10 licenses for nationwide advanced paging networks.
On top of that, it  took in $216 million from the sale of some 300 licenses that may be used for interactive television services in the future.


RESULTS PLUS
KAYAKING AND CANOEING


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about support groups for women with breast cancer and their daughters omitted the name of an organization based in Manhattan that runs such groups, including the one described in the article.
It is Share: Self-Help for Women With Breast or Ovarian Cancer.


Senate Health Bill to Try to Avoid Requirement on Employers
Insisting that he had not made up his mind, Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, outlined to Democratic senators today some central provisions of a health care bill he plans to propose next week, one that relies on employer payments for workers' insurance only as a last resort.
That is its biggest difference from the bill House leaders unveiled today, which would require employers to pay 80 percent of their workers' premiums, starting in 1997 for large employers and in 1999 for smaller companies.


Gilbert Le Coze Dies at 49; Inspired a Generation of Chefs
Gilbert Le Coze, a French-born chef whose innovative ways with seafood at his Manhattan restaurant, Le Bernardin, influenced a generation of American cooks, died on Thursday.
He was 49 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Le Coze had a heart attack while working out at a health club, said Eric Ripert, chef at Le Bernardin.


Son Seeks Father Beyond the Identities of Race
In David Rousseve's "Pop Dreams," which was presented on Thursday night in the Serious Fun festival at Alice Tully Hall, the experimental choreographer's company, David Rousseve/Reality, uses popular music, speech and dance to explore what it means to grow up as a black man in America.
This subject has been the dominant theme of the troupe's recent work, but now it has been enlarged into the universal myth of a son's search for his father.
For the most part, Mr.
Rousseve has trouble rising to his own occasion.
But amid the spoken and danced soliloquies of this two-hour piece, there is one striking and poignant image that gets to heart of the matter.


ROCK
A Virtuoso of Effects Boxes As Well as the Guitar The Cooler


Arrest in 1981 Murder
A suspect in the 1981 killing of a Manhattan doctor was taken into custody yesterday by the police.
Patrick McDowell, 30, was being held in connection with the slaying of John  Chase Wood Jr., an emergency room physician at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.


Steam Pipe on West Side Spews Asbestos Into Sky
A 32-year-old steam pipe ruptured early yesterday morning on the West Side, cracking a sidewalk and spewing asbestos and other debris 30 feet into the sky.
Officials closed off a four-block area around the intersection of 57th Street and 10th Avenue, where the break occurred at 1 A.M.
No one was injured or evacuated, but residents and workers in the area were required to wear yellow plastic booties over their shoes yesterday to avoid tracking asbestos into their homes and offices.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a meeting of minority journalists in Atlanta misspelled the surname of the Harvard law professor who was moderator of a discussion about political correctness.
He is Charles J. Ogletree Jr.


Health Care Mergers Should Worry Consumers
To the Editor:
As a physician I am greatly concerned that the dramatic increase in the number of mergers and acquisitions in the health care industry is not so much a  response to pending health care reform as an attempt to circumvent that reform.
The acquisition of drug benefit management companies by large drug manufacturers should be particularly troubling, since it is difficult to imagine how such a combined entity could possibly operate without conflict of interest.


Health Care Mergers Should Worry Consumers;  100 Million at Risk
To the Editor:
"Frayed Nerves of People Without Health Coverage" (front page, July 11) leaves out risks faced by more than 100 million of us.


British Drop Insider Case
Jeffrey Archer, the best-selling novelist and Conservative politician, has been cleared of insider trading, the British Government said on Thursday.
The millionaire author of "Kane and Abel" and "Honor Among Thieves" and a close friend of Prime Minister John Major was being investigated by the Department of Trade and Industry for insider trading involving a television company's shares.
He had denied any wrongdoing.


Trade Pact's Financing Plan Clears a Senate Committee
After months of political maneuvering and repeated setbacks, the Clinton Administration finally persuaded the Senate Finance Committee today to accept a  plan to pay for the costs of a global free trade pact.
The deal clears away one obstacle to Congressional approval of legislation putting last December's 117-nation free trade deal into legal force.
The pact would expand the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and replace it with a more powerful World Trade Organization.


When to Cash In Chips During a Merger Battle
THE prospect of a corporate takeover sets dollar signs dancing in investors'  eyes.
And for good reason.
When the McKesson Corporation announced it was selling its PCS Health Systems unit to Eli Lilly &amp; Company and when QVC announced it would merge with CBS, stock of the companies being acquired soared.
The difficult part for investors, of course, is picking the right stocks.
But even those fortunate enough to snag the highfliers often find themselves in  something of a quandary: should they sell the shares before the deal is completed and, if so, when?


Thousands March in Bangladesh to Demand Execution of Writer


Dr. Paul Ander, 63, Chemistry Professor
Dr.
Paul Ander, a professor of chemistry at Seton Hall University and co-author of the college textbook "Principles of Chemistry," died on Sunday at his home in Union, N.J.
He was 63.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


New York Jews Warier of Terrorism
As the sun set over New York yesterday, Jews repaired to their synagogues to  celebrate the Sabbath, the day when God and man rest.
But the fear of terrorism, in the wake of threats this week, cast a particularly dark shadow last night at synagogues throughout the city.


A Savvy Hitchcock Gives Yankees a Fresh Start
Sterling Hitchcock does not know if his first extended glimpse of the major leagues will be curtailed by a players' strike in 13 days.
No one does.
He does  not know if the Yankees will stash him at Class AAA Columbus a day or two before the strike to keep him pitching.
No one does.
What Hitchcock knows is that his performance against the Cleveland Indians last night felt terrific and that he might not be able to duplicate it after Aug. 12.
Hitchcock accomplished precisely what the Yankees envisioned for him when they removed Terry Mulholland from the rotation to begin the second half in favor of the touted but untested rookie left-hander.
Displaying a powerful fastball, a tricky change-up and decent control against the premier lineup in the American League, Hitchcock whiffed seven and pitched commendably into the eighth inning as the Yankees rumbled to a 5-2 victory over the Indians at Yankee Stadium.


HOUSE DEMOCRATS UNVEIL PROPOSAL FOR HEALTH BILL
House Democratic leaders unveiled a national health care plan today that promises universal coverage by 1999, and they immediately embarked on what is expected to be an epic, two-week legislative struggle to assemble a Democratic majority behind it.
"This bill is about the courage of this Congress," said Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the majority leader, who urged his colleagues to step up to a moment in history, just as previous Congresses did with Social Security and Medicare.


Observer;He Yearns To Serve
Many have pleaded with me not to seek the Presidency in 1996, but I must.
Call it selfish, but I yearn for the utter humiliation that only the Presidency  can bestow.
I want to be scolded by columnists and editorial writers for not possessing sagacity and cunning as profound as theirs.


Editorial Notebook;Dennis Potter's Last Interview
Early in June Dennis Potter, perhaps the most dazzling and certainly the most imaginative of all television playwrights, died at his home in England.
A diagnosis of pancreatic cancer had been made on Valentine's Day, "a little gift, a little kiss from somebody," leaving him just enough time to work on two more plays and give an interview to the BBC in April.
The interview, with Melvyn Bragg, a British TV personality, was shown on New  York's Channel 13 last week.
Morbid curiosity, I suppose, is what drove me to watching it, that and having seen Mr.
Potter's "Pennies From Heaven" and "The Singing Detective." What kept me watching, however, was the obverse of morbid.
In the midst of death, Mr.
Potter was in full, glorious life -- almost, in a sense, in full bloom.


New Law Says Victims' Attire Cannot Be Cited in Rape Cases
New York today became the second state to prohibit defense attorneys from referring to a complainant's manner of dress in sex crime cases.
Under legislation signed into law by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, New York joins Florida as the only states that forbid defendants accused of sexual assault from using a person's style of dress as a motive for their actions.


Changing A Name That No Longer Feels Right
Mary Geraci, 41, a part-time public relations representative for Wells Fargo  Bank in San Francisco and Mary Kay Cosmetics saleswoman, was divorced in 1987 after 12 years of marriage.
She retained her married name, Essary, partly because that's how people knew her.
She began to think about returning to her maiden name in 1992 during a vacation  to Italy.
"People asked me what nationality Essary was, and I didn't know," she  said.
"I wanted my Italian name back." Then in June 1993, she had to send a note to her ex-husband on a personal matter.
"Seeing my married name on the return address pushed me over the edge,"  she recalled.


A Russian Official Says Bosnian Serbs Let Moscow Down
The Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev said today in Geneva that his Government had done all it could for Bosnia's Serbs and felt betrayed by their refusal to cooperate in the latest proposal for peace, the news agency Itar-Tass reported.
Mr.
Kozyrev told journalists in Geneva that Russia had made numerous initiatives to help broker an equitable peace in Bosnia that would reflect the interests of the Serbs, traditional allies of the Russians.


A Closer Look at the Two Plans


CAR AND TRUCK PRICES TO BE RAISED AN AVERAGE 6%
Bowing to the pressure of a rising Japanese yen, the Nissan Motor Company said yesterday that it would raise 1995 car and truck prices an average of 6 percent, or $1,105, above prices a year earlier.
The Japanese car maker said prices at its Infiniti luxury division would rise an average of $2,114 a car, or 6.1 percent.
A spokesman for Nissan said the price increases reflected the higher value of the yen and increased regulatory and equipment costs.
Like many Japanese auto makers, Nissan has been forced to raise prices more than once this year, making the 1995 price increase smaller when compared with final 1994  prices.
While Nissan's 1995 increases were limited to the single digits on the company's car lines, pickup-truck prices are up between 6 and 18 percent from the level of a year ago.


Economy Is Up 3.7% but Signs Hint of Slowing
In a report that cheered the Administration and financial markets for different reasons, the Commerce Department said today that the nation's economy  grew at a brisk annual pace of 3.7 percent in the second quarter.
But the report also showed that while businesses were expanding their production, unsold goods  were piling up on store shelves as consumer spending slowed sharply.
The stock and bond markets rallied strongly on the announcement as investors  decided that well-stocked retailers would stop ordering new goods and, as a result, the pace of economic growth might slow in the months ahead.
Slower growth would help keep inflation, which is now just below 3 percent, in check and could reduce the need for the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates.


Rizzuto's the Talk of the Town
Slouching at the bar at the Knights of Columbus Hall, gently sipping a beer,  T. R. Ciesla didn't look much like a heretic.
But when the conversation this afternoon turned to Phil Rizzuto, the former Yankee who is a resident here, Mr.
Ciesla uttered the kind of comments that some residents might contend should be  grounds for immediate, irrevocable exile.
"I don't care much for the man, to tell you the truth," announced Mr.
Ciesla, 46, an electrician who seemed eager to play the role of grinch amid the  celebrations in Hillside a few days before Mr.
Rizzuto is finally to be admitted to the Baseball Hall of Fame.
"He does nothing for the town."


Madrid Journal;Feminism Bursts Out Of Closet, Into Cabinet
It would never have happened on General Franco's watch, but in the Spain of today it was hardly shocking for a new-car advertisement to be illustrated by a  photograph of a young woman in a short skirt revealing a provocative glimpse of  underwear.
After all, as far back as the late 1970's, the sale of pornographic material  on newsstands was open proof that the dictatorship was over.
And even today, the sexual dalliances of the rich and famous still provide the main fodder for gossip magazines with huge readerships.


Vietnam War Protesters Had Selfish Motives
To the Editor:
Re "Look at Vietnam Generation Now" (letter, July 16): Erna Gold states that  "the most virulent antiwar protests occurred in the best colleges and universities, where students had the most knowledge and understanding of American history."


$680 MILLION NONCASH CHARGE AGAINST EARNINGS
The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it would take a $680 million noncash charge against second-quarter earnings, which were reported earlier this week, to reflect a change in accounting for inventories.
The restatement will wipe out the oil company's second-quarter profits of $535 million, or $1.31 a share, leaving it with a loss of $145 million, or 40 cents a share.
Mobil said the change, adopted yesterday, reflects the way it values crude oil and product  inventories.
The company said it would now compare book value with current market prices in each country instead of lumping them together on a worldwide basis.
Crude market prices vary depending on the country and blend of crude.
The change results in a permanent write-down of non-United States inventories by $680 million after taxes, Mobil said.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the settlement of a sexual harassment case involving the leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored  People referred incorrectly in some editions to the chairman of the special board trying to raise money for the association.
His name is spelled Marc Stepp.


Olympic Site Is Changed
Bowing to pressure from gay and lesbian activists, organizers of the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta said today that they would move preliminary volleyball  competition out of suburban Cobb County, which passed an anti-gay resolution last year.
Billy Payne, president of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games, said preliminary volleyball competition would be held in the 10,000-seat University of Georgia Coliseum in Athens, Ga.


Congress Advances Jordan Debt Relief
Congress took a step toward approving the reduction of Jordan's debt to the United States by up to $220 million today, speeding the measure because of the nation's accord this week with Israel.
The Clinton Administration promised Jordan $700 million in debt relief as a reward for King Hussein's decision to meet Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel at the White House this week and sign a pact formally ending a 46-year state of war.


Religion Notes
Twenty years ago in Philadelphia, 11 women were ordained priests in the Episcopal Church in direct defiance of official church rules.
The ordinations, held on July 29, 1974, were considered by many to be a major victory for women's rights in Christianity.
A number of the participants in that service -- including many of the women  and some of the male bishops who ordained them -- are gathering this weekend at the Episcopal Cathedral Church of the Savior in Philadelphia to mark that occasion.
Last night, the women celebrated a mass together, and today they are leading discussions that assess how far they have come and how far they still have to go.


Lawmakers Seek Tougher U.S. Protection For the Clinics
Several Democratic lawmakers demanded today that the Federal authorities intervene more aggressively to protect abortion clinics from acts of violence.
"The Federal Government has the tools and resources to deal with such reprehensible terrorist attacks and the organizations responsible for perpetrating the attacks," said Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn.


Fears of Rate Rise Ease, Spurring Stock Gains
Stocks broke out of their summer slumber yesterday after a weaker-than-expected report on the economy eased fears of an imminent interest rate increase.
The Dow Jones industrial average jumped 33.67 points, to 3,764.50, its highest close since June 17.
For the week, the Dow is up 29.46 points.


TRAINING CAMP REPORT
San Francisco 49ers


More Rwandan Refugees Begin the Long, Painful Trek Home
On the side of the road leading from the refugee camps in Zaire, a field hospital was hastily put up this morning.
Inside one tent, a man was being fed a solution intravenously, treatment for cholera.
An emaciated 9-year-old boy sat on his haunches nearby.
He had been abandoned somewhere along the road by his parents because he was too weak to keep walking.
Along 30 miles of twisting, hilly roads between the Zaire border and here, a  steady movement of refugees began the long trek back from the camps to their homes in Rwanda -- carrying their possessions in pails or in bags balanced on their heads.


Hotel Plans Are Submitted For Times Sq.
In the latest step in the long-delayed effort to redevelop Times Square, at least six large hotel chains have submitted plans to build a new hotel at the corner of 42d Street and Eighth Avenue.
One plan includes a proposal by the Walt Disney Company to create 100 time-share apartments.
The proposals, which had been requested in May by city and state development  authorities, were still being compiled yesterday, the deadline for submissions.
Although government officials declined the discuss the details of the proposals, they said interest in developing the rundown site, now home to several adult video stores, had been greater than expected.


Ribbon (Red Tape?) Cutting for Art
We all know," Deputy Borough President Jeannette Gadson of Brooklyn said yesterday, "that tourists do not come to New York to view the traffic."
They are, of course, drawn to the city by its cultural attractions.
Ms.
Gadson joined Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and others at the Brooklyn Museum to announce the start of a matching-grant program to make those cultural jewels shine brighter.


Corrections
An article yesterday about security measures in New York City after terrorist attacks in London and Buenos Aires misidentified the executive director of the Jewish Community Relations Council of New York.
He is Michael S. Miller, not Mark J. Miller.


Steam Pipe Rupture Spews Asbestos on West Side


Woman and Daughter, 3, Are Slain in Queens Home
A 27-year-old pregnant woman and her 3-year-old daughter were found dead last night with their throats slashed inside the family's apartment in Flushing, Queens, the police said.
Ramon Rodriguez, 29, told the police that he entered his sixth-floor apartment at 133-01 Sanford Avenue shortly before 8 P.M. and found the bodies of his wife, Francesca, and daughter, Alexa, inside a blood-soaked hallway.
Dead in a Pool of Blood


Cytogen Deal For Cytorad
The Cytogen Corporation, agreed today to acquire Cytorad Inc. for stock, warrants and rights.
Both are biotechnology companies here.
Unit holders of Cytorad would exchange each of their units for 1.5 shares of  Cytogen, a warrant to acquire a share of Cytogen and a right to receive up to half a share in Cytogen at no cost.


Plaudits Drown Out Critics As Senate Confirms Breyer
The Senate today confirmed Judge Stephen G. Breyer as the nation's 108th Supreme Court Justice by a vote of 87 to 9.
The vote, which followed unanimous approval last week in the Senate Judiciary Committee, came after more than five hours of scripted debate on the Senate floor.
With confirmation a foregone conclusion, senators took to the floor one at a time to state their views about the nominee to a largely empty chamber.


Person, Cut by Timberwolves, Now a Spur
CHUCK PERSON, released by the Minnesota Timberwolves after the season, signed yesterday with the San Antonio Spurs.
The Spurs, who recently reacquired SEAN ELLIOT and AVERY JOHNSON, and Person agreed to a multiyear deal beginning at about $1.1 million a year.
It enables Person to slip into the salary slot left by DALE ELLIS, who became a free agent this summer. (AP)


Tests Confirm Horizon Passenger Died of Legionnaires' Disease
A day before the cruise ship Horizon was to go back into service, health officials confirmed yesterday that a man who sailed to Bermuda on the ship had died of Legionnaires' disease.
Test results that came in late Thursday showed that the passenger, Pasquale Cantone, had been infected with the bacteria that causes Legionnaires' disease,  said Kristine Smith, a spokeswoman for the New York State Health Department.


Kings' Robitaille Dealt for Tocchet
The high-scoring left wing LUC ROBITAILLE was traded from the Los Angeles Kings to the Pittsburgh Penguins yesterday for right wing RICK TOCCHET and a 1995 second-round draft choice.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Conservancy to Give Aid To Renovations in Harlem


Spider Woman, As Reincarnated By a Pop Artist
IN ANY LIST OF MEMORABLE STAGE entrances, the initial appearance of Aurora in "Kiss of the Spider Woman" would be difficult to top.
She's called forth out of  thin air by the lonely Molina, the gay window dresser serving time in a brutal Latin American prison on a morals charge.
Aurora is Molina's escape hatch.
She both enunciates the show's most haunting theme ("You've got to learn how not to  be/ where you are") and demonstrates the way to do it.
In response to Molina at the beginning of the show, Aurora materializes from  the darkness of Molina's mind, not as a flesh-and-blood woman but as a mythical  larger-than-life character from a remembered dream.
Her roots are in the camp cinema of Maria Montez and other B-picture sirens of the 1940's.
Yet singing, dancing and kicking high, she comes on as a creature of such comic, commanding,  metaphysical presence that by the end of the first number, the audience is as seduced by her as Molina is.
We see the figure of his imagination.


Colleen C. Coyle, Craig J. Fecke
Colleen Clare Coyle, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. Coyle of Flushing, Queens, was married there yesterday to Craig James Fecke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Fecke of Huntington, L.I.
The Rev.
Matthew J. Diamond performed  the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Andrew Avellino Church.
Msgr.
John Keough, who officiated at the wedding of the bride's parents 30 years ago, took part in  the ceremony.
Mrs.
Fecke, 28, graduated from New York University.
She is an accountant with Ernst &amp; Young, the accounting firm in New York.
Mr.
Fecke, 31, graduated from Roanoke College and received an M.B.A. from Rutgers University.
He is a financial analyst in the international finance division of Texaco Inc. in Harrison, N.Y.


2 Ambiguous Paths Converge in Killings
Paul Jennings Hill "simply carried out his own theology," a friend said of the man arrested on Friday in the killing of a doctor who performed abortions at a clinic in Pensacola, Fla.
Mr.
Hill, a 40-year-old former Presbyterian minister, had expounded a theory  that such a killing would be homicide but would also be biblically justified.
He is charged with adding at least three shots from a .12-gauge shotgun to his volley of words and killing two people.


Blame the Boss
To the Sports Editor:
I am incensed by Thad Mumford.


Zoo Bear Mauls Woman
An Australian tourist who apparently wanted close-up pictures of a polar bear at the zoo here was mauled after she got too close to the animal.
The tourist, 29-year-old Kathryn Warburton of Sydney, received a broken leg and bite wounds in the attack on Friday, the police said.


July 24-30: Iran Blamed;Car Bombs Strike Two Jewish Targets In London
When a car bomb exploded outside the Israeli Embassy in London last Tuesday,  injuring 14 people, it hardened suspicions within the Israeli Government that radical Islamic fundamentalists were mounting a sustained international terrorist campaign against Jewish targets.
When another bomb went off 12 hours later outside a Jewish fund-raising group in north London, injuring five more people, suspicion turned to certainty, among Israeli officials, who blamed Iran and Hezbollah, an Iranian-backed guerrilla group.
The bombings followed by one week a similar attack in Buenos Aires, where about 100 people were killed outside a Jewish community center.
They also came
just a day after Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and King Hussein of Jordan signed a peace declaration in Washington, further enraging Islamic extremists who oppose peace with Israel.
RICHARD W. STEVENSON


Miss Winthrop, Mr. Hagen
Katharine Winthrop, a daughter of Mrs.
Nathaniel T. Winthrop of New York and  the late Mr.
Winthrop, was married yesterday in Blue Hill, Me., to Robert Peter  Hagen Jr., a son of Mrs.
Hagen of Alexandria, Va., and the late Colonel Hagen.
The Rev.
Robert McCall performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Hagen founded Caleb's Corner, a day-care center in Cambridge, Mass.
She  graduated from Wheelock College and received a master's degree in education from Lesley College.
Her father was a lawyer at the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.


POSTINGS: Foundation for the Blind Sells 4 Buildings;YIVO Institute Moving Near Union Sq.
After four decades in a Fifth Avenue mansion that would not look out of place on the Place des Vosges in Paris, the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research has a contract to buy a set of institutional buildings near Union Square.
The 85,000-square-foot complex, which has been home and headquarters of the American Foundation for the Blind, includes two four-story neo-Georgian structures on West 16th Street, between Fifth Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas, behind which are a 12-story loft building and a four-story building on West 17th Street.


U.S and Japan Break Off Trade Negotiations
The United States will formally charge Japan with failing to open its Government markets to American telecommunications and medical equipment products after last-minute trade talks today failed to break a negotiating log jam, a United States official said.
Deputy Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky said in an interview that the announcement of the formal complaint against Japan would be made on Sunday.


Alex the Great Conquers Saratoga
Alex the Great, a 5-year-old horse bred in England and raced mainly in France and California, brought his traveling act to Saratoga today and outran stars such as Fraise and Sea Hero to win the $250,000 Sword Dancer Handicap.
Fraise, the Breeders' Cup champion, finished fourth; Sea Hero, the winner of last year's Kentucky Derby, ran seventh in Saratoga's foremost grass race.
Kiri's Clown led until Alex the Great collared him on the homestretch.
At the finish, Alex had three-quarters of a length on Kiri's Clown, who held second by two lengths over L'Hermime.
The winner ran the mile and a half in 2:283/5 and returned $8.40 for $2.


Ceramics Hold Their Own in a Rockefeller Portfolio
ANCIENT CLAY WARRIORS FROM the Tang Dynasty guard the front hall at Kykuit, the Rockefeller hilltop home that is now a house-museum.
Meissen vultures, two feet tall, roost on a dining-room sideboard under John Singer Sargent's portrait of John D. Rockefeller Sr.
Ming and Ching vases, from the 15th to 19th centuries and embellished with dragons, florals and scenic designs, are clustered on tables everywhere.
The 40-room Beaux-Arts mansion was built by John D. Rockefeller Sr. 80 years  ago on the highest hill of his 300-acre property near Tarrytown, N.Y.
It is preserved today as the home of four generations of Rockefellers.
Following John  D. Senior's death in 1937, his son and namesake, John Jr., moved here with his wife, Abby Aldrich, and remained until his death in 1960.


Summer's International Overtones
MOST libraries around the county are content to coast during the warm- weather months, at least as far as music programs are concerned; not so the New  Rochelle Public Library.
True, the "Music, Wine and Cheese" concerts are taking the summer off, but all sorts of other events are in store.
Activities for small children at the library include the "Music and Movement" workshops on Wednesday at 10 A.M. and a 1 P.M. session on Friday with John Bertles called "Bash the Trash: Making and Playing Your Own Musical Instruments."


Julie Wallace, John Schwartz
Julie Kathleen Wallace, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Wallace of Wilmington, Mass., was married on Friday in Boston to John Putney Schwartz, the  son of Judge and Mrs.
Charles Schwartz Jr. of New Orleans.
Joseph L. Tauro, the  chief judge of the Federal District Court in Boston, officiated at the Harvard Club.
Mrs.
Schwartz is a vice president of the State Street Research and Management Company in Boston.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire.
Her father retired as a manager at Trans World Airlines in Boston.
Her mother, Norma Wallace, is an associate at the Baybank in Burlington, Mass.


Sonoma County
To the Editor: It is a joy to return home to find The New York Times on the doorstep; it is tantalizing to skim through my favorite sections in anticipation of what I'll be reading with my morning coffee.
Ah-ha, another well-deserved accolade for Timberhill Ranch.
What a shock to read Lynn Freed's article; this reporter doesn't seem to be reviewing the same Timberhill I know and love.
I would never classify the custom-made furniture as motel-style; Timberhill has handmade quilts on the beds, works from local artisans in the meticulously appointed cedar cabins as well as in the living room of the main lodge, with its magnificent fireplace.


Q. &amp; A.
A Bed and Breakfast In a Co-op


Oregon Jury Convicts Man in 4 Killings Linked to Hell's Angels
A man who prosecutors say was under orders from a top Hell's Angels leader was convicted today of murdering a woman, her twin 6-year-old girls and a family friend 17 years ago.
The defendant, Robert G. McClure, 47, was sentenced immediately after the verdict to four consecutive life terms in prison.


Straus Park Needs More Than Just a Facelift
To the Editor:
While I commend Leon Auerbach's efforts to refurbish Straus Park ("Prodding Pays Off for Straus Park," June 26), the plan to spend $325,000 of the city's money for landscaping and to replace benches is a glaring example of treating the symptom, not the cause.


Old School: Famous, Infamous and Now a Landmark
When it was dedicated in February 1903 as the first public high school for girls in New York City, Wadleigh High School was hailed in The New York Times as "the finest high school building in the world."
But after years of graduating promising students like Lillian Hellman and Jean Stapleton, the handsome brick building on 114th Street, with its elegant stained glass and bas-reliefs, fell into disrepair.


Ohioans to Clinton: Stop Strike
President Clinton got an earful today from baseball fans in Ohio who urged him to head off a threatened major league strike.
He was sympathetic, but made no promises.
Clinton, who traveled to Ohio for a political fund-raiser, stopped to shake hands with a crowd at the airport after departing Air Force One.


Western Forest Fires Blaze Out of Control
LEAVENWORTH, Wash., July 30
A speeding forest fire destroyed several houses near this tourist town today, forcing workers to shut down the water plant.


Trump Joins Davids I. Suitors
DAVIDS ISLAND, once an active Army post guarding New York from attack by sea, now sits abandoned off the coastline here -- considered by many to be prime real estate.
Not used since World War I, the 120-acre site on Long Island Sound periodically catches the fancy of developers, who see high-rise dwellings there, and city fathers, who would like the property to generate revenue for New Rochelle's declining tax base.
But to date no proposal for the island's future has made it past the planning stage.
Two years ago, environmentalists' concerns and debate over construction of a 3,500-foot bridge linking the island to this city, among other things, caused a $1 billion condominium proposal to founder.


Savoring the Memory of Enchanted Evenings


Brown Passes One Test But Giants Fail at End
It was his first touchdown drive as a Giant, and in this age of gyrating hips and disco dances to celebrate a score, Dave Brown opted to borrow an old-fashioned move from the Giants' past.
Specifically, borrowing it from the quarterback he is trying to replace.
After an impressive 12-play, 62-yard drive that resulted in the Giants taking a 7-3 lead over the Miami Dolphins and Brown taking the lead in the quarterback  fight, he made a tight fist and did a sort of round-house pump with his arm.
Nothing fancy, may not make the sports highlight shows or MTV.
But it sure did look familiar.
That's because for 15 years it was what Phil Simms did.


The Last Jitterbug
The final evening for dancing outdoors at the Midsummer Night Swing, Lincoln  Center, July 23.


Fewer Tours For the Disabled
WE are an endangered species," said Barbara Jacobson of Flying Wheels Travel in Owatonna, Minn., a travel agency-tour operator that since 1970 has specialized in travel for wheelchair users.
She was among several agency owners interviewed in light of the closing of Evergreen Travel of Lynnwood, Wash., for 37 years a leading operator in the field.


Wall Street;An Unpleasant Surprise for Buffets Investors
BUFFETS INC., a restaurant chain based in Eden Prairie, Minn., didn't make any friends Wednesday when it said that it wouldn't meet its expansion goals.
Only last month, Buffets had cheered investors with news that all systems were go on an aggressive plan to open 50 new restaurants in 1994 -- a lot of work, considering only 11 had been completed at that point.
But Buffets cut that goal to 45 new restaurants, adding that most of the new  operations would not open until very late in the year.
On Wednesday, the stock fell $3.25, or 16.7 percent, to $16.25, then rallied a little to close at $17.0625 Friday.


A Pianist With Strings And as Solo Performer
EVEN when he was at the beck and call of the commissars in the former Soviet  Republic of Georgia, Svyatoslav Levin probably did not have as crowded a Sunday  as he has today: the pianist appears this afternoon with the Leontovitch String  Quartet at Music Mountain in Falls Village, then gives a solo recital tonight in New Canaan.
Mr.
Levin has been carving out an increasingly active American career since his emigration in 1989 (he now lives in Kansas), giving a highly acclaimed New York debut recital in 1990, and last year taking first prize in the Simon Belsky Competition in Litchfield.


Short on Services, Neighborhood Sees New Use for Old Building
Shelby Dickson sat on a bench beside a basketball court littered with broken  glass, next to an abandoned lot overgrown with weeds and strewn with garbage.
Peering across Martin Luther King Jr.
Boulevard, she looked at a four-story, white-brick building whose graffiti-covered facade incorporates two Stars of David and texts from the Talmud.
Ms.
Dickson, who is 23 and grew up in Morris Heights, said she remembered passing in front of the building at No. 1835, before University Avenue was renamed, as a child.
Jews from the area used to gather there at the Hebrew Institute to pray, to socialize, to play, but Hispanics and blacks long ago replaced the Jews and Irish; the institute has been shuttered for 17 years.


Custody Case Stirs Debate on Bias Against Working Women
A Michigan judge's decision to take a child away from a mother who placed her in day care has created a furor over whether courts are biased against working mothers and has rekindled debate about the broad leeway judges have in deciding  what is in the best interests of a child.
To many custody experts and women's advocates, this case reflects a widespread, lingering bias among judges that penalizes mothers in custody disputes for working or going to school.
To other experts and fathers' rights proponents, the case is an exception to the rule that most judges still tend to  favor mothers over fathers.


The Buckaroo Stops Here
Since the sixties, when most men came to believe that it was the hair, not the hat, that made the man, it's been considered quite all right to present oneself in public bareheaded.
Still, there are plenty of guys who don't feel properly dressed without their chapeaus, and we don't mean only religious enthusiasts -- we're talking cowboys.
Cowboys are known for a lot of special apparel -- chaps, boots, belt buckles, bandannas.
But it is a high-crowned, broad-brimmed hat that's the buckaroo's coat of arms.
Strip a man bare, put him in long johns or a business suit; if he's got a ten-gallon hat on his noggin, he looks like a cowboy . . . whether he is or not.


Lo, the Powers of the Mighty Earthworm
CLEOPATRA declared them sacred and wanted to protect them.
Aristotle referred to them as the "intestines of the soil." Charles Darwin was even more full of praise.
"Long before man existed the land was in fact regularly plowed and still continues to be thus plowed by earthworms," he is said to have pronounced in 1881.
"It may be doubted whether there are many other animals which have played  so important a part in the history of the world as have these lowly organized creatures."
Such noble tribute is not heard much today.
Rather earthworms are regarded almost with disgust.
A gardener who comes upon these slimy creatures is likely to respond squeamishly.
Worms are considered something to back away from.
But it is time for these worthy creatures to again be regarded with the respect they deserve.


ABOUT SPAM
In the Big Deuce -- World War II -- Spam was not only a dietary staple, it was often the only item of fare.
We protested in a song, sung to the tune of "Mademoiselle from Armentieres." As best I can recall, it went:


Mutual Funds;More Investors Like Bundled Funds
WHAT'S the best way to describe a mutual fund industry with nearly 5,000 funds: "diverse" or "confusing"?
The industry prefers diverse, but clearly more investors are perplexed.
That  explains the astonishing growth in programs known broadly as "wrap" accounts, in which brokerage firms, banks and mutual fund companies assemble packages of funds for investors to meet their financial goals.


Ms. Farrell And Mr. Fox
Anne Marie Farrell, a daughter of Pauline A. Farrell of Oswego, N.Y., and the late James E. Farrell Sr., was married yesterday to George Patrick Fox 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fox Jr. of Old Field, L.I.
Msgr.
Francis J. Furfaro performed the ceremony at the Sage Chapel at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.
The bride, 26, is keeping her name.
She and her husband work in New York at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, where she is an associate and he is an accounting officer.
She graduated from Cornell and is studying for a master's degree in public administration at New York University.
Her father was the controller of M. J. McDonald &amp; Company, a women's clothing store in Oswego.
Her mother is a lay minister of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Syracuse.


A Beautiful Example of Older Workers' Value
To the Editor:
" 'Dead End' Service Jobs: Path to Profit" (Viewpoints, July 10) makes an important point that must not be allowed to get lost in the shuffle.


Correction
Because of an editing error, the What's Doing column on July 17, about Geneva, misstated the telephone dialing code to reach Switzerland.
It is 41, not 42.


Tennis, Telethon, Cello: So Many Things to Play
UPTOWN -- David N. Dinkins was wearing a beautifully tailored pin-stripe suit at the post-screening party for "It Could Happen to You" on Tuesday at the Central Park Boathouse.
He was looking as much the Mayor as ever.
"It Could Happen To You," filmed mostly in TriBeCa last summer, when Mr.
Dinkins was still working nearby in City Hall, is a New York City fairy tale about a lottery-winning policeman from Queens (Nicolas Cage) and a bankrupt waitress from Manhattan (Bridget Fonda) who have hearts as big as any of the problems Mr.
Dinkins faced as Mayor.
The movie is also about keeping a promise in a city in which goodness is rewarded, police officers love their jobs, robberies are neatly intercepted and nighttime stickball games are played in safety by children on streets washed clean by the rain.


Martha Foote, Joseph Burke Jr.
Martha Foote, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul R. Foote of Seneca Falls, N.Y., was married at her parents' house yesterday to Joseph Patrick Burke Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burke Sr. of Oceanside, Calif.
The Rev.
Peter Crego, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Foote, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Swarthmore College and received a master's degree in early childhood education from the Bank Street College of Education.
In the fall she expects to teach at Public School 306 in the Bronx.


Chill Out
WHEN a stifling summer day got the better of my grandmother, she would draw the blinds in her bedroom and lie down with a cold, wet washcloth on her forehead.
She would emerge, eventually, and her spirits would be restored enough to cook dinner and buy me a Dixie cup, half-chocolate, half-vanilla ice cream that came with a wooden paddle instead of a spoon.
That was my version of the drawn blinds, so by the time I was ready for bed, we had both found ways to soothe ourselves into the cooler night.
Somehow, now, it's not so simple.
It seems that every day in the sweltering subway more people are screaming at no one in particular, and with vacation bearing down, the amount of work that must be done beforehand seems to negate the entire prospect.
People swing between genuine ennui ("I don't know, Marty, what do you want to do?") and unexpected bursts of violence.
Bump into someone now and you take your life in your hands.


Skirmish on Welfare Plan Highlights the Chasm Between Right and Left
Congress concluded its first round of welfare skirmishing this week, ending four days of hearings in which members rained insults on each other, their witnesses and President Clinton's proposal to overhaul the system.
As expected, Republicans accused Mr.
Clinton of offering a soft measure that  did too little to demand work or discourage out-of-wedlock birth.


J.A.L. Service Comes at a High Price
To the Editor:
As a 22-year employee of a major United States airline which has always taken pride in the excellence of its service, I was dismayed with Ms.
Orlins's article denigrating a major American airline while smugly stating that this nation's airlines should pattern themselves after Japan Airlines.


Governments Meddle In Pinelands Market
The July 14, 1994 Pine Barrens Commission Draft Comprehensive Plan ["Pinelands Plan Would Leave Critical Decisions to 3 Towns," July 17] creates a  costly government scheme that may fail because it is directed toward a nonreceptive market.
The July 14 plan to save the hydrologic and ecologic integrity of the Long Island pine barrens sought to be funded and administered by private-market entities.
The commission proposal creates a market in pine-barrens credits and transfer-development rights.
It provides a means to sell and purchase the equity of the land in the core area of the pine barrens.


Grand Canyon Visits Drop
As attendance figures tell it, 1994 has been an odd year for the Grand Canyon.
After a boisterous March, when visits were up 17 percent over the previous March, attendance dropped 7 percent in May and 12 percent in June.
The  drop was a shock, especially to motels and restaurants in nearby communities, like Flagstaff, Ariz.
Until this year, attendance had increased by 9 percent annually for an entire decade. (As of June 30, 2.3 million people had visited; last year 2.6 million had visited in that period.) The cause seems uncertain and some local residents believe Park Service promotions to prevent overcrowding have scared away visitors.


Runways;The Suit Rebounds, Tailored to Leisure
Just when you thought it was safe to abandon the suit (at least on Fridays),  men's fashion is sharpening up.
The revenge of the tailored suit on sloppy sportswear was the story at the European men's wear shows in early July.
The biggest shock was the gangster suit -- double-breasted, pin-striped and  with pronounced shoulders.
It first appeared at Dolce &amp; Gabbana in Milan, where  the idea of dressing like the mob caused a scandal.
Jean-Paul Gaultier's take on Al Capone was witty, with a buttonhole flower embroidered on the wide pin-striped lapel.
But behind the fun, Mr.
Gaultier had a message.


Bookshelf
AROUND THE WORLD IN A HUNDRED YEARS: From Henry the Navigator to Magellan.
By Jean Fritz.
Illustrated by Anthony Bacon Venti.
Putnam. $17.95. (Ages 7 to 11) Here is a prequel of sorts to the author's much-loved children's books on American history -- engagingly written profiles of some of the European men who  explored what they called the Unknown.
Illustrations and maps.


'Who Cares?'
To the Editor:
I am outraged by K. Robert Schwarz's article "Composers' Closets Open for All to See" [June 19], which discussed the sexuality of my cousin Aaron Copland and  other American composers.
Who cares?
Does that make Aaron and the others less good musicians?
I grew up with Aaron.
His sexuality was never discussed.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
What would happen if a disturbed genius figured out a way to infiltrate the navigation systems of all American commercial aircraft in flight?
That's the plot of ALL FALL DOWN, a big, exciting book by Lee Gruenfeld (Warner, $21.95).
Mr.
Gruenfeld, himself a pilot and computer specialist, has a great deal going for him.
He knows the field; he has thoroughly researched the role of the various agencies that spring into action when there are airline problems; and, best of all, he is an accomplished writer.
The ending is one of the more harrowing and suspenseful that anybody is going to encounter.
But the story is told in smooth reportorial fashion, with little hyped-up, artificial prose.
The author is obviously in love with the romance of flying, but he seldom gets sentimental about it.
His characters are believable, and they talk understandable and sometimes even literate English.


Corrections
A front-page article on July 17 about the regionalization of pop music around the country incorrectly rendered the given name of the writer for the section on Portland, Ore.
She is Rachel Zimmerman, not Rebecca.


SUNDAY, July 31, 1994;Manhole Mandalas: A Necessary Art
Since the 1840's, foundries have produced manhole covers for city streets.
In the 19th and early 20th centuries, designers created myriad cover patterns -- Victorian, Art Nouveau, Art Deco -- that are still in use but often bear little  or no information about their origins.
A few designers' names are known; the cover at top left was designed in 1922 by Edwin H. Ford of the Ford Meter Box Company, in Wabash, Ind.
These covers were stolen so often from New Orleans streets that a plainer one had to be introduced.
Some apparently decorative aspects of the gray iron sand-cast covers are functional: the raised surface kept horses from slipping; glass insets allowed light underground.
But the work is often fanciful -- blossoming flowers or Gothic intricacy.
The photographs above are from "Manhole Covers," by Mimi and Robert A. Melnick.
The book will be out in the fall from M.I.T.
Press.


Corrections
An article on page 20 of the Times Magazine today about President Clinton's political career misstates the timing of his resignation as Governor of Arkansas.
Mr.
Clinton resigned in December 1992, after he was elected President; he did not resign to seek the Presidency.


Lo, the Powers of the Mighty Earthworm
CLEOPATRA declared them sacred and wanted to protect them.
Aristotle referred to them as the "intestines of the soil." Charles Darwin was even more full of praise.
"Long before man existed the land was in fact regularly plowed and still continues to be thus plowed by earthworms," he is said to have pronounced in 1881.
"It may be doubted whether there are many other animals which have played  so important a part in the history of the world as have these lowly organized creatures."
Such noble tribute is not heard much today.
Rather earthworms are regarded almost with disgust.
A gardener who comes upon these slimy creatures is likely to respond squeamishly.
Worms are considered something to back away from.
But it is time for these worthy creatures to again be regarded with the respect they deserve.


Curious Yellow
Twice this week I've seen women wearing yellow stockings, each time at the wide intersection in my neighborhood across from the Columbia gates, a crossing  that like a piazza in an Umbrian painting is a headland, dropping as it does precipitously to the river.
One woman was buying papers from the Indian news dealer, the other was going down the steps to the subway, and in each instance I thought of the first time I saw a pair of yellow stockings.
It was in the 70's, in Ken Russell's film "Women in Love." Gudrun, played by  Glenda Jackson, and her sister, Ursula (Jennie Linden), are walking away from the camera, down a lane bordered by green fields.
Ursula's clothes are careless, ordinary except for her marigold stockings.
They are talking animatedly.
Gudrun's love affair with Gerald, who later freezes to death in the snow, is doomed.


Widow's Peak


Ideas &amp; Trends;And a Fine Brawling City It Was!
IF you had the choice of returning to an earlier New York, the one that lives in soft, censored memory of days that never really were, which years would you choose?
The virtually simultaneous emergence of several novels, including best-sellers by E. L. Doctorow and Caleb Carr and a perennial from 1970, vote for the last 40 years of the 19th Century.
Those were the years that saw Gotham erupt as a world-class industrial metropolis.
It was the time chosen by Peter Quinn for his newly published "Banished Children of Eve," a novel about caste and class during the Civil War draft riots.
It was an era in which the city's population more than doubled, from 800,000 in 1860 to 1.8 million in the late 1890's, when the murders in Caleb Carr's "The Alienist" take place.


Sports of The Times;With Induction, a Writer Remains a Pioneer
Wendell Smith would be overjoyed this afternoon.
Over 35 years, from 1937 to 1972, Smith dedicated his sportswriting career to chronicling the triumph of skill and talent over bigotry and discrimination.
He  achieved the goal during his life and today, 22 years after his death, his quest will become immortalized.


The Intricacies of Laying Out and Constructing a Sawhorse
CONSTRUCTING a sawhorse is a traditional test of carpentry skills that is sometimes still given by master carpenters and building contractors to newcomers applying for work.
The model described here has legs that splay in two directions, outward and toward the ends, for maximum stability, and it is narrow enough to fit through doorways.
Layout involves using a framing square, a simply designed useful tool.


ABOUT SPAM
For those who wish to know more about Spam's impact ("More Than You Wanted to Know About Spam," by Judith Stone, July 3), I submit an addendum:
Q: From 25 feet above ground, does Spam splatter when dropped on pavement?


Rwanda's Lottery of Life and Death
WHEN medical relief finally arrived at the SOS Village orphanage just outside Goma, Zaire, and the doctor heading an Israeli army medical team finished a cursory examination of the frail and listless young cholera victims sprawled on  the floor, among his first questions to the orphanage physician was: "Shall we take the ones that are most likely to die or those most likely to survive?"
"How do you choose?" was the plaintive reply of Dr.
Nimet Lillani, the orphanage physician.
"They all deserve an equal chance."


There Are Solutions
To the Sports Editor:
It was with no small degree of consternation that I read Thad Mumford's piece.
The Bombers should stay exactly where they are; with a little housecleaning, intelligence and willingness from Yankee fans and management, Yankee Stadium will once again be the Mecca of all baseball.


SUNDAY, July 31, 1994;Minuteman Park
Disney, with its plans for a Civil War theme park in Virginia, has nothing on the National Park Service, which hopes to memorialize the cold war.
The Park Service is considering preserving for posterity a Minuteman missile site just off Interstate 90 and adjacent to Badlands National Park, in South Dakota.
When  the cold war ended, the missiles had outlived their mission -- to reach Soviet targets in under 30 minutes.
Three hundred were officially deactivated on July 4.
"We're afraid of losing something of significance," says Gregory Kendrick of the Park Service.
At a preserved silo, a Park Service study reports, visitors would get the feel of a "day in the life of a Minuteman missileer."


IN SHORT: FICTION
SOUTH SEAS STORIES THE SONGS OF SALANDA And Other Stories of Sulu.
By H. Arlo Nimmo.
University of Washington, $22.50.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
POP-MUSIC BIOGRAPHY RHINESTONE COWBOY An Autobiography.
By Glen Campbell with Tom Carter.
Villard, $22.


The Intricacies of Laying Out and Constructing a Sawhorse
CONSTRUCTING a sawhorse is a traditional test of carpentry skills that is sometimes still given by master carpenters and building contractors to newcomers applying for work.
The model described here has legs that splay in two directions, outward and toward the ends, for maximum stability, and it is narrow enough to fit through doorways.
Layout involves using a framing square, a simply designed useful tool.


Anne E. Marshall And Basil A. Hero
Anne Elizabeth Marshall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lynn V. Marshall of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Basil A. Hero, a son of Drs.
Angela C. and Byron A. Hero of New York.
Msgr.
Edward Connors performed the ceremony at the Fordham University Church in the Bronx.
Ms.
Marshall-Hero graduated from Fordham and is studying dentistry at Tufts University.
Her father is the director of development for Concern USA, a relief  agency in New York.
Her mother, Patricia B. Marshall, is the associate director of student health at Fordham.


THE FIRST LADY'S NEW CLOTHES
In her On Washington column "The First Lady's New Clothes" (July 10), Maureen Dowd writes that "Mrs. Clinton has tried to capture some of the Jackie glamour." No way.
Hillary Rodham Clinton never tries to imitate anyone.
She's an original, as was that other First Lady, Jacqueline Kennedy.
I am lucky enough to have shared working lunches with Jacqueline at her desk and to have escorted her to a couple of book trade meetings.
I recall a comment  she made about Hillary just after returning from her last summer at Martha's Vineyard, where she had dined and sailed with the Clintons: "She always looks so adorable, and she's intrepid; she's the biggest bargain America ever got, bigger than that Louisiana Purchase from my French friends."


Sports of The Times;Strike Talk Hangs Over Cleveland
HERE'S how I know there's going to be a long baseball strike: Cleveland.
This is true.
Cleveland is having such a delightful season, after all these years, that something ghastly must surely interfere.
Even a wild-card entry into the playoffs would set up the most important series in Cleveland baseball in 40 years.
The prospect is so heartwarming for a city that has suffered so much that I just know the owners and the players are going to blunder into a strike that could kill the season.


Beneath the Very British Exteriors
SECRET LIVES Three Novellas.
By Tom Wakefield, Patrick Gale and Francis King. 254 pp.
New York: Serpent's Tail.
Paper, $12.99.


A Deficit Revisited
He came into office promising to be the Mayor who finally seized control of New York City's finances.
And in his first budget, he closed a $2.3 billion gap, cut spending by $1.1 billion and pared 15,000 municipal jobs.
But for all that, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani still found himself under attack  last week, accused of not having done nearly enough to solve New York City's financial problems.
In a series of rebukes, the city's fiscal monitors said that even if this year's budget held together, New York still faced a budget gap of $2 billion next year and ever-larger ones down the road.


F.D.R. Work Spells the End Of Easy Parking For 500 Drivers
Some 500 parking spaces have disappeared under the F.D.R.
Drive and they won't be returning soon, if ever.
The loss of the parking lot has many of its former users scrambling for alternatives.
The city has provided a temporary site for 50 spaces and some local garages have taken in refugees at special rates, but most of the parkers have been left to cope with the eviction as best they can.
This has often meant  paying as much as three times the approximately $60 a month they paid under the  Drive.


Sometimes, Three Is the Loneliest Number
IN "IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU," a police officer named Charlie (Nicolas Cage) stares deeply into the eyes of a waitress named Yvonne (Bridget Fonda) with the  conviction of a man who has just tuned in to the frequency of true love.
Charlie and his wife, Muriel (Rosie Perez), have just won millions in the New York lottery.
Soon after discovering Muriel's greed, he realizes that he would rather be with the waitress he has tipped with half his winnings.
Fidgeting with his wedding ring, Charlie discusses his avaricious wife with Yvonne: "It's like we're on two different channels now," he says.
"I'm CNN, and she's the Home Shopping Network."


BEST SELLERS: July 31, 1994
Weeks This Last
On Week Week  List Fiction


An Old Case Of Arson Set For Retrial
On Aug. 2, 1978, six firefighters were killed when a collapsing roof sent them plunging into the inferno of a Brooklyn supermarket that investigators said had been set ablaze by arsonists.
Two years later the only suspect ever arrested in the highly publicized case, a Brooklyn man then identified as Eric Jackson, was convicted of murder and arson.
But in 1988, after he had served nearly 10 years of his 25-year-to-life sentence, his conviction was dismissed and a new trial ordered.
A judge found that prosecutors in the Brooklyn District Attorney's office at the 1980 trial had improperly withheld information that could have helped the defense.


Near Carnegie Hall: An Octet of Oases
AQUAVIT * (212) 307-7311; 13 West 54th Street; $$$(c) all major credit cards


Long And Loose
Men's jackets are getting longer, some even fingertip length, as seen on men  who attended last week's collections for spring.
Five years after it was first shown by Giorgio Armani, the three-button jacket is gaining wider acceptance, and there are now variations by other designers, including double-breasted jackets.
These long jackets are cut big, are made of materials with a spongy texture and have sloping shoulders, giving the wearer an elongated line.


Shoshanna Liptzin and Adam B. Shear
Shoshanna Tamara Liptzin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Liptzin of Longmeadow, Mass., is to be married today to Adam Brian Shear, the son of Natalie Pickus Shear of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Daniel H. Shear.
Rabbi James Ponet is to officiate at Chez Josef in Agawam, Mass.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Yale University, from which the bridegroom, who was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, graduated summa cum laude.
In the fall they are to attend the University of Pennsylvania, where she plans to study for a medical degree and he plans to study for a doctorate in Jewish history.


WHY DO CATHOLICS STAY IN THE CHURCH? BECAUSE OF THE STORIES
In "Why Do Catholics Stay in the Church? Because of the Stories" (July 10), Andrew M. Greeley hits the mark.
As we have moved away from the format of catechism questions and answers, storytelling from the pulpit -- the story that  explains and gets to the point in under 10 minutes -- is what distinguishes a good preacher.
Father Greeley said it well. We stay for the "story" of God's grace in our lives.


The Nation;  Savoring the Sweetness of Ostracism
VILIFICATION isn't always a bad thing.
Like any suspect and scolded minority, the smokers of New York have claimed their own places: park and stoop, back door and loading dock, a patch of sidewalk.
And in banishment, the pull of ritual simply grows stronger.
There is, it seems, a hard core of incorrigibles, undeterred by health warnings or social disdain.
The latest report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention showed that the rate of smoking among American adults had risen to 25.7 percent, from 25.5 percent in 1990.
Among 18-to-24-year-olds, the increase was sharper.


Unstinting Production Of 'Crucifer Of Blood'
EARLY in "The Crucifer of Blood," imperial India where the prologue untangles -- is said to have "an uncanny way of bringing out the extremes in people." And  it isn't long before strange things require extreme measures.
An untouchable kills a leper, or thinks he has.
English officers and Hindus are plotting.
They  talk of the runaway rebel maharajah.
The time of the Mutiny is upon them.
What anyone will do to get a hold of a chest of precious gems knows no limits.
"It gives me the willies," a conspirator says.
"It is kismet," another announces.
If such intelligence is insufficient to get you hooked on the Phoenix Theater Company's last production of the season, don't fret.
This play travels.


A Sweetness Tempers South's Bitter Past
Black and white, they squeezed into the 150 seats in the refinished oak pews, stirring the air with hand-held fans, courtesy of the local funeral home.
As more people filed in, they took up all the space along the freshly painted white walls, and then spilled into the aisles, into the new kitchen behind the pulpit, into the foyer and finally into the steamy air outside the Spring Hill Free Will Baptist Church.
"There's a sweet, sweet, spirit in this place," sang an exuberant interracial choir that gathered here in southwest Mississippi on May 15 for the rededication of Spring Hill Free Will, a small black church burned to the ground by three drunken white youths and rebuilt by some 325 black and white volunteers.
"There  are sweet expressions on each face."


Steady as It Blows


After Carjacking Surge, Puerto Rico Is Wary Behind the Wheel
Whenever she goes out now, Nellie Pena pulls her long hair up in a bun and takes off her earrings.
The windows of her 1983 Camaro have been tinted dark.
"That way they can't tell a woman is driving," the 52-year-old Ms. Pena said.


Data Bank/July 31, 1994
Data Bank/July 31, 1994 New Orders for Durable Goods
June
May
April  Monthly percent change
1.3
1.2
0.3  Consumer Confidence
July
June
May  1985=100
91.6
92.5
88.9  Gross Domestic Product
II Q'94
I Q'94
IV Q'93  1987 dollars, in percent
3.7
3.3
6.3  Weekly Jobless Claims
July 22
July 15
July 8  In thousands
331
390
365  Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
July 29
July 22
July 15  Friday spot price, per barrel
$20.30
$19.61
$19.89  Auto Production In units, weekly total
109,371
108,648
35,277  Truck Production In units, weekly total
99,982
96,597
15,109  30-Year Treasury Bonds Yield in percent
7.39
7.56
7.54


K. A. Bakewell, Scott A. Lehrer
Kathleen Adele Bakewell, a daughter of Joseph and Una Bakewell of Boxford, Mass., was married yesterday to Scott Alan Lehrer, the son of Jerome and Harriett Lehrer of Bellmore, L.I.
Town Justice Anne Holland of Ipswich, Mass., officiated at the Ipswich River Wildlife Sanctuary in Topsfield, Mass.
Ms.
Bakewell, who is keeping her name, is a landscape designer with Coe Lee Robinson Roesch, a New York design company.
She graduated from Columbia College  in Chicago and received a master's degree in landscape architecture from Harvard University.


Ginny Stoll, David Hiteshew
Virginia Stephanie Stoll, a vice president at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, and David Anders Hiteshew, a vice president at J. P. Morgan Investment Management, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Clem Metzger performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Gesu Church in Toledo, Ohio.
Mrs.
Hiteshew, 32, is known as Ginny.
She graduated from Xavier University.
She is a daughter of Nancy and Richard Stoll of Toledo.
The bride's father is the chairman and chief executive of the Stoll Companies, a distributor of magazines and periodicals in Toledo.
Her mother is a watercolor artist.


At Work;Making Family Leave a Reality
EIGHTEEN months have gone by since Bill Clinton paused during what would turn out to be a nanoseconds-long post-Inaugural honeymoon to sign the Family and Medical Leave Act and a year -- as of Friday -- has passed since it took effect.
Critics said the law -- which entitles employees in companies with 50 or more workers to up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave a year for family medical emergencies  -- doomed small business, flung the door open to employee fraud and was irrelevant to anyone not affluent enough to take advantage of it.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the apocalypse is still at bay and the center is holding.
The law had neither the revolutionary nor the regressive effect its critics all along the political spectrum predicted.
Instead, it seems gradually  to be seeping its way into the consciousness of the country's employees and employers, providing the principle, if not the practical path, by which they may come to terms with the juggling of chain saws that is family life these days for many Americans.


Self-Management By a Co-op Board
To the Editor:
Your article on self-management on June 26 ("Running a Co-op In-House") was a fine overview of the why and how of conversion to tighten co-op board control.
However, many co-ops are in difficulty because of a persistent "hands off" attitude toward management, which allowed unchecked mismanagement and stealing.
These same boards with their "renter" mentality will have to make a quantum leap to the most minimal board involvement in self-managing.


Lee A. Rolontz Ernest R. Fritz
Lee Alison Rolontz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Rolontz of New York,  was married on Fire Island yesterday to Ernest Raphael Fritz, a son of Eugenia B. Fritz of Laurel, Md., and the late Capt.
Ernest S. Fritz.
The Rev.
Dr.
Paul W. Zeckhausen 3d, a United Church of Christ minister who had officiated at the wedding of the bride's parents, performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's-by-the-Sea in Saltaire, L.I.
The bride is the vice president of video production at Columbia Records in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father, who was a vice president of the New York Cosmos soccer team, retired as a director of publicity at Warner Communications in New York.
Her mother, Susan Rolontz, is the executive vice president of The Tobe Report, a weekly fashion and merchandising  magazine in New York.


Journal;Boredom Without Tears
The four major television networks have already rendered their verdict on the entertainment value of the first round of Congressional Whitewater hearings: they didn't air a single minute of them.
The New York Times and The Washington Post have delivered their verdict on the hearings' historical value: neither paper published any transcripts.
"Rarely has mindless partisanship been more blatantly on display," concluded Ted Koppel after surveying a video replay of the moment in which the Democrat Maxine Waters yelled at a Republican antagonist to "shut up."
And that was one of the good parts.
At one point Thursday the engineers at the public television station in Washington got so bored that they inadvertently broadcast a few seconds of "Mister Rogers' Neighborhood." Later, as the session  entered its 10th hour, the hearings disappeared entirely from television view -- even PBS, CNN and C-Span jumped ship.
Which raises the knotty philosophical question: If a Congressman postures in a committee room where no one is listening, is he really there?


Sow Seeds, and Don't Forget to Pinch and Cut
Sow seeds of pansies and violas in a shady seed bed or cold frame.
It's last  call to sow forget-me-nots and English daisies.
The small seedlings can be transplanted to permanent homes in late August or early September.
Finish dividing and replanting bearded irises; start dividing Siberian and Japanese irises.
Divide and replant bleeding hearts and Oriental poppies.


S. L. Williams, 61; Led Bar Association
Samuel L. Williams, a lawyer who turned down a seat on the California Supreme Court to become the first black president of the State Bar of California, died on Thursday in Los Angeles.
He was 61 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was a heart attack he suffered at home, The Associated Press reported.


In Defense of the Endangered Urban Tree
LIKE a medical team making hospital rounds, the group of volunteers in a UConn extension program went from case to case.
They viewed the results of neglect and poor nourishment; they saw the bad results of good intentions, they  studied an ingrown foreign object and broken limbs.
The group considered solutions.
The leader, Robert M. Ricard, eyed the limbs.
"Someone could have pruned them in five minutes," he noted, "but there's no money." On a flowering cherry tree by a busy downtown street, low limbs had been broken by someone or something going by.
Now the tree was open to disease, and passers-by were in danger of getting hit by its dangling limbs.


Lisa Rappaport, Sean Deson
Lisa Rappaport, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bob S. Rappaport of New York, was  married last evening to Sean Deson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Deson of Farmington Hills, Mich.
Rabbi Stanley Schickler performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
The bride, 27, is a psychologist for the Mackay School and the Middle School, both in Tenafly, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She received a master's degree and a professional diploma in psychology from Fordham University.


No to National Police
To the Editor:
Senator Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut has proposed creation of a national  police force under the control of the President, who would be empowered, if the  Senator's amendment to the crime bill passes, to declare crime emergencies anywhere in the country.
This will be the justification for its deployment, and  it is a grave mistake.
It ignores the constitutional limits on government and opens the door to abuse.
It is tyrants, not democracies, that need national police.
ROBERT A. SCHWARTZ Norwalk, Conn., July 21, 1994


No Headline
Folks, 60 years ago this fight started.
Fifty years ago Truman tried it three times and failed.
Twenty-nine years ago, President Johnson came to this city to sign Medicare into law and to give Harry and Bess Truman Medicare cards  1 and 2.
Let's finish Harry Truman's fight.
PRESIDENT CLINTON. [24:6.]


A Nutritionally Balanced Steakhouse Menu
THERE was a time when the words steakhouse and budget rarely appeared in the  same sentence.
Restaurants like the new Chaps in Syosset are changing that.
Chaps, in the North Shore Atrium at 6800 Jericho Turnpike (496-3525), is one of  a small but growing new breed.
Such alternative steakhouses are part of a modest movement back toward big beef, which gained momentum when many traditional steak spots closed in the health-conscious 1980's.
The pendulum had swung too far, and as a result, a new, albeit smaller, market for steak restaurants, emerged.


Montecatini
To the Editor: Your article "Taking the Waters in Tuscany" (June 19) states that most visitors to Montecatini in Tuscany thrive on idleness coupled with immersion in mineral springs and baths.
As an aside, the small minority of otherwise sedentary visitors take day excursions to such tourist destinations as Pisa or Florence.
In May, as a diversion from those hordes, we drove to Vinci -- the birthplace of Leonardo, and only 15 miles southeast of Montecatini.
The number of visitors was a trickle, and we had the opportunity to visit Museo Leonardiano, full of models designed from his Codex Atlanticus.
The range was incredible -- from war machines to complex industrial machines to a helicopter and a bicycle.
Another museum called the Leonardo da Vinci Ideal Museum for Art, Utopia and Culture on Earth is also in this town, below the main museum.
Vinci would be a delightful change of pace for any visitor avoiding crowds in Florence, Pisa and Siena.


Ex-Jet Cadigan Works Out With Saints
The Saints worked out offensive lineman DAVE CADIGAN for about 45 minutes yesterday morning at their training camp in LaCrosse, Wis.
Cadigan, who became a free agent when the New York Jets did not offer him a contract for the upcoming  season, was a No. 1 draft pick by the Jets in 1988.
Coach JIM MORA has said depth at offensive line is his biggest concern.
The five starters look good, Mora said, but after that everyone is struggling.
Cadigan is considering several teams.


Dr. Murdock Head Dies at 70; Was Jailed in Bribery Scandal
Dr.
Murdock Head, who spent about a year in prison in 1983 and 1984 after being convicted of conspiring to bribe two Congressmen, died on Thursday at his  home in Airlie, Va.
He was 70.
He had been suffering from a rare form of brain cancer, said his daughter Karen Schlegel.


Surfers Can Now Seek the Perfect Wave at Deal
THE thousands of dedicated surfers who descend on the Jersey Shore each weekend, searching for the perfect wave, can now seek that ultimate experience in Deal.
That is new.
Until a few weeks ago, Deal, a wealthy beach community with many multimillion-dollar homes lining the shore just north of Asbury Park, was off limits to surfers.
Deal had an ordinance on its books that in effect prohibited  people from surfing along its milelong beach by imposing strict restrictions on  surfers.


Tonality Is Dead; Long Live Tonality
IN PRAGUE AFTER THE VELVET REVOLUTION, IT was easy to get lost on familiar streets.
Names were changed overnight: Lenin Avenue became Europe Avenue.
The Gottwald metro station, named for the dark overlord of the Czechoslovak Communist revolution, was rechristened Vysehrad, after the noble rock featured in Smetana's "Ma Vlast." A similar process has been going on in American academic music departments in the last decade, as the ideology of Serialism has  lost its stranglehold.
The parallel between Marxists and Serialists is more than superficial.
Each group tended to argue with almost incontrovertible power that its view of the world represented the inevitable working out of a process mandated by history.
People who realized this truth were considered intellectually and morally progressive, while those who tried to avoid it were slackers, reactionaries or just plain lunkheads.
Like you know Who, capitalism and tonality were dead.


Unlicensed Cafes Are Sprouting, Along With a Crackdown
It is a summer sight so common, especially on Columbus Avenue, that it is hardly noticed by the casual passer-by anymore: the warm-weather sprouting of dozens of bustling outdoor cafe areas along the sidewalks of the Upper West Side.
But now, responding to growing complaints from angry residents and frustrated restaurant owners, local leaders and city officials are moving to begin a crackdown on many such cafes that have been operating without licenses.


Diets Make You Fatter, and for Good Reasons;Kale, Kasha and Quinoa
To the Editor:
I became a vegetarian as a teen-ager, and have continued to eat a vegetarian diet for 16 years.
I want to rebut the myth that a vegetarian diet is restrictive.
The diet most Americans consider balanced is heavily weighted toward dense animal proteins, with a few fruits and vegetables (headed by tomatoes, potatoes and iceberg lettuce) thrown in for good measure.
Perhaps people do not realize that salad fixings can include escarole, red leaf and romaine lettuce.
Apples come in many varieties besides Delicious and McIntosh.
Even the ubiquitous potato is available in myriad shapes and colors -- red, yellow and blue, for example.


July 24-30;Army and Marine Corps Offer Women More Yet Less
The Army and Marine Corps opened more than 80,000 combat positions to women last week, but none of the new jobs will put a woman on track to become a future Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
With great fanfare, the Pentagon announced that women will now be able to serve in many rear-echelon headquarters units and some helicopter jobs that previously were off-limits.
But top generals lobbied furiously to bar them from  positions like infantry, armor and much of field artillery that involve direct combat.
Many generals argued that women lack the requisite physical strength needed in such units and that they would disrupt morale.


Those Backstage Deserve Applause
To the Editor:


SUNDAY, July 31, 1994;Gold Plates
The plates, forks and spoons in the 18 place settings of 18-carat gold belong neither to Donald Trump nor Michael Milken.
These vanities come from the family vaults of E. H. Gary, a founder of U.S.
Steel and a titan of the Gilded Age.
The service, not gilded but gold, was designed by Tiffany &amp; Co. around 1920, in another era when there was no distinction between wealth and taste.
Sotheby's is auctioning the set this fall  and expects the 557 pieces to sell for more than $1 million.
The goldware is supposed to have been used only once, at a banquet for the Sultan of Turkey.
Tiny scratches on the dinner plates are a record of that meal.


Durocher's Teams Never Did Defeat Rizzuto's Yanks
He too reached the major leagues as a shortstop with the Yankees, and for him, the wait for Cooperstown was every bit as long as Phil Rizzuto's.
But when  Leo Durocher is inducted posthumously into the Baseball Hall of Fame this afternoon, it will be for his ability to call the shots correctly from the dugout, not for fielding them adeptly from his position.
Only six managers have won more games than Durocher's career total of 2,008;  even fewer antagonized umpires as much.
A feisty player who blended well with the scrappy St.
Louis Cardinals' Gas-House Gang of 60 years ago, Durocher made his managerial mark in New York with both the Giants and the Dodgers, highlighted by the Giants' four-game sweep of Cleveland in the 1954 World Series.


Lo, the Powers of the Mighty Earthworm
CLEOPATRA declared them sacred and wanted to protect them.
Aristotle referred to them as the "intestines of the soil." Charles Darwin was even more full of praise.
"Long before man existed the land was in fact regularly plowed and still continues to be thus plowed by earthworms," he is said to have pronounced in 1881.
"It may be doubted whether there are many other animals which have played  so important a part in the history of the world as have these lowly organized creatures."
Such noble tribute is not heard much today.
Rather earthworms are regarded almost with disgust.
A gardener who comes upon these slimy creatures is likely to respond squeamishly.
Worms are considered something to back away from.
But it is time for these worthy creatures to again be regarded with the respect they deserve.


Throwaway Plastic Bottles and the Environment
To the Editor:
Gayle Turim's June 19 article "Endangered: Tiny Bottles of Hotel Soap" (Viewpoints) remains quite puzzling to me.
I appreciate her accolades for our environmental efforts and recognize the tongue-in-cheek tone of this article.
Nonetheless, it is a bit disturbing to think that eliminating disposable plastic bottles in favor of an elegant, custom-designed pump dispenser renders our property "charmless."


Closing of Flea Market Would Add to Jobless
As a resident of East Meadow and president of the Roosevelt Raceway Flea Market Merchants' Association, I feel compelled to respond to "Flea Market Plan  Raises Opposition" [July 3] regarding the proposal to shift the current flea market to the Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum.
Regardless of the weather, my members engage in a tradition older than the Bible, selling their wares at an open-air market where they are audited regularly by the New York State Department of Taxation and Finance.


Pets Get a Bonus
Humans are no longer the only passengers eligible for Carnival Air Lines's frequent flier program.
This month, the six-year-old airline initiated a frequent flier program for pets.
Under the airline's original mileage program, human travelers who make 10 round-trip flights receive an 11th free.
Now pets who accompany their owners share the same benefits. (Pet fares are normally $45  one way.) Reservations: (800) 824-7386.


Karen Rothballer, Perry D. Seelert
Karen Burns Rothballer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger W. Rothballer of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Perry David Seelert, a son of Mr.  and Mrs.
Robert L. Seelert, also of New Canaan.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert L. Veon performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Seelert, 25, was until recently a research associate at the Ischemia Research and Education Foundation in San Francisco.
She and her husband graduated from Hamilton College.
She is to begin studying for a master's degree in health psychology education at Stanford University in the fall.
Her father, who is retired, was a manager in business education at the International Business Machines Corporation, in Thornwood, N.Y.


Intelligence And Sex: Why Not?
To the Editor:
It was depressing to read Bruce Newman's article "Susan Sarandon: Lover, Lawyer, Marmee" [July 17] in which he says that Ms.
Sarandon possesses the "rare combination of intelligence and sex." What?
While it's not news that intelligence in women is sometimes a turnoff to men, it's still tough to see that fact written in black and white.
Thanks for printing a truly insightful statement about our culture.
AMY LARKIN New York


My Dear Beloved Riddle of Life'
INTIMATE LETTERS Leos Janacek to Kamila Stosslova.
Edited and translated by John Tyrrell.
Illustrated. 397 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. $35.


Working Smarter
To the Editor:
Stanley Bing's "Executive Decisions: Spring Cleaning" (Viewpoints, June 12) is an apt and amusing expose of an executive's office in crisis.
I see such sights on a regular basis.


Ultrair Ceases Flights, And Offers Refunds
Ultrair, a start-up airline that was flying from New York to Miami, Orlando,  West Palm Beach and Fort Lauderdale, Fla., stopped operating July 13.
The company, which leased five 727's, said it was giving refunds to anyone with tickets for later dates.
Like other small lines serving New York and Florida, it offered tickets to Florida at a single price, $99 one way, with no Saturday stayover requirements.
Just before shutting down, the line had added flights to Birmingham and Mobile, Ala.
A big selling point was the wide spacing of its rows of seats, a 34-inch "pitch" contrasted with 31 inches in most coach sections.


SURFACING
MOTION Speed board: Fans of the Powell long board, which is more than a foot longer than the average skateboard, say it's faster and easier to handle.
But tricks are not so easy.


Kathleen Flatley, Robert O. G. Ix
Kathleen Dolora Flatley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Flatley of Boston, was married yesterday to Robert Owens Gilmore Ix, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Edward Ix of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Daniel McLeod, a Roman Catholic priest and an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.
Elizabeth Seton  Church in North Falmouth, Mass.
Mrs.
Ix graduated from Boston College, from which she also received a master's degree in education.
She is to begin teaching the first grade at the Fairfield Country Day School in Fairfield, Conn., this fall.
Her father is a real-estate developer in Braintree, Mass.


Forget Woodstock. Whither Wigstock?
The East Village's trademark Labor Day drag festival, Wigstock, is looking for a new home -- in the West Village.
The annual transvestite blowout "grew like Topsy and has gotten too large" for Tompkins Square Park, said Henry J. Stern, the city's Parks Commissioner.


WESTERN NATIONS TO ADD SANCTIONS AFTER SERBS BALK
The United States, Russia and the European Union agreed today to seek fresh economic sanctions against Serbia in reprisal for the Bosnian Serbs' rejection of their peace plan last week.
But apparently wary of risking their own fragile  unity, the powers shied away from tougher measures like a renewed threat of NATO air strikes.
After a six-hour meeting here, Secretary of State Warren Christopher and the  Foreign Ministers of Britain, France, Germany and Russia defended their decision as consistent with a step-by-step approach aimed at persuading the leadership of the Bosnian Serbs to accept the proposed territorial division of Bosnia.
Serbia  is the main supporter of the Bosnian Serbs, and the new sanctions are intended to make Belgrade press its Bosnian allies to agree to the plan.


Immigration Jail Faces Neighborhood Battle as Its Lease Runs Out
Five years ago, the Federal Immigration and Naturalization Service turned the two-story brown brick warehouse at 145-55 226th Street into a 100-bed detention  center without warning the residents of the tranquil neighborhoods around it, Springfield Gardens and Rosedale.
Now, with the lease expiring in September and amid talk that the agency wants to double the center's capacity, residents have stepped up pressure to force it  out.


G.I.'s Tally Macedonian Traffic Flow
I understand what's going on," said Sgt.  Scott Culver, as he gazed down from the small American Army camp here at a long line of trucks waiting to cross the border into Serbia. "You don't need a Ph.D. for that."
What was going on, as it does every day, was that the United Nations trade embargo on Serbia was being violated.
Dozens of trucks loaded with merchandise were heading north into Serbia, meticulously observed by United States soldiers  of the 2d Battalion of the 15th Infantry Division, based in Schweinfurt, Germany.


The Roots People
A FRIEND TELLS ME THIS story: He was in Lithuania seeking the shtetl his mother had come from, seeking a name, a synagogue, a cemetery, whatever.
One day he was talking to some villager when another one approached.
"Who is this guy?"  asked the second one.
"Ah, he's one of those roots people," said the first.
Imagine. Before perestroika we didn't exist. Now we are a category.


Lo, the Powers of the Mighty Earthworm
CLEOPATRA declared them sacred and wanted to protect them.
Aristotle referred to them as the "intestines of the soil." Charles Darwin was even more full of praise.
"Long before man existed the land was in fact regularly plowed and still continues to be thus plowed by earthworms," he is said to have pronounced in 1881.
"It may be doubted whether there are many other animals which have played  so important a part in the history of the world as have these lowly organized creatures."
Such noble tribute is not heard much today.
Rather earthworms are regarded almost with disgust.
A gardener who comes upon these slimy creatures is likely to respond squeamishly.
Worms are considered something to back away from.
But it is time for these worthy creatures to again be regarded with the respect they deserve.


THAT SCITEX GLOW
For several years I worked for a large firm that has all the Scitex equipment; the retouching effects it could produce never ceased to impress me (Style: "That Scitex Glow," by Mary Tannen, July 10).
I often said (not jokingly) that for my 40th birthday, I'd treat myself to a good studio portrait  and some aggressive Scitex touch ups.
I'd wind up with a photo of my ideal face: larger eyes, longer lashes, real cheekbones, baby-soft skin and a blank stare.
As my 40th approached, I actually considered doing this (even with a house discount, it wouldn't be cheap) -- until I realized there really wasn't anything I wanted to change.


Manager's Profile
Douglas H. Johnson


Darcy W. Dunn, Mark A. Singer
Darcy Wynne Dunn, the daughter of Doris Dunn of New York and Warren E. Dunn of Morris Plains, N.J., was married on Thursday to Mark Aryeh Singer, a son of Judith and Isadore Singer of Passaic, N.J.
Rabbi Simcha Weinberg performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge, a restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
Ms.
Dunn, 30, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is a mezzo-soprano with the Magic Circle Opera Ensemble in New York.


Grand Jury Testimony Says That Simpson Spied on Wife's Dates
O.
J.
Simpson spied on his estranged wife as she had sex with another man and once told the man at a restaurant, "I'm O. J. Simpson, and she's still my wife," according to grand jury testimony.
"I was for sure intimidated," testified the man, Keith Zlomsowitch, who dated Nicole Brown Simpson.
He described Mr.
Simpson's tone in the restaurant encounter as "serious, if not scary, just deep, threatening."


A Cozy Base in the Wild Highlands
A TIDY seaside resort with amusement arcades and a deluxe golf course, a white sweep of curving beach, and a small, snug yacht harbor, all not far from a New Age spiritual center: This was not exactly how I'd envisioned the wild and rugged Scottish Highlands.
When my husband, James, and I turned onto High Street in Nairn, a town of 10,000 just 15 miles east of Inverness on the Moray Firth, it seemed almost too civilized.
But this small section of the vast Highlands had more than enough surprises  in store.
Our comfortable vacation apartment, part of a new development fronting the old harbor, opened onto a marina and a long, handsome pier designed by Thomas Telford in 1820. (Among other engineering feats, Telford supervised the construction of the Caledonian Canal connecting the North Sea and the Atlantic Ocean.) Beyond the marina, we looked far out to sea, flanked on the west by the  misty Black Isle, a peninsula on the other side of the Moray Firth.


Madison Ave. Closes Ranks To Cut Crime
Along Madison Avenue, "Vera Wang" no longer means simply "expensive bridal shop." It has come to be shorthand for the robbery and shooting there March 23,  and signals a new era of watchfulness among the fashionable shops and expensive  boutiques on the street.
"Vera Wang woke a lot of people up," said Beth McElhiney, president of the fledgling Madison Avenue Merchants Association.
"All of a sudden people are working together who ordinarily are in such intense competition they wouldn't even say hello. Now we have eyes and ears all up and down the avenue."


Promising Debut for New-Look Secondary
The Giants' new but probably not improved secondary made its first outing tonight.
So far, so good.
In a 20-19 preseason loss to Miami tonight at Giants Stadium, the Giants' secondary played tightly against the Dolphins' dangerous receivers.


Kristin Kovach, F. L. Hohmann 3d
Kristin Lyn Kovach, a model with Wilhemina Models in New York, was married yesterday to Frank L. Hohmann 3d, a managing director of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, the investment bank in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kenneth O. Jones officiated at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
The bride, who is attending Hunter College, is a daughter of Nancy Ellen and Charles Kovach Jr. of Shinglehouse, Pa.
The bridegroom, a graduate of Princeton  University, is a son of Virginia and Frank Hohmann of Princeton, N.J.


Construction Delays Bradley Airport Traffic
Travelers arriving at or departing from Bradley International Airport in Windsor Locks, Conn., should allow additional time getting to and from the airport this summer.
Construction has begun on an airport improvement project to repair and extend the roadways of Terminal B, which houses American, Delta, Northwest, T.W.A. and several small commuter airlines.
The temporary rerouting of traffic may cause minor delays.
Work is now being  done to expand the lower roadway, improving traffic flow and increasing capacity.
Beginning next month, the upper roadway will be closed for structural  repairs.
During construction, scheduled to be finished in October, officials advise travelers to arrive at the airport at least an hour before their flight.
The lower level will be have additional skycaps and temporary luggage conveyor belts.


Wall Street;  Bad News for Baldness Cures
IT'S been a tough few weeks for the balding and for those who invest in the follicularly impaired, with the Food and Drug Administration giving bad news to  two public companies with an eye on the nation's glimmering pates.
The Upjohn Company got the unwelcome word from the F.D.A. on Wednesday that it could not sell its Rogaine hair-loss treatment over the counter to consumers.
Instead, an F.D.A. panel said, Upjohn would have to continue to market Rogaine exclusively through physicians who write a prescription for the anti-baldness solution.


60's Heroes Keep On Keeping On
ONLY the most tuned-out members of the baby boom generation can claim never to have heard of Mary Travers.
After all, she's part of Peter, Paul and Mary, a  trio that the Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock and Roll calls "the most popular acoustic folk music group of the 1960's." During that decade they produced 11 albums, 5 of which became million sellers.
And they scored 12 hit singles, including the classic children's song, "Puff, the Magic Dragon" and "Leaving on a Jet Plane," a ballad written by John Denver.
For the past 28 years, Ms.
Travers has lived in Redding, in a 250-year-old house just down the road from her mother, Virginia.
She shares the central-chimney home with her husband, Ethan Robbins, and her 28-year-old daughter Alicia.
The house shows the influence of different generations of owners: a former master bedroom was added around 1940, for example, while two upstairs bedrooms date to the 1800's.


Holly L. Klafehn, Ronald Drake Jr.
Holly Lynn Klafehn, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl Klafehn of Rochester, was married yesterday to Ronald Oliver Drake Jr., the son of Anne Drake of Chatham, N.J., and Mr.
Drake of Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
Richard Klafehn, a  Lutheran pastor who is a brother of the bride, performed the ceremony in Sage Chapel at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.
Mrs.
Drake, 25, and her husband, 26, graduated from Cornell.
She is an assistant at Robert Chang Productions, a video production company in New York.
Mr.
Drake is an associate at McKinley Capital, a New York investment banking firm.


Frugal Choices
To the Editor: Susan Spano seems to enjoy carrying her suitcase all over town while looking for a suitable low-cost hotel.
Wouldn't she have done better by taking a package trip?
Pascha Tours recently offered an eight-day package to Istanbul for $590, which I took late in March.
This included air, hotel, transfers, porterage and breakfast that would have satisfied even the most frugal as well as those not so frugal.


POSTINGS: 12 Acres in the Hamptons;A Waterfront Sale For $13.9 Million
When is the whole equal to the sum of its parts?
Many real estate professionals in the Hamptons might have said never -- especially when the subject of discussion was a 12-acre property on Gin Lane in  Southampton with three structures and 500 feet of waterfront.


Last Flight Out of Haiti Strands Some
Haiti's last commercial air link to the rest of the world was severed today.
The final regularly scheduled flight, an Air France jet bound for French Guiana, departed just ahead of a Monday deadline that was intended to increase both the  economic pressure on the country's military-backed government and its isolation.
Though the suspension of commercial flights does not affect the vast majority of Haiti's seven million people, most of whom are too poor to afford foreign travel, it promises to have an important psychological impact, especially on the country's commercial and governing class.


In the Region/Connecticut;Those New Big-Box Stores Are Meeting Resistance
THE retailing catchwords of the 90's -- big box, category killer, discounter  -- describe the industry's current hot concept, in which mammoth low-priced retailers are claiming their turf.
But like the malls of the 80's, the spread of big-box stores in suburban communities, where they tend to settle on major arteries or off highways, threatens local merchants in established business districts.
Along the Gold Coast of Fairfield County the stores are meeting some stubborn resistance.


Residents Mobilize to Root Out the Rats
They blamed the harsh winter, construction, the garbage pick-up schedule.
They set up a hot line.
They harangued bureaucrats.
Nothing seemed to help.
Now, residents of the West Village are shopping for ammunition and plotting strategy.
"We felt we had to do something to save our nice neighborhood," said Linda Myers, who heads the Sheridan Square-Barrow Street-Washington Place Block Association.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD


Fire Is Set Outside Clinic
A gasoline-powered device with a timer went off on Friday night behind an abortion clinic here, starting a fire that was quickly put out by a police officer, said an agent for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
The bureau and Planned Parenthood are offering a $100,000 reward in the case.
The clinic has been the scene of numerous protests.


July 24-30: Extremism in Florida;Abortion Doctor And Bodyguard Killed
Every Friday, workers and volunteers at the Pensacola Ladies Center would escort the visiting doctor and patients past half a dozen or more shouting anti-abortion demonstrators.
But last Friday a gunman killed Dr.
John B. Britton, 69, and a security escort, James H. Barrett, 74, and wounded Mr.
Barrett's 68-year-old wife, June.
Paul J. Hill, 40, a former Presbyterian minister known to advocate violence  against abortion doctors, was arrested in connection with the shootings.


Lindsey Stires, Cary Zimmerman
Lindsey Davis Stires, the daughter of Barbara B. Stires of Bronxville, N.Y.,  and David M. Stires of Irvington, N.Y., was married yesterday to Cary Dean Zimmerman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl B. Zimmerman of Colorado Springs.
The United Church of Christ ceremony was performed by the Rev.
George Wesley Otto at the Broadmoor Community Church in Colorado Springs.
Mrs.
Zimmerman, 29, is a client services supervisor at Russell, Karsh &amp; Hagan, a public relations firm in Denver.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Mr.
Zimmerman, 39, owns Z Design and Communications, a graphic design company in Denver.
He graduated from Arizona State University.
His first marriage ended in  divorce.


Drought Devastating Many Crops in Suffolk
WHAT some farmers and farm officials are calling the worst drought since the  mid-1960's is devastating crops in Suffolk County.
"Crops are withering everywhere," the extension agent at the Cornell Cooperative Extension in Riverhead, Bill Sanok, said.
"Corn is stunted, potatoes are reduced to the size of marbles and some crops of cucumbers, snap beans, cabbage, cauliflower, pumpkins and others of the 60 varieties grown here are suffering.


For a Widow, Years Rebuilding Life
Diana Newton Wood, whose world was all but destroyed by the bullet that killed her husband nearly 13 years ago, yesterday recalled the terrible days of  trauma and the twilight years of struggle that followed, years of rebuilding her life and raising the son born five months after that fateful night.
The events of Nov. 2, 1981, are still vivid: the last meal of Dr.
John Chase  Wood Jr. at their Washington Heights apartment, his departure on the short walk to Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, where he was a surgery resident and she a nurse, then the phone call and the ride in the police car and some official's sad, gentle voice pronouncing the unthinkable words.


Caution for N.Y.R.A.: Even at Saratoga Spa, the Well Can Run Dry
Maybe they should have listened to Horatio Luro, the late, great trainer, who always warned horse people: "Don't squeeze the lemon dry."
The people who run the traditionally successful Saratoga racing season deny they're squeezing the lemon dry just because they've lengthened the meeting from 30 racing days to 34, with recurrent rumors that they may keep lengthening it in the future.


Scotland's Summer Gardens
SETTING out from New York last July, when the temperature seemed stuck at a stifling 101, my husband, Michael, and I planned eight days in Scotland around museums, castles and gardens -- particularly gardens.
In cool Scotland, gardens  are at their peak in summer, and the deep greens of the landscape -- as startlingly green as Ireland's -- the fresh skies and unpressured pace were totally restorative.
Three splendid gardens were our focus: Crathes Castle and Pitmedden in the Grampian region, in the northeast, and Inverewe in the western Highlands.
Utterly different, the three complemented one another perfectly.


Archer Sets Her Sights For the National Team
MARGARET ADLER has her eye on a certain jacket, and it isn't available at any shopping malls.
The red, white and blue item is worn by members of an elite team sponsored by the Junior Olympic Archery Development program of the National Archery Association, and judging by the progress Maggie has made in her two years as an archer, the team is within her grasp.
The 17-year-old Scarsdale High School senior, who is known as Maggie, was to  leave this weekend for Oxford, Ohio, to compete in the 110th National Championship tournament of the National Archery Association.
In the past month she won the Eastern Archery Association championship for her age division, scoring higher than any other female shooter of any age, as well as the New York State championship.
In the state contest, held in upstate Cazenovia, she broke the record she herself had set, scoring 1,213 out of a possible 1,440 points.


Out of the Wasteland, a Fountain of Hope
SUNDAY morning's inspirational sounds came from the brisk staccato scratching of Larry Tillman's rake as it pulled in the debris of another weekend: bottles,  cartons and papers strewn behind the green wooden benches that line the park side of Edgecombe Avenue.
This is Larry's weekend ritual during the spring and summer.
Larry and I are neighbors at 409 Edgecombe Avenue.
He is the sort of neat, conscientious person who expects his home and neighborhood to reflect his character.
When things fall apart, he takes it upon himself -- without a fuss -- to put them back together.


Some Big Break: A Sex Scene With Mom
FOR MOST YOUNG ACTORS, A major role in a movie that deals with incest, date rape and assorted other violations of the psychosocial contract -- even an ultra-low-budget film -- would come under the heading of "very bad career move." But for Jeremy Davies, the 24-year-old star of "Spanking the Monkey," which cost $80,000 to make and opened to glowing reviews two weeks ago, the chance to play  the sexually frustrated Ray Aibelli was irresistible.
He may sleep with his mother and try to kill her, and be accused of rape after a fumbling attempt at sex with a neighborhood girl, but throughout "Spanking the Monkey" Ray maintains the comic likability of classic coming-of-age heroes.
"The character fell somewhere between the stereotypical roles that are offered to actors my age, where you're either a nerd or a jock," said Mr.
Davies during a recent visit to New York.
Sipping orange juice at the Mayflower Hotel,  the wiry, soft-spoken actor acknowledged that it was Ray's ambiguity that attracted him to the part.
The character combines the sweetness of waning youth  with the menace of a nascent sexuality.
"I'm far more attracted to the antihero," he said.


Khrys Kelly, Udoh Opiotennione
UDOH OPIOTENNIONE and Khrys Kelly, who met at Howard University in Washington, describe themselves as "a 1970's couple." Both are idealistic, spiritual, vegetarian and dedicated to working on a grass-roots level to regenerate black pride.
Mr.
Opiotennione (pronounced oh-pee-OH-ten-yahn), 27, is a soft-spoken saxophonist who has played with everyone from the Dance Theater Workshop in Manhattan to the Fire Fishers, an industrial band he describes as "very B-52's,  very SoHo, very Bard College."


INSIDE
Iraqi Economy in Tailspin


Move the Owner
To the Sports Editor:
Thad Mumford ("The Bronx and the Yankees: Time to Call It Quits," The Times,  July 24) talks as though there were a dialogue between the Yankees and the Bronx.
In reality, there is only one talker -- George Steinbrenner -- and an effort by the Bronx not to get into a fight.
Remove the Boss and the Yankees could settle happily -- and successfully -- back into their longstanding relationship.


When Comedians Meet, It's Not All Laughs
EVERY stand-up comic is gunning for a spot on the Buddy King television show.
Comedy writers would put each other away to get on staff.
Don't talk about what agents would do.
In "Only Kidding" at the Schoolhouse here, the playwright Jim Geoghan, himself a survivor of a nine-year bout with stand-up comedy, is mirroring the vain pursuit of what he calls joke slaves.


Artistry, an Artistic Director Learns, Is Only the Half of It
FROM THE EVIDENCE AT hand last month, it would have been difficult to tell that the Frankfurt Opera, one of the biggest and proudest companies in Germany,  was near collapse, riven by a bitter internal feud and crippled by a 25 percent  cut in public subsidies over the next four years.
Or, indeed, that the entire publicly supported theater system in Germany, which had provided for spoken, musical and dance theater with unequaled lavishness, was in a profound crisis, with politicians slashing budgets and theater administrators wringing their hands in self-doubt.
At the opening of Debussy's "Pelleas et Melisande," the final new production  of Sylvain Cambreling's first season as artistic director of the Frankfurt Opera, the triumph was complete.
And it was reaffirmed by glowing reviews over the next few days in the German press.


Spirit of Compromise Emerging Around the Rebbe's Grave
In mid-June, in the days after the death of Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson, leader of the Hasidic Lubavitch movement, thousands of mourners streamed to his  grave in Old Montefiore Cemetery.
The police, trying to keep the main gate clear, diverted them to an entrance on Francis Lewis Boulevard.
Residents near Francis Lewis found strangers on their lawns and cars blocking their driveways.
Visitors knocked at all hours asking to use the bathroom and telephone.


How the Moon Came To Have a Far Side
To the Editor:
Re "In Rural Ohio, Armstrong Quietly Lives on His Own Dark Side of the Moon" (news article, July 20): There is no dark side of the moon.
It is the far side.
One hemisphere of the moon always faces Earth, as the moon revolves around Earth.
Thus, we see only the near side.
When we see the full moon, the far side  is dark.
When the moon is new for us, the far side is full.


It's 'Forrest Gump' vs. Harrumph
FORREST GUMP" may be the biggest hit of the year, the movie that earns a second Oscar for Tom Hanks, the one that makes audiences laugh and makes them cry, the one that proves you don't need sex and violence to succeed in Hollywood. "Forrest Gump" may be all these things. But Jack Delaney, 48, who saw it in Manhattan last week, really doesn't buy it.
His analysis?
It wasn't meaningful at all.
"It was about a simpleton who goes through life, and everything works out his way," Mr.
Delaney said.


Habitats/The Captain's House;Tantalizing Mysteries
AFTER a full-scale tour of the grand, as-yet sparsely furnished rooms, the new owner reaches, almost as an afterthought, for a rather worn black wooden lacquer box, about the size of a 6-year-old's suitcase.
"I bought this the other night at an auction, for 50 bucks," he says, with just the right mixture of excitement, suspense and self-satisfaction.
"It's part of the stuff that came out of the house."


Miss McAlpin, Mr. Vanden Broek
Merrill Classen McAlpin, the photo and special-events manager at the Puck Building in New York, was wed yesterday to Richard Albertus van den Broek, an equity research analyst at Merrill Lynch in New York.
The Rev.
Ophelia Keller officiated at St.
George's-by-the-River Episcopal Church in Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
William Donovan, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Vanden Broek, 27, graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father, David H. McAlpin of Morristown, N.J., is an area director in Morristown of the National College Recruiting Association, which helps find college scholarships for high school athletes.
Her mother, Susan C. McAlpin of Little Silver, N.J., is the outpatient coordinator at the Riverview Medical Center in Red Bank, N.J.


Let's Look at Reverse Discrimination Suit
To the Editor:
Re "Racial Discrimination or Righting Past Wrongs?" (Education page, July 13): You paint too sympathetic a picture of Cheryl Hopwood, the white plaintiff  in a reverse discrimination lawsuit against the University of Texas School of Law, and of the facts in the rest of the case.


Word for Word: The Condemned;As Executions Mount, So Do Infamous Last Words
HARDLY a week goes by in the United States without, if not another execution, some new reflection of Americans' willingness to get tough on crime by putting killers to death: a Federal crime bill expanding the number of capital offenses; Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York, the icon of American liberalism, tempering his opposition to the death penalty in a tough re-election campaign; Stephen G. Breyer, the Supreme Court nominee, being grilled by Senators before satisfying them of his acceptance of the constitutionality of executions.
On Wednesday, Arkansas, which already this year has put to death two men in  a single day, plans the nation's first triple execution since 1962 -- the lethal injection of three men for a 1981 robbery-murder.
So it seems likely that the volume of the national clamor over the death penalty will rise yet again.


The Comeback of Sandy Stewart
LISTEN, kid, we can't have two careers," the songwriter Morris (Moose) Charlap said to the singer Sandy Stewart in 1962. And so Miss Stewart gave up a  career in ascent for marriage and motherhood.
"We couldn't have let you do that if it were happening today," the couple's two sons, Tom Charlap, 35, and Bill Charlap, 27, have since declared to their mother.


Q and A
Fall Events in Mexico


Strawberry Hits Homer In Support of Portugal
Giants 6, Rockies 4


Latin Nations at U.N. Delay Resolution on Haiti Invasion
Latin American and Caribbean nations are delaying United Nations approval of  the Clinton Administration's proposal for the possible invasion of Haiti if sanctions fail to remove the military Government from power.
The key resolution would in effect allow the United States to invade and occupy Haiti, the first such invasion in the Western Hemisphere that would have  Security Council support.


The Executive Computer;Unsung OS/2 May Finally Be Getting Some Respect
LIKE the kid who always sits on the bench while the stars take the field and  get the glory, I.B.M. is weary of all the attention being paid to Microsoft's new version of Windows, which is code-named Chicago and is expected to reach the market late this year or early next.
Chicago is intended to be a 32-bit operating system, meaning it can process operations with 32 pieces of data at once, rather than the current 16.
I.B.M.'s  OS/2 already processes 32 bits.
Chicago will feature an interface more like Apple's Macintosh, which should make it easier for new users.
OS/2 already has that, too.
Chicago will run all the current DOS and Windows applications software.
OS/2 can, too.


Giving The Yard A Facelift
THE backyard is looking a bit dull this summer.
That row of roses across the  back is covered with Japanese beetles.
The grass is brown.
The deck is starting  to rot.
You've been looking in the house magazines and have seen yards the same size, transformed into oases of calm and visual interest with trellises and raised beds and granite retaining walls and built-in sprinklers.
Plants are massed in undulating waves of color.


Leslie S. Morris, Andrew Taylor
Leslie Sarah Morris, the daughter of Michael Morris of New York and the late  Marcia Morris, was married last evening to Andrew Martin Taylor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Taylor of Flanders, N.J.
Rabbi Frederick Dworkin officiated at the Basking Ridge (N.J.) Country Club.
The Rev.
Wayne Owens, a United Church of  Christ minister, took part in the interfaith ceremony.
Mrs.
Taylor, 26, teaches the second grade at the Dutch Neck Elementary School in Princeton Junction, N.J.
She and her husband graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.
Her father is an executive vice president at Burson Marsteller in New York.


In America;Seventh Inning Suspense
For major league baseball fans, this should be among the sweetest of seasons, reminiscent of past glory years when amazingly gifted men like Willie Mays, Stan Musial, Mickey Mantle and Hank Aaron filled the summer with drama and beauty and grace.
The excitement this year comes from the splendid talents of home run-hitting  phenoms like Ken Griffey Jr. in Seattle and Frank Thomas in Chicago, and an astonishing youngster in Houston named Jeffery Bagwell, who apparently has yet to discover that he's not Babe Ruth.


Mets Let It Slip Away, And Streak Is Over
Jim Lindeman wished he had played Carlos Garcia's 10th-inning shot into left  field on one hop.
Dallas Green pondered whether he should have let Bret Saberhagen pitch the ninth.
You play for the Mets in '94, second-guessing is an art form.


Argentina Detains 3 in Bombing That Killed 100
Following a trail of parking lot tickets and auto repair bills, the police have detained three Buenos Aires men suspected of preparing the truck bomb that  killed about 100 people here last week.
Blue-collar bit players in what appears to be an international plot, the three are a used car dealer, a mechanic and the owner of an automobile "chop shop." Detectives believe the white Renault van used in the attack was altered with parts of other vehicles, either to hinder an investigation or to build a better bomb.


Signs Of Life In County's Economy
NEWS this month that I.B.M. profits jumped during the second quarter of the year appeared to signal more than just a fresh start for the once-beleaguered Armonk-based computer giant.
Analysts said the announcement from the county's largest private employer ended weeks of speculation that the economy in general  in Westchester was finally pulling out of a slump.
There continued to be a growing list of indicators this summer that the recession -- which hit hard and lasted so long in Westchester -- was finally loosening its grip here, as it had much earlier in other parts of America.


Nine Firefighters Injured in Yonkers Fire


Labor Talks Break Off
Negotiations between striking bus mechanics and the Metropolitan Transit Authority have broken off, leaving the nation's second-largest city with minimal bus service over the weekend.
Leaders of the mechanics union abruptly broke off  talks on Friday, accusing transit authority officials of working behind the union's back by appealing directly to workers.
Emergency service was extended into the weekend on six bus and rail lines as the strike by 1,900 bus mechanics  entered its sixth day.


150 Die in Colombia Guerrilla Offensive
A guerrilla group called the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia has opened a new offensive against the Government, attacking military bases and other targets.
More than 100 guerrillas and nearly 50 security troops have died  in the violence.
In a statement, rebel leaders said the offensive was a farewell gesture to President Cesar Gaviria, whose term ends Aug. 7.
Government officials say the attacks are intended to press President-elect Ernesto Samper into seeking peace  talks, which Mr.
Samper has said he will do.


The New Deal at American Express
IMAGINE Tiffany's admitting that most of its customers don't need gold necklaces and would look just as elegant in beads.
Or that Saks reacted to flagging couture sales by opening a discount warehouse.


Delores T. Benn, William Inzerillo
Delores T. Benn, a daughter of Delores and John Benn of Commack, L.I., is to  be married today to William Inzerillo, a son of Marie and Biagio Inzerillo, also of Commack.
Dr.
David Harmon, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society of Long Island, is to officiate at Riverview, a restaurant in Oakdale, L.I.
The bride, 26, is studying for a doctorate in developmental psychology at Fordham University.
She graduated from the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University, from which she also received a master's degree in psychology.
Her father retired as a New York City police officer.
Her mother retired as a registered nurse at North Ridge School in Commack.


Debra L. Samuels, Glenn Greenberg
Debra Lynn Samuels, the daughter of Richard and Dr.
Janet Samuels of New York, is to be married today to Glenn A. Greenberg, the son of Ernest and Loretta Greenberg of Manchester, N.H.
Rabbi David Lincoln is to officiate at Gurney's Inn in Montauk, L.I.
The bride, 27, is to become a fifth-grade teacher at Stratham Memorial School in Durham, N.H., in the fall.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in elementary education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is the manager of industrial relations for Con Edison in New York.
Her mother, a psychologist in New York, is also the director of training for the department of psychiatry at Interfaith Medical Center in Brooklyn.


Accidental Terrorists


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
ELIZABETH IMAGINED AN ICEBERG Written and illustrated by Chris Raschka.
Unpaged.
New York: A Richard Jackson Book/Orchard Books. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 7) ON A WHITE PEBBLE HILL By Chyng Feng Sun.
Illustrated by Chihsien Chen.
Unpaged.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8)


Ukraine Parliament Acts to Curb Privatization
Despite an agreement by Ukraine's new President and the head of the International Monetary Fund to work on an economic program, the Parliament has voted to slow the move by freezing the sale of state enterprises to bring privatization under stronger Government control.
Parliament, which is dominated by former Communists, is seeking to control a  process that has hardly begun.
Fewer than 10 percent of the nation's enterprises have been privatized.


A Doctor Finds an Answer For a Young Mother's Fears
To the Editor:
When I read the July 17 essay ("A Doctor of the Old School") about the retirement of Dr.
Harry Blum, the 95 1/2-year-old ear-nose-and-throat specialist, I suddenly realized he was the doctor who performed a tonsillectomy  on my daughter, Janet, in 1957 when she was five years old and we resided in Brooklyn.


Cecily D. Garrity, Matthew I. Janger
Cecily Doran Garrity, a daughter of Thomas J. Garrity of Bailey, Colo., and the late Ann M. Garrity, was married yesterday to Matthew Isaac Janger, a son of Allen and Inez Janger of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The Rev.
Scott Morrow, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at Capt.
R.
Slanders' House, an inn in Chilmark, Mass.
Until recently, the bride, 29, taught history and was the director of college counseling at the Oakwood School in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
She graduated cum laude from Smith College.
Her father, now retired, was a lawyer in New York.
Her mother was a special-education teacher in the Boston public schools.


Miss Halatas, Mr. Lonergan
Aspasia Halatas, a daughter of Helen and John Halatas of East Rockaway, L.I., was married on Friday to Richard Lonergan Jr., the son of Elizabeth LaChance and Mr.
Lonergan, both of East Rockaway.
The Rev.
Nicholas Magoulias officiated at the Greek Orthodox Cathedral of St.
Paul in Hempstead, L.I.
The Rev.
Michael Carroll, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Lonergan is a medical assistant at Wantagh (L.I.) Internal Medicine, a group practice.
She graduated from Nassau Community College.
Her father is a machinist at Newsday in Melville, L.I.


Political Lunacy
To the Editor:
In his review of Bob Woodward's book "The Agenda" (July 3), Andrew Sullivan states that President Clinton's political consultants, such as Paul Begala, were "spectacularly wrong" in their argument that taxing the rich would be a better political message than reducing the deficit.
Mr.
Sullivan says it was obvious that deficit reduction was "the popular rage of 1993." A recent poll, however, shows that only 24 percent of Americans are even aware that Congress passed a deficit-reduction package last year.
If it was such a "popular rage," why did nobody notice when it happened?


The Nation;Congress May Inquire To Its Heart's Desire
LIKE no-hitters and new pain-relief formulas, Congressional investigations like the Whitewater hearings that began last week in the House and Senate Banking Committees are rare enough to be noteworthy but sufficiently commonplace that no one is particularly surprised when another one is in the news.
As often as not over the years, the inquiries have passed like a summer shower.
Who remembers, for instance, the 1980 hearings about President Jimmy Carter's brother, Billy, and his contacts with Libya?


The Intricacies of Laying Out and Constructing a Sawhorse
CONSTRUCTING a sawhorse is a traditional test of carpentry skills that is sometimes still given by master carpenters and building contractors to newcomers applying for work.
The model described here has legs that splay in two directions, outward and toward the ends, for maximum stability, and it is narrow enough to fit through doorways.
Layout involves using a framing square, a simply designed useful tool.


Ahn Y. Lee and Jay McKechnie
Ahn Yuet Lee, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stimson Lee of New York, and Joseph Roy McKechnie Jr., the son of Sheila Saunders of New York and Mr.
McKechnie of Toronto, were married yesterday in New York.
Judge William Mogulescu of New York City Criminal Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony at the New York Palace.
The bride, 29, teaches kindergarten at the Allen-Stevenson School in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
Her father retired as a vice president at Dean Witter Reynolds, the stock brokerage in New  York.


THE FIRST LADY'S NEW CLOTHES
I thank Maureen Dowd for mentioning me in her article, but I must defend my tabby from characterization as a "matronly" accessory.
Anyone familiar with my playful "cat bag" knows it to be a youthful, lovable pet that symbolizes the joie de vivre of the fortunate owner.


Matador  Takes On Competitive Waters
It was as touchy as it gets in yacht racing.
Two cumbersome 85-footers careened up to the start line, rising and falling on the tops of seas big enough to spit white foam in the faces of their crews.
Above the din of metal cables snaking their way around deck blocks and winches came the soft, squeaky voice of one tough woman.
"Out of the way," barked Leslie Egnot from the helm of Matador , a white maxi-yacht.
Within six feet of Matador 's port side was the equally intimidating Longobarda, a maxi-yacht with a raging appetite to beat the boat full of women to its right.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST STORIES GETTING OVER TOM By Abigail Thomas. Algonquin, $16.95.


Russian Stock Fund Halts Its Dealings
The president of Russia's troubled MMM investment fund announced today that the company had suspended buying and selling of its shares, the Itar-Tass news agency said, quoting Russian television.
Sergei Mavrody, the president, also said a shareholders' meeting would be held before Monday.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


The Intricacies of Laying Out and Constructing a Sawhorse
CONSTRUCTING a sawhorse is a traditional test of carpentry skills that is sometimes still given by master carpenters and building contractors to newcomers applying for work.
The model described here has legs that splay in two directions, outward and toward the ends, for maximum stability, and it is narrow enough to fit through doorways.
Layout involves using a framing square, a simply designed useful tool.


ABOUT SPAM
When my father served under Gen.
John Pershing, in three United States Army campaigns, canned salmon was the Spam of the marches.
He told us that he had salmon for breakfast, lunch and supper: salmon croquettes, salmon a la king, salmon au vin, even salmon a la mode.
MARY KWAPINSKI DAVIDSON Lubbock, Tex.


Beyond Security;The Hopes for Peace Begin To Build Upon Themselves
DAN MERIDOR, a former Justice Minister, was chatting last Tuesday about how much Israel has changed -- how its economy has taken on vigor and its people self-confidence, how the nation itself is emerging triumphant from decades of conflict to be recognized as a regional superpower.
As he spoke in Parliament's cafeteria, a sprawling room set against a panoramic view of Jerusalem, Mr.
Meridor kept glancing at a most striking illustration of this new Israel: its legislators staring, transfixed, at televised images of King Hussein of Jordan and their own Prime Minister Yitzhak  Rabin, addressing a joint session of the United States Congress.
In the audience was Rehazam Ze'evi, leader of a far-right party that advocates the expulsion of  Arabs; barely 10 feet from him were a dozen photographers jostling to shoot pictures of Yasir Arafat's sister-in-law, Hala Tawil, paying her first visit to  Parliament as the guest of another legislator.
"These are good days for Israel," said Mr.
Meridor, a leading figure in the right-wing opposition Likud Party, flashing a mischievous smile of appreciation at the scene.


Ideas &amp; Trends;In Search of a Vision For the City of the '90's
WHERE have you gone, Lewis Mumford and Jane Jacobs?
A nation's cities turn their lonely eyes to you.
O.K., granted Mr.
Mumford and Ms.
Jacobs, the most insightful prophets and critics of the 20th-century American city, are no Joe DiMaggio.
For Paul Simon,  the songwriter, Joe was the larger-than-life icon of a lost age of American innocence.
But something has also been lost from what passes these days for the  art of urban planning.
And that is precisely what those two intellectuals once brought to the field: a vision of the future of the big city.


The Executive Life;A Summer Boot Camp For Budding Executives
WHILE her friends went to field hockey camp, baby-sat or worked as lifeguards this summer, Kacie Croson, 16, spent millions of dollars -- much of it borrowed  -- in a struggle to turn a fledgling computer company into a profitable venture.
Thankfully, it was a hypothetical venture, the central challenge of a two-year-old all-girls program called Camp Entrepreneur, based at Seton Hill College in Greensburg, Pa.
Kacie, who lives in the suburbs of Columbus, Ohio, was one of about 40 girls who signed up for the camp.
At first, she recoiled at  the idea.
"It would be like a camp for geeks," she told her father, an engineer  and owner of his own business.
But by the end of the program, she had drafted a  business plan, made a pitch for financing from venture capitalists and heard tips from bankers about how to apply for a business loan -- and she was enthusiastic.


Business Diary: July 25-29
COMPANIES


Lynn Schmeidler and Gregg M. Ury
Lynn Schmeidler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Schmeidler of Larchmont, N.Y., is to be married today to Gregg Marc Ury, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gustav Ury of Baltimore.
Rabbi Amy Bardack is to perform the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ury, 27, is a middle-school teacher at the Berkeley Carroll School in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in education from Lesley College.
Her father is the founder and president of A. R. Schmeidler &amp; Company, an investment firm in New York.


New York's Revival Houses: And Then There Was One
You had only to go to the movies to know that the late 1970's and early 80's  were the halcyon days of the revival houses.
There, at the opening of "Annie Hall," was Woody Allen in his halcyon days, in line for "The Sorrow and thePity" at the Thalia.
There were at least a half-dozen others then - cool, dark variations on film-buff paradise.
It's all been downhill since, though.
One by one - with the coming of videos and the big theater chains - the old theaters have closed or gone first-run. (Some others opened, but they, too, didn't last).
And today, one of two survivors, Theater 80 on St.
Marks Place, will run its last picture show, leaving only Film Forum 2 among commercial revival houses. (Several cultural institutions still show old movies in repertory.) Here is a look at the ebb and flow (but mostly ebb) of a cultural artifact.


Impresario of the Night
IT WAS 2 A.M., prime time at Limelight, and as usual the only person not dancing or ogling, drinking or gabbing, kissing or groping, was the nightclub's  owner, Peter Gatien.
Laser lights and house music were lashing the bodies around him, but he stood nearly motionless for minutes at a time, somberly stroking his chin as if he were eyeing a sculpture at the Met.
Mr.
Gatien is the preeminent ringmaster in the city's night life circus, host to 20,000 guests a week at his four clubs, Limelight, Palladium, USA and the Tunnel.
His success in this fickle trade is perhaps tied to that peculiar facet  of his personality on display at Limelight: he is not the life of the party, but he knows how to throw one.


A Cycle Rally With a Bit Less Roar
Some motorcycle rally.
No one is popping wheelies.
Men walk past monster bikes talking about their urologists.
The women don't have tattoos.
There are seminars.
You can hear yourself think.
T-shirts are on display in the vendors' tents.
"This Is Your Brain," one says, over a BMW logo.
"This Is Your Brain on Drugs," the next line says, over a Harley.


Keeping It Simple, and Straight From the Garden
THE other day a friend who was giving me a lift into the city told me that he loved to cook but confessed that he was sick of reading recipes he described as  "weird."
"I'm not interested in polenta sandwiches or coriander pesto," he said as we  left the rolling hills of northwest Connecticut behind.
"I want to read recipes for simple, straightforward dishes -- and preferably ones that don't cost a lot of money and don't take long to cook."


Seeking Satisfaction if There's No Quick Fix
THE first state "lemon laws" were passed a dozen years ago, to provide legal  remedies for consumers with relatively new, problem-plagued cars that are not fixed after repeated repair attempts by a dealer or manufacturer.
All 50 states, plus the District of Columbia, now have such laws.
Most states currently cover leased cars as well as purchased vehicles, and New York, Massachusetts and Rhode Island cover certain used cars as well.


On a Fashionable Avenue, an Old-Fashioned Style
THE number 654 has followed N. Anthony Rolfe around for more than 50 years, he says.
He was assigned to an LST bearing that number as a young naval officer  in 1943, and he served on it for three years.
But in and out in three years is not the way this real-estate broker and investor has operated as a civilian.


Campaign for the Paradise Tries to Save the Inside, Too
For two years, community leaders have pushed for landmark status for the exterior of the old Loew's Paradise, the ornate 65-year-old movie palace that has enchanted generations of Bronx residents.
But seven months after the theater was closed, the building's fate still hangs in the balance -- and now it's the inside that's attracting much of the attention.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LIVELY STREETS OF SONO


A Feminist Heroine?
To the Editor:


Playing All the Angles
To determine who fits where in movie triangles, it helps to remember some basic rules of geometry, which may have been forgotten somewhere between high school and the birth of the 20-screen multiplex.
In geometry there are four types of triangles, and in film these same shapes can be used to describe what screen lovers face when involved in three-way relationships.
The following chart defines the triangles and lists the movies that match them.
MARIA LAURINO
EQUILATERAL TRIANGLE (all three angles are equal): Everyone loves everyone.


WHY DO CATHOLICS STAY IN THE CHURCH? BECAUSE OF THE STORIES
What is it with numbers people?
The world can turn upside down and yet they point to some figures and say nothing has happened.
The latest example is Father Greeley's report that the Catholic Church is stable because "the Catholic defection rate has remained constant over 30 years. It was 15 percent in 1960 and it is 15 percent today."
Unnoticed in this figure is the redefinition of what it takes to defect.
In  1960 Catholics proved their membership every Friday by suffering through a fish  meal and every Sunday by going to Mass.
Today, you establish a membership by telling a poll taker you are Catholic.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-12


Lucia Paolicelli, Salvatore Fratantaro
Dr.
Lucia Marie Paolicelli, a daughter of Emanuel Paolicelli of Bayside, Queens, and the late Dorothy Paolicelli, was married yesterday to Dr.
Salvatore  Nicola Fratantaro, the son of Salvatore and Adeline Fratantaro of Centerdale, R.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Davis performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Church in Jamaica Estates, Queens.
The bride, 32, is the director of psychology at the Child Development Center  of Rhode Island Hospital and a clinical assistant professor of pediatrics at Brown University, both in Providence.
She graduated summa cum laude from Connecticut College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received master's and Ph.D. degrees in clinical psychology from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.


Diets Make You Fatter, and for Good Reasons;Young Vegetarians
To the Editor:
As the total vegetarian, or vegan, mother of three young vegetarians, I was  delighted to see your July 13 articles on vegetarian children.
You have alerted  your readers to a growing trend, but also perpetuated myths about vegetarianism.


The World;A Writer Hides. Her Country Winces.
IN the weeks when the world's soccer nations were competing for the World Cup, the favorite topic among Bangladeshis was the performance of Brazil.
Perhaps because Brazil is in some ways similar to Bangladesh -- crowded, and for the most part desperately poor -- people all across this nation draped their homes with Brazil's green-and-yellow flag.
When Brazil won the championship, crowds danced in the streets.
But this Bangladesh, striking for its spontaneity and good will, is not the  Bangladesh familiar in the West.
The Bangladesh that has been capturing attention there is a country where crowds of angry Muslims have been demanding the death of a writer accused of blaspheming the Koran.
The images have been all the more stark for the fact that the writer, Taslima Nasrin, is a woman, who reacted to the death threats by fleeing to an undisclosed hideout and issuing anguished appeals to Western governments to save her life.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'BLOOMER GIRL'


This Week's Numbers


New Protests Halt Business in Bangladesh
A nationwide strike called by an opposition party and secular student groups  halted traffic and closed businesses today in Bangladesh, a country increasingly polarized by debates over Islam.
The Awami League party and student groups organized the walkout to protest the killing of six people in clashes in the southern port city of Chittagong.
The opposition blames a fundamentalist Muslim party for the killings.


2 New River Tours For Rhode Island
This summer and fall, visitors to Rhode Island may choose between two new river tours that explore the urban geography and history of the state.
Baer's River Workshop, an outfitter in Exeter has introduced a five-hour urban paddling tour for sightseeing around the city from the vantage point of the Woonasquatucket and Seekonk rivers.


Susan Eaton And Mark Kramer
Susan Elizabeth Eaton, a doctoral candidate in education at Harvard University, was married yesterday to Mark William Kramer, a writer-in-residence  and professor of journalism at Boston University.
The bridegroom's father, Sidney Kramer, a justice of the peace in Westport, Conn., officiated at Catamount Hill, a farm in Colrain, Mass.
Mrs.
Kramer, 30, is also the assistant director of the Project on School Desegregation at Harvard.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and received a master's degree in education from Harvard.
She is the  daughter of Nancy and William G. Eaton of Winchester, Mass.
Her father is a director of sales for Nynex in Boston.


Corrections
An article on page 30 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the new Davis Museum and Cultural Center at Wellesley College refers incorrectly to the  donation that gave the museum its name.
It was a gift, not a bequest, from Kathryn Wasserman Davis and her husband, Shelby Cullom Davis.


Officer Charged in Dispute
An off-duty police officer was arrested and suspended yesterday for shooting  at an empty car after a traffic dispute with its owner, the police said.
The officer, Rafael Sanchez, 35, was arrested at 5:30 A.M. at his home in the Bronx, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.
Officer Sanchez, who has  been on the force for nine years, is assigned to the 20th Precinct on the Upper  West Side of Manhattan.


Fresh Air Day Marks Joys Of Program
Four years ago, LaToya Craig of the South Bronx crossed the Hudson River and  found a whole new world: one where children splash in pools without worrying about their safety, where they walk unafraid to neighbors' homes at night, and where the summer heat is a bit more forgiving.
This tranquil world is less than a mile as the pigeon might fly from LaToya's apartment building on Cortland Avenue near Yankee Stadium.
It is in Leonia, N.J., at the home of Carol Lutchen and her daughter Beth, who have welcomed LaToya, 11, into their family for two weeks each of the last four summers as part of the Fresh Air Fund.


In Paralegals v. Lawyers, Recuse the Lawyers?
THE president of First Security Legal Clinic in Hartford, Roney L. Harris, makes a living explaining the intricacies of the state's courtrooms to people who cannot afford to hire a lawyer or don't want to.
Now Mr.
Harris is being hauled to court himself, on charges that he is practicing law and should not be because he is not a lawyer.
And across the state, his case is being scrutinized by the paralegal companies, most of them started just in the last few years, that provide people a less costly alternative for guidance in divorce, bankruptcy, probate, name changes and other judicial proceedings.


Norman Jimerson Jr., Desrie Mason
Desrie Linda Mason, a daughter of Jean and Aubrey Mason of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Norman Russell Jimerson Jr., a son of Onnie C. Jimerson of  Cromwell, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Hugh Forde, a Methodist minister, officiated at Terrace on the Park in Flushing, Queens.
Ms.
Mason-Jimerson, 29, is an associate at Wood, Williams, Rafalsky &amp; Harris, a law firm in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Syracuse University.
She received a law degree from Cornell University.
Her father retired as a supervisor of nurses at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn.
Her mother is an associate for the Fifth Avenue Club, a personal shopping service at Saks Fifth Avenue in New York.


Granny, Geli and Florah
AFRICAN WOMEN Three Generations.
By Mark Mathabane.
Illustrated. 366 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $23.


Karen A. Zelman, Kevin Dinowitz
Karen Aliza Zelman, the daughter of Shirley Groman Zelman and Dr.
Marvin Zelman, both of West Hartford, Conn., is to be married there today to Dr.
Kevin  Dinowitz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Neal Dinowitz of Bellmore, L.I.
Rabbi Alan Ullman is to officiate at Beth El Temple.
The bride, 28, graduated from the University of Rochester and received a master's degree in psychology from Yeshiva University.
She is studying for a doctorate in neuropsychology at the University of Houston.
Her father is a psychiatrist in Hartford, where her mother is an office manager at the law firm  of Chilton, Alix &amp; Van Kirk.


Fran D. Goldman, Robert C. Fink
Fran Debra Goldman, the daughter of Ellen and Joel Goldman of Wayne, N.J., was married last evening to Robert Cary Fink, a son of Lorraine and George Fink  of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
Rabbi Martin Freedman performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Fink, 29, graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a master's degree in advertising from Northwestern University.
She is an account supervisor at Ally &amp; Gargano, an advertising agency in New York.


Facing Complaints of Bias, Farrakhan Speaks to Women Only
Louis Farrakhan, the Nation of Islam minister who angered many women when he  barred them from attending a speech here last winter, returned on Wednesday night and delivered a speech that only women could attend.
Mr.
Farrakhan faces sexual discrimination complaints filed with a state agency because women were kept from the city-owned theater where he delivered the speech on March 10.


New Passengers Board After Ship's Cleanup
As Bermuda-bound passengers boarded the cruise ship Horizon yesterday afternoon for its first voyage since a fatal outbreak of Legionnaire's disease was traced to the ship, they repeatedly said that a clean bill of health from Federal officials was clean enough for them.
The go-ahead from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta apparently persuaded wary passengers to make the weeklong voyage.
The Horizon, which set sail at 4:30 P.M. yesterday, was fully booked with more than 1,500 passengers, said Jim Grossman, a spokesman for Celebrity Cruise Line, owner of the 12-deck, 682-foot-long ship.


Conclusions That Baffle
To the Editor:
While I appreciate the information about film violence offered in your feature "Taking the Children," I am continually baffled by the conclusions your  reviewers draw about age-appropriateness.
For instance, in her review of "Baby's Day Out" [July 10], Patricia S. McCormick says that though the film contains "endless, repetitive bone-crunching wounds" that look "too realistic to be painless," she adds that children ages 3 to 6 will be amused but "will need help understanding kidnapping." Does this movie count as part of our children's  abuse-prevention education?


Yankees Mad All Over, and Cool When It Counts
Jim Abbott, usually calm and cool, was livid.
He stood in the corner of the Yankee dugout and shouted at plate umpire Ed Hickox after he left the game in the sixth inning.
Paul O'Neill, rarely calm and cool, was also livid.
He slammed his helmet into the dirt after center fielder Kenny Lofton swiped a potential hit in the eighth with a gorgeous diving catch.
The Yankees were angry.
The Yankees were ornery.
The Yankees were showing some emotion.
Team Robotic?
The Yankees, whose players usually utter cliches that are intended not to motivate the opposition and who hardly ever let their emotions spill forth, were refreshingly emotional yesterday as they scrambled to a 6-5 victory over the Indians at Yankee Stadium.


A New Shrine to the Auto
The new $40 million Petersen Automotive Museum in Los Angeles, billed as the  largest of its kind in the United States, is at the center of the sprawling city that grew up with cars.
On the first floor, about 40 classic and collector's cars are used to recreate historical settings, like a full-size 1929 Richfield gas station, a Depression-era strip mall and the Dog Cafe -- a roadside tamale stand in the shape of a giant bulldog.
Visitors can board one of two trolley cars crushing Laurel and Hardy's Model T in a scene from their movie "Hog Wild."


Jordan Finally Gets First Home Run
Former National Basketball Association great MICHAEL JORDAN hit his first home run as a pro last night and added a run-scoring double as he helped the Birmingham Barons to a 6-1 victory over the visiting Carolina Mudcats in a Class AA Southern League game.
Jordan's eighth-inning homer, a solo shot, came in his  354th at-bat and increased his average to .189.
"I knew the pitcher was a fastball pitcher, and I was looking fastball," Jordan said.
"It was a great feeling." (AP)


July 24-30: Health Triumph Undercut;Lead Levels Still High Among Many Poor Children
After lead additives were phased out of gasoline between 1976 and 1991, the average amount of lead circulating in the bloodstreams of Americans plummeted by 78 percent, a government study has found.
Health officials last week hailed the  finding as a major public health triumph.
With lead no longer airborne or contaminating crop soil, the entire country  has benefited -- with one glaring exception.


The World;Presto! Past Sparkles, Present Vanishes!
THE advertisement could be for Lloyd's of London or even Ralph Lauren.
A faded, sepia-tinted group photograph of turn-of-the-century bankers dissolves into a similar portrait of 1950's-era bankers, and then a third, contemporary group.
A bowler hat floats, Magritte-style, through all three tableaus to land on the head of a young boy at the knee of a proper 1990's businessman.
The not-so-subliminal message of the ad for the Russian Credit Bank is tradition, heritage and continuity through the ages.
Missing are the 70 years when all commercial banking came to a halt under Soviet rule.


It's Tears and Touchdowns At Canton's Hall of Fame
The neat, warm and inviting homes tucked around each corner near the Pro Football Hall of Fame were decorated this afternoon in red, white and blue streamers with banners and ribbons aplenty.
Fans filled the streets as this football-crazed town celebrated its annual shining moment -- the induction ceremonies reserved for only the greatest to ever play the game.
This time around it was running backs Tony Dorsett and Leroy Kelly, tight end Jackie Smith, linebacker Randy White, cornerback Jimmy Johnson and former Minnesota Vikings Coach Bud Grant who joined football's special fold.
Each man spoke of the magic of the moment.
Each talked about the tremendous emotion involved.


Sea Walls
Medieval modern seems an unlikely description for a beach house in Northern California, but in this case it is entirely apt.
Lodged 300 feet above the Pacific, this monumental feat of engineering appears both solid as a fortress and fragile as a candlelit lantern.
Its architect, Joan Hallberg, drew on the grandeur of the site, and its history, for inspiration.
The natural landing cut into the cliffs was used by loggers at the turn of the century, in the transportation of redwoods.
The building itself, all 7,000 square feet, has the long, skinny proportions of the  sawmills that once dotted the area.


U.N., Battling Death, Tends to 8,000 Rwandan Orphans
It looked like the maternity ward of a large hospital.
But the 43 naked babies lying shoulder to tiny shoulder were on the floor of a canvas tent in the middle of banana plantations and coffee fields.
They were just the youngest of more than 500 abandoned Rwandan children -- twice the number of two days ago -- crowded today into a makeshift orphanage of  35 tents.


13 Years Later, an Arrest in a Manhattan Doctor's Slaying
Nearly 13 years ago, Dr.
John Chase Wood Jr., a 31-year-old resident in surgery at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, was accosted by three young men as he strode back to the hospital from dinner at home nearby with his pregnant wife.
One brandished a gun, and they demanded his money.
Dr.
Wood, a tall, husky man who played spirited rugby and elegant classics and jazz on the French horn,  apparently resisted, and there was a brief scuffle.
One shot was fired, and Dr.
Wood, struck in the heart, died an hour later in the hospital where he worked.


Traveling Show From Harlem Museum
THE Studio Museum in Harlem has sent on the road a small excerpt from its collection -- 46 works out of about 1,500 -- and the first port of call is the Montclair Art Museum.
Valerie Mercer, associate curator of the Harlem museum's collections, masterminded the show, expanding upon one that was recently organized on behalf  of Paine Webber.
The result is a crowded but cool anthology that spans the last  25 years of work by black painters and sculptors in the United States.


Blacklist: Memories of a Word That Marks an Era
AGAINST THE BACKDROP OF THE cold war in the 1940's and 50's and increasing anti-Communist sentiment in the United States, the House Un-American Activities  Committee, set up in 1945 as a standing committee, carried on Government investigations of Americans suspected of being Communists or of having sympathy  with the Soviet Union.
The entertainment industry, especially in Hollywood, and  unions were major targets of hearings that began in 1947.
Ultimately, 10 blacklisted screenwriters, directors and producers were imprisoned for their refusal to answer questions from the committee.
Along with  this group, known as the Hollywood 10, several hundred others in the movie industry lost their jobs for actual or suspected Communist affiliation.
While television and radio also felt the committee's influence, the New York theater world seemed to be affected least.


Mexico Moves to Limit Projects Along Its Coast
AFTER 20 years of favoring big developments like Cancun that gobble up miles  of coastline and pave over thousands of acres of sensitive wetlands, the Mexican Government is trying to switch directions and limit what can be built on the beach.
A new accord among federal, state and local governments reached in June will  drastically curtail building on the 60 miles of coast from the high-rise hotels  and chain restaurants of Cancun down to the 1,000-year-old walled city of Tulum.


Bentsen Gave the White House His Inspector General's Report
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen asked his department's independent investigator last weekend for copies of interviews conducted during an ongoing ethics review of the Clinton Administration's handling of the Whitewater affair, Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Bentsen, who had ordered the review by the Treasury Department's inspector general and was among the people interviewed, forwarded the documents  to the White House so that aides could prepare for Congressional hearings, the officials said.


Crossing the River: The Israel-Jordan Pact -- A special report.;Amid Debt, Doubt and Secrecy, Hussein and Rabin Made Peace
On the evening of May 19 in a quiet London living room, two war horses of the Middle East -- men who were present at the creation of the conflict between their countries nearly half a century ago -- met secretly to end it once and for all.
As King Hussein remembers it now, he looked across at Yitzhak Rabin and said  to himself, "You know, Yitzhak, you and I have been at this a long time."


Many Health Groups Fight House Democratic Leaders' Plan
A broad assortment of doctors, hospitals, private insurance companies, health maintenance organizations, state officials and big employers said today that they disliked a central element of the House Democratic leaders' health plan, which would more than double the size of the Federal Medicare program.
Under the proposal put forward Friday by the House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the Government would create a new Part C of Medicare, open to people who are unemployed, receive welfare, work part time or hold jobs  at companies with fewer than 100 employees.
The new program is one of the Democratic leaders' main tools to guarantee health insurance for all Americans.


Krista Van Vleet, Lawrence Kovacs
Krista Van Vleet, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lyle Van Vleet of Kansas City, Kan., was married yesterday to Lawrence Scott Kovacs, a son of Diane Kovacs and  Dr.
Ernest Kovacs, both of Roslyn, L.I.
The Rev.
Katherine Hawbaker, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Loose Park Rose Garden in Kansas City, Mo.
The bride, 29, is a candidate for a Ph.D. in cultural anthropology at the University of Michigan, where she was named a Fulbright scholar.
She expects to study in Sucre, Bolivia, in the next academic year.
She and her husband graduated from Beloit College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a consultant to the printing industry in Kansas City, Kan.
Her mother, Marian Van Vleet, teaches mathematics at St.
Mary College in Leavenworth, Kan.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3


Sic Transit Agnew
Not much goes on in Tryon, N.C.
In one recent issue of The Tryon Daily Bulletin, "The World's Smallest Daily  Newspaper," the big news was that the Town Council had banned beer at a local barbeque.
So you can imagine how odd it is to drive through the languid Carolina countryside to an isolated Mediterranean-style villa, where you turn a corner and come face to face with -- Spiro T. Agnew.


Even With 72 Percent of the Season Complete, the Awards Must Go On
With no apparent solution in sight, chances of averting the threatened Aug. 12 strike seem slim, if not nonexistent.
Once the strike begins, it promises to  be a long one, jeopardizing the playoffs and World Series.
Major league baseball, then, would have no pennant winners and no World Series champion.
But it would have most valuable players and Cy Young award winners because the Baseball Writers Association of America does not plan to walk out, too.
If anyone wanted to impose a salary cap on the writers, they would probably be flattered.


Reports Say Ellison Is the Newest Celtic
The Boston Celtics, who already have added DOMINIQUE WILKINS and BLUE EDWARDS, have also signed center PERVIS ELLISON, broadcast and published reports say.
Terms of the contract have not been disclosed, but one unidentified source told The Boston Globe that Ellison would get a six-year deal worth about $12 million.
The Celtics, who have a $1.1 million salary-cap slot available, did not confirm the reports. (AP)


Diets Make You Fatter, and for Good Reasons
To the Editor:
We are not at all surprised by the increasing obesity rates reported in "Despite Awareness of Risks, More in U.S. Are Getting Fat" (front page, July 17).
The experts cited blame our abundant food supply, food advertising, our television watching and the growth of the anti-diet movement.


Emily S. Jonas, Patrick J. Trotti 3d
Emily Susan Jonas, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Manfred Jonas of Schenectady, N.Y., is to be married today to Patrick John Trotti 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Trotti Jr. of Tarrytown, N.Y.
Donald J. McGrath, a marriage officer of the Town  of Philipstown, N.Y., is to officiate at Hudson House, an inn in Cold Spring, N.Y.
The bride, 33, is an assistant corporation counsel for the New York City Law  Department at the Brooklyn Family Court.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Northeastern University.


Lisa Rosenthal, Michael Mittleman
Lisa Jan Rosenthal, a daughter of Marjorie P. Rosenthal of New York, is to be married today to Michael Jay Mittleman, a son of Linda and Richard Mittleman of  Providence, R.I.
Rabbi Shira Stern is to officiate at the Stanhope Hotel in New  York.
The bride, 31, graduated from the University of Chicago, from which she also received a master's degree in geography.
She and the bridegroom, 28, received M.B.A.'s from Columbia University.
Mr.
Mittleman, a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, is an associate at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


U.S. IS ATTRACTING NEW MONEY POOL
The United States has found an unlikely benefactor to replace Japanese investors in paying for the nation's continuing budget and trade deficits: foreign government banks, mainly in developing countries.
The flood of money from these unlikely sources into the United States is the  latest shift in the powerful currents of capital flows that underlie the global  economy.
In the 1970's, Arab nations flush with oil money recycled their profits into American investments.


Editorial Notebook;U.N. Troops Cannot Stop Genocide
What can the world do when hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians are slaughtered because of their race, religion, class or tribe?
It happened this year in Rwanda and is still happening in Bosnia.
Recently, it has happened in Cambodia, Indonesia and the Kurdish areas of Iraq.
Typically, the world does very little.
This passivity outrages compassionate people everywhere.
Increasingly, those demanding armed action against genocide have made the United Nations their chosen instrument.
The urge to defend innocent victims reflects humanity at its best.
But the task is rarely as simple as it looks.
And U.N. military intervention is, in most cases, the wrong tool.


A Feminist Heroine?
To the Editor:
Contrary to Susan Cheever's assumption that American women prefer a fantasy Jane Roe, "a feminist Joan of Arc" or "an uneducated innocent" (whatever that means), I'm pleased she's who she is.
I'm glad she's not a manager or a novelist or even an ordinary working woman with a family.
She's Norma McCorvey, who has written a book about survival, her journey to a public space, through poverty and violence, barely able to protect herself, let alone her children, which is why she finally decided not to have any more.


WHY DO CATHOLICS STAY IN THE CHURCH? BECAUSE OF THE STORIES
Andrew Greeley manages to turn an interest in stories and metaphors into a field of competition: Catholic stories aren't just good, they're better than everyone else's.
Perhaps one reason Catholics don't leave the church is because  their leadership routinely patronizes non-Catholics.
In the minds of many disaffected Catholics, there is no other religion worthy of the name.
PAUL A. H. BABITTS New York, N.Y.


A Man Who Knows Too Much


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Executive Computer column on July 24, about  computer operating systems, described the Microsoft Corporation's Windows NT software incorrectly.
It is based on Microsoft's own technology; it is not a Unix system.


Janine M. Cone, Matthew Metcalf
Janine Marie Cone, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George E. Cone of Somers, N.Y., was married yesterday to Matthew Lee Metcalf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy E. Metcalf of Duncan, S.C.
Msgr.
Timothy McDonnell performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
John and St.
Mary in Chappaqua, N.Y.
Mrs.
Metcalf, 30, is an associate at the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.
She graduated magna cum laude from Cornell University, from which she also received her law degree.
Her father retired as a corporate counsel of I.B.M. in White Plains.


Places Where Women Made History
As tourist attractions go, 142 West Fourth Street in Cincinnati, is pretty subtle.
But the furniture store and garage visitors see today occupy the site where Lucy Hobbs Taylor, the nation's first female dentist, learned to drill and fill teeth in the early 1860's.
Though the place lacks a commemorative plaque, it is immortalized on page 356 of a hefty new book, "Susan B. Anthony Slept Here: A Guide to American Women's Landmarks" by Lynn Sherr and Jurate Kazickas (Times Books, $18).
The 580-page volume, part travel guide, part reference book, describes more than 2,000 sites where women made history.
And while some exist mainly in memory, plenty are substantial landmarks, among them graves, statues, memorials  and, of course, houses, from Susan B. Anthony's red-brick residence in Rochester, and Louisa May Alcott's clapboard cottage in Concord, Mass., to Sara  Winchester's eccentric 160-room "Mystery House" in San Jose, Calif. (She believed she would be punished for the deaths caused by Winchester rifles unless she kept adding to her house.)


Nancyanne Freeman and Guy Lerner
Dr.
Nancyanne Freeman, a daughter of William P. and Nancy S. Freeman of Moorestown, N.J., was married last evening in Philadelphia to Dr.
Guy Mark Lerner, a son of Leslie and Elaine Lerner, of Allentown, Pa.
Rabbi Alan Weitzman performed the ceremony at the Downtown Club.
The bride, 32, is an anesthesiology resident at Emory University.
She graduated from the University of Delaware and received her medical degree from Jefferson Medical College.
The bridegroom, 35, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received his medical degree from the University of Pittsburgh.


Credit Insurance
To the Editor:
I read with great interest the Mike Hudson article, "Credit Insurance: Overpriced and Oversold" (Viewpoints, July 3).
Noticeably absent in the article  was mention of the excellent credit insurance program of credit unions.


They're Satisfied Customers on Montague St.
Every day for five hours, three workers and a supervisor clean the length of  Montague Street, all the way from Court Street to Hicks Street.
They sweep sidewalks and gutters.
They empty litter baskets and bag the debris for pickup by the Sanitation Department.
The workers are developmentally disabled. Their results?


Paintings Are the Main Event In the Barnum Festival Show
THE Discovery Museum in Bridgeport is looking spiffy these days with its entrance, a recent addition, faced in multicolored ceramic brick.
This encloses  a lobby much larger than before, an expanded gift shop and a new staircase with  walls of glass bricks.
There is a whiff of the Pompidou Center in Paris in these improvements.
But its current show is the venerable Barnum Festival juried art exhibition and sale, now 34 years old.
The judges of the competition, imported from Manhattan for the occasion, were Laura Trippi, curator at the New Museum of Contemporary Art, and Jon Ippolito, curatorial coordinator at the Guggenheim Museum's branch in SoHo.
Out of the 300 works submitted, the two chose 78 and the results are the usual mixed bag.


A Foldaway Tandem
While cycling enthusiasts frequently travel with their bikes, tandem riders seldom enjoy that luxury.
But a new tandem bike that folds may change that.
The  Montague Triframe, a standard eight-foot tandem, which weighs about 47 pounds, folds into a Z shape that measures 3 feet by 3 feet by 1 foot.
Folding takes two minutes once the owner gets the hang of it.
The Triframe, which costs $1,995, is available in Manhattan at Frank's Bike Shop, 553 Grand Street; (212) 533-6332.
It also can be ordered from the company: Montague Corporation, (800) 736-5348.
An air-travel case is $599.95.
TERRY TRUCCO


An Unlikely Jets Pair Cross Paths in Pursuit of Their N.F.L. Kicking Dream
When did their dreams begin?
For Doug Blevins, it was in a small Virginia town where, from his wheelchair, he watched others kick a football.
For Tony Meola, it was seeing his mother working a forklift, watching his father cut other people's hair.
Tony played soccer, but one day, maybe, he could kick in the National Football League.


Between the Food Lines: Feuding Over Homeless Aid
For five years, homeless people would gather inside the old St.
Agnes School  at 152 East 44th Street for the stew, milk, bread and fruit delivered every night by the Coalition for the Homeless.
But last Tuesday, they waited in drizzling rain behind Grand Central Terminal.
When the coalition's van arrived,  they ate in the open.
"I don't know what's going on," said a homeless man who ate his dinner in a doorway and gave his name only as John.
"It seems like a lot of political infighting."


Inventories Are Rising for the Right Reasons
JUST in time is justly starting to vanish.
That is probably the real meaning of the bulge in business inventories that has left economists shaking their heads, and that on Friday sent bond prices soaring.


SUNDAY, July 31, 1994;evere Weather Watch
Weather gets more worrisome all the time.
Once, it was hot or cold.
Then came El Nino, global warming, comets hitting Jupiter (where the weather is really going haywire).
Now, in addition to rain forecasts, jet stream charting and pollution alerts, the National Weather Service offers the ultraviolet exposure index.
Each day, in a yearlong trial that started in June, the weather service is forecasting the danger from the sun on a scale of 1 to 10 for 58 cities. (The Times publishes the New York information as a Solar Risk Index.) As you might expect, Seattle is a good place to escape the sun (it often rates a 4) and Phoenix is not (9 is common).


The Dutch Had a Word For 'Brother': Broeder
To the Editor:


F.Y.I.
Harbor Lights


Sound Bytes;Making Robot Gladiators
Marc A. Thorpe spent a dozen years as a model maker and animatronic designer  for George Lucas's Industrial Light and Magic, working on special effects for films like "Return of the Jedi" and the Indiana Jones trilogy.
More recently, after a stint as a toy maker at Lucas Toys, which is now defunct, Mr.
Thorpe, who is based in Fairfax, Calif., north of San Francisco, decided to focus his unique talents on something even more important: building a robotic, radio-controlled vacuum cleaner.
"I thought, 'What if you could make vacuuming fun?' " Mr.
Thorpe recalled.
His invention raised some eyebrows, but "it didn't vacuum very well." So, Mr.
Thorpe removed the vacuum cleaner from the radio-controlled robot and, as a lark, strapped on a battery-powered drill and other power tools.
When he strapped a chain saw to the robot, he had an epiphany: Why not a robot war, with radio-controlled robots in a Roman Forum atmosphere?


Flamboyant Note in a Sea of Tranquillity
THE Maidstone Arms in East Hampton has not changed its character, but it has  changed its chef.
The fashionable inn looks much as it has for the last few summers, since new owners took over in 1992.
The Maidstone is the epitome of elegant country dining, a white-clapboard 17th-century charmer with striped awnings, welcoming porches, wicker and elaborate floral bouquets perfuming the air.


Art That Turns Television Frogs Into Princes
ALTHOUGH ARTISTS IN THIS century have made diligent efforts to introduce the  most derelict items into the court of art, you might have thought television was too thoroughly masscult, too yahoo, too committed to the froggy life for any number of kisses to turn it into a prince.
You would have been mistaken.
By the 60's, artists were already taking on the tube.
Pop artists borrowed images from the cathode-ray bank of imagery, which generously made interest-free loans.
Others removed content from the programs and forced the electrons to behave like modern art.


In a Computer Class, Trading Places
THE puzzled and the confident worked side by side at a recent technology workshop held at the Middle School here, learning both from their instructors and from one another how to put together multimedia presentations for classroom  use.
People seeking to "reform" schools have long talked about the peer model of education, and here was the concept in action: 41 teachers, administrators and board members from the Scarsdale, New Rochelle and White Plains public schools devoting two weeks of their summer to exploring the latest in computer software  and technological equipment.
The workshop was organized by the Institute for Information Age Education, an arm of the Weston Woods Institute of Weston, Conn., and sponsored by the Scarsdale Teachers Institute.


A Feminist Heroine?
To the Editor:
It's reassuring for us to have an educated, privileged woman like Susan Cheever put the "real" Jane Roe -- Norma McCorvey -- in her place, or keep her there by the faithful summary of self-damning elements in her story, unmodified  by any sympathetic overview, excepting a single sentence at the end: "Almost everything in her story could have happened to many young women in a country where the rights of women and children are still under attack." What "happened"  to Ms.
McCorvey -- "an angry shadow from the dark side of the American dream" -- includes being an "unwanted child," a failed mother, a rape survivor, a reform school graduate, a worker at "dead-end jobs" and a lesbian.
It's especially comforting to read that lesbians are "from the dark side of the American dream."


Keeping It Simple, and Straight From the Garden
THE other day a friend who was giving me a lift into the city told me that he loved to cook but confessed that he was sick of reading recipes he described as  "weird."
"I'm not interested in polenta sandwiches or coriander pesto," he said as we  left the rolling hills of northwest Connecticut behind.
"I want to read recipes for simple, straightforward dishes -- and preferably ones that don't cost a lot of money and don't take long to cook."


Praise Be To St. Ann's
To the Editor:
I read with interest Steve Pond's article about John Cale and Bob Neuwirth's  song cycle "Last Day on Earth" ["Spinning Canterburyish Tales in the Cafe Shabu," June 26].
However, as program director of the Arts at St.
Ann's Church in Brooklyn, I want to note that although "Last Day" was indeed rehearsed at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the work was commissioned and financed entirely by the Arts at St.
Ann's.
JANINE NICHOLS Brooklyn


IN SHORT: FICTION
PSYCHOLOGICAL THRILLER TOO CLOSE FOR COMFORT By Ellen Feldman. Delacorte, $19.95.


Sonoma County
To the Editor: As East Coast residents and long-term devotees of Timberhill Ranch in northern Sonoma County, Calif., we were dismayed to read Lynn Freed's review of that haven, "Seeing the Pacific's Wilder Side" (June 26).
Let us try to describe the delights of Timberhill.
After having traveled extensively both in the United States and abroad, we can honestly say that we have never been to a getaway with better service or nicer, more accommodating and gracious owners and staff in a more magnificent setting.


Technology;Coming to a Cash Register Near You: Multimedia
A small manufacturer of cash registers is hoping to speed up supermarket check-outs with a computer-based register that can display pictures of products  for quick identification, price verification and customer entertainment.
The machine, called the Experience, is made by Stores Automated Systems Inc., a privately held company based in Bristol, Pa., that expects revenues of $40 million this year.
Unveiled in February, the Experience costs $8,000 a unit, about $1,000 more than other point-of-sale systems.


Cliburn Portrait


Women's Bridge Team Wins Place at Trials
A team led by Sally Woolsey of Kensington, Calif., won the Women's Knockout Teams Championship on Friday at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals here.
Her teammates were Joann Glasson of Morrisville, Pa., Joann Manfield of Philadelphia, Jo Anne Casen of Boca Raton, Fla., Jan Martel of Davis, Calif., and Georgiana Gates of Houston.


Last Frontier' on Lake of Ozarks
There are not a lot of rules here on the Lake of the Ozarks.
A man -- and most of those at the helm are men -- can drive a boat as fast as he wants.
He can drive it all night.
There is no curfew.
He can drink and drive, too.
And if  the beer runs out, there are plenty of lakefront bars.
A boat can be as big, with as much horsepower, as the owner can afford.
The Lake of the Ozarks is not like some other lakes, Lake St.
Louis, say, where boat length is restricted to 20 feet, and horsepower to 175.


Amid Reports of Dissension, a Top Legal Firm Plans to Dissolve
Publicly citing "uncertainty in the health care field" and privately describing dissension within its ranks, a premier New York City law firm in the  medical malpractice specialty announced on Friday that it was closing its doors.
The decision to shut Bower &amp; Gardner, a 39-year-old firm, was approved overwhelmingly by its 66 partners on Thursday night, said John Gardner, the "name partner" in the firm.
The decision also ends employment for 125 associates and 275 paralegals and other members of the support staff.
While the  firm will formally dissolve on Oct. 7, it is already dividing up clients among its partners.


Iraq Reeling After 4 Years Of Sanctions
After four years of economic sanctions, Iraq has become impoverished, with its citizens struggling to survive in a world of roaring inflation, dwindling supplies of goods, and salaries that never catch up with prices.
Last summer there were two antique stalls in the lobby of the smart Rashid Hotel in Baghdad where middle-class Iraqis, desperate for cash, deposited their  antiques -- old muskets inlaid with mother of pearl, heavy silver bracelets and  piles of carpets -- in the hope that they might find a buyer.


Finding 'em Where They Are, Off Staten Island
Speaking almost 100 years ago, Wee Willie Keeler, the 5-foot-4-inch outfielder with the New York Highlanders, explained his success at the plate.
"Hit 'em where they ain't," Keeler advised.
This is an excellent philosophy for getting on base, but not a very good one  for fishing.


SPECTATOR SPORT
The attempt by R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr. to denigrate his former wife for her efforts at self-improvement -- via tennis, religion and psychotherapy -- is ironic ("Spectator Sport," by Dinitia Smith, July 3).
I suppose trying to navigate middle age by blowing up condoms at benefit dinners is more in line with what Tyrrell considers an appropriate coping mechanism.
CATHERINE F. DOYLE Cambridge, Mass.


The Push Is On for Link to Airports;Port Authority Confident of Rail Plan Despite Opposition
Standing before a plastic model of the sleek automated train the Port Authority plans to run from Manhattan to the airports in Queens, an elderly woman took one look during a public hearing last week and turned away.
"It'll never happen," she said, in a sneer of weary dismissal.
Edward J. O'Sullivan, the director of the Port Authority's airport access program, rolled his eyes.


Kelley Lewis, Scott Johnston
Alice Kelley Lewis, a vice president at Bear Stearns Asia Ltd., and Scott Christian Johnston, a vice president at Banker's Trust, both in Hong Kong, were  married yesterday.
The Rev.
Peter Larsen, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Johnston, who is known as Kelley, is a daughter of Mrs.
McGavack Lewis of Washington and Fulton Lewis 3d of Bradenton, Fla.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her mother is a broker at Pardoe Real Estate in Washington.


New York Develops Incentive to Reduce Time in Foster Care
Seeking to reduce the time children spend in foster care, New York State is developing a new approach that would financially reward nonprofit agencies that  quickly return children home or place them for adoption -- and penalize agencies that move slowly.
The state now pays agencies an average of $18 for each day a child is in their care.
The system, similar to others in use all across the country, sets no time limit, and many experts say it provides no incentive to move children out of foster care into secure, permanent homes.


Clinton Goes to Truman Land In Push to 'Give 'em Health'
Trying to draw some magic from the lodestar of political scrappers, President Clinton came to Harry Truman's hometown today to start a homestretch push for a  health care bill that provides universal coverage.
Wrapping himself in the reputation of the first President to propose legislation to guarantee universal health insurance, Mr.
Clinton likened the opponents of such legislation today to Truman's opponents.
He said that both relied on appeals to division and fear.


Erika G. Henik, Joel H. Tranter
Erika Gail Henik, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Willy Henik of Teaneck, N.J., is to be married today to Joel Hillson Tranter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Revan Tranter of Berkeley, Calif.
Rabbi Meyer Rabinowitz is to officiate at the Woodcliff Lake (N.J.) Hilton.
The bride, 26, is the senior research editor at Montgomery Securities, an investment bank in San Francisco.
She and the bridegroom graduated cum laude from Columbia University.
The bride's father is a clinical psychologist in New York.
Her mother, Libby Henik, is an insurance agent and social worker in New York.


Ideas &amp; Trends;Hoover's F.B.I. and the Politics of Art
But Hoover's preoccupation with subversion being what it was, and Mr.
Bernstein's unquestioning embrace of liberal causes being what it was, it was inevitable that the maestro too would grace the Director's files.


Michael R. Carey and Kristen C. Watts
Kristen Cass Watts, the daughter of Mrs.
Elkins Bruce of New Baltimore, Mich., and Dr.
John Watts of La Jolla, Calif., was married yesterday to Michael  Raymond Carey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond B. Carey Jr. of Locust, N.J.
The  Rev.
James Wysocki performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Cathedral in Saginaw, Mich.
Mrs.
Carey, 30, is an accounting supervisor at the ADS Group, health-care managers and consultants in Andover, Mass.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of San Diego.
Her father is a general surgeon at the Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation in La Jolla.
Her mother is the director of the Macomb County infant preschool program for children with special needs, in Clinton Township, Mich.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
A RIVER SUTRA By Gita Mehta.
Vintage International, $11.
These stories take place in India, where a retired civil servant recounts the adventures of holy men and courtesans, loveless children and love-struck adults.
Last year our reviewer, Edward Hower, said the tales are "told with skill and sensitivity" and "a delight to read." DENYING THE HOLOCAUST: The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory By Deborah E. Lipstadt.
Plume, $10.95.
The author examines the arguments of those who insist that the Nazi campaign of  genocide against the Jews never happened, tracing them from the pro-German statements of former isolationists after World War II to "scholarly" attempts to debunk the Holocaust in the United States today.
It is an "important and impassioned work," Walter Reich said here last year, written "particularly from  an American perspective." Exploring the same problem with a concentration on France is ASSASSINS OF MEMORY: Essays on the Denial of the Holocaust, by Pierre  Vidal-Naquet, translated by Jeffrey Mehlman (Columbia University, $15.95).
In the same review, Mr.
Reich said that this French historian impresses the reader  with his "intellectual and moral power." The historical roots of enmity toward Jews are analyzed in ANTISEMITISM: The Longest Hatred, by Robert S. Wistrich (Schocken, $15), which shows how early Christian prejudice, based on theology, has evolved into a more geopolitical animosity today.
It is "as good a one-volume overview of anti-Semitism as exists in English," Mark Silk said here  in 1992.
Efforts to remind the world of the victims of Nazi anti-Semitism are the subject of THE TEXTURE OF MEMORY: Holocaust Memorials and Meaning, by James  E. Young (Yale University, $20).
The author discusses monuments in Germany, Poland, Israel and the United States, noting how they reflect national identity.
Last year our reviewer, Mark Lilla, said Mr.
Young "movingly" shows how "the human desire to memorialize in art those lost to barbarism has survived."


Trade Talks Reach Impasse
The United States will formally charge Japan with failing to open its markets to telecommunications and medical equipment, an official said after talks broke  off.
Page 5.


Pirates May Be Going Up for Sale
The Pittsburgh Pirates' board of directors, expected to vote Wednesday on a new stadium lease, may instead put the team up for sale.
The Pirates notified major league baseball's ownership committee they were discussing a sale to one of two groups. (AP)


Genetic Defect for a Type of Dwarfism Is Found
Researchers say they have found the genetic defect responsible for about a third of the cases of dwarfism, or 1 case in every 20,000 people.
Scientists at the University of California at Irvine found the gene that causes the defect, achondroplasia, just six weeks after they began looking for it.
Three other teams had narrowed the search to the end of human chromosome No. 4.


Aldrich Ames
RICK AMES, A LIFELONG employee of the Central Intelligence Agency, betrayed at least 12 of the best secret agents working for the United States from within  the Soviet Union and the Soviet bloc during the 1980's.
All were jailed and most were executed.
"They died because this warped, murdering traitor wanted a bigger house and a Jaguar," says the Director of Central Intelligence, R. James  Woolsey.
From 1975 to 1985, the C.I.A. promoted Aldrich Hazen Ames, an alcoholic underachiever going through a financially ruinous divorce from a fellow spy, to  increasingly sensitive posts, unaware that he was thinking all the decade about  selling the agency's deepest secrets to Moscow.
For the next decade, it remained unaware that he was hand-delivering reams of top secret papers to the Soviets and talking his vodka-soaked heart out with his Communist case officers in annual all-nighters.


Keeping It Simple, and Straight From the Garden
THE other day a friend who was giving me a lift into the city told me that he loved to cook but confessed that he was sick of reading recipes he described as  "weird."
"I'm not interested in polenta sandwiches or coriander pesto," he said as we  left the rolling hills of northwest Connecticut behind.
"I want to read recipes for simple, straightforward dishes -- and preferably ones that don't cost a lot of money and don't take long to cook."


The Editor Has No Clothes
NEWS AND THE CULTURE OF LYING By Paul H. Weaver. 243 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $22.95.
WHEN I first was a reporter, there reigned a conceit that reporters did not write about reporters or their publications.
One behaved in print like a butler  at cocktail time: silent, self-deprecating when challenged, and confident in one's superiority to everybody else in the room.


Spanky's World


NJN and Its Role Throughout the State
Re: "NJN Girding for Battle of Survival," July 17:
We at the New Jersey Network welcome the coverage on "The New Jersey Channel," but the article presented a distorted perspective.
As executive director of NJN, I am writing to correct the impressions that this view may have created.


East Orange Woman Found Slain in Car
A 45-year-old East Orange woman was found shot dead in the back seat of her car on Friday, after she was apparently abducted from a Bloomfield shopping center in a robbery and driven home by her assailants, the police said.
The victim, Sandra McKnight, was discovered dead in her car, which was abandoned on a dead-end street in Irvington, the police said.
Her husband was injured, they said, when he was hit by the car as he investigated why it was sitting in the family's driveway at one point.


Laura Steinberg, J. H. Sadowsky
Laura Frances Steinberg, the daughter of Rita and Larry Steinberg of Louisville, Ky., is to be married today to Dr.
Jonathan Hal Sadowsky, a son of Jean and Edward Sadowsky of New York.
Rabbi Chester B. Diamond is to perform the ceremony at the Temple in Louisville.
The bride, 24, is completing a bachelor's degree at the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the president of the A-Bell Electric Company, a contractor in Louisville.
Her mother is the executive director of the Kentucky Art and Craft Foundation in Louisville.


WHY DO CATHOLICS STAY IN THE CHURCH? BECAUSE OF THE STORIES
Father Greeley has firmly established his point that the benevolent imagery of Catholicism is paramount in the decision of many adherents to remain faithful.


Maureen Holland, Timothy Dibble
Maureen Therese Holland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel J. Holland of Hingham, Mass., was married there yesterday to Timothy Lavern Dibble, the son of Ursula Dibble of Cambridge, Mass., and the late Prof.
Vernon K. Dibble.
Deacon Edward Doyle officiated at St.
Paul's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Dibble, 28, graduated from the University of Vermont and is studying in  a post-graduate program in teaching at the University of San Francisco.
In the fall she is to begin teaching the fourth grade at the Town School for Boys in San Francisco.
Her father is a general partner in Morgan Holland Ventures, a venture capital firm in Boston.


After Wearing Out Hometown Welcome, George Flees to New Niche
There are more than 1,600 players in the National Football League and each yearns for his own slice of respect and adulation -- especially from his peers.
Often, the players' perceptions of one another are shaped from afar.
In this 1994 N.F.L season of riveting movement sparked by free agency, however, more players are getting a close-up peek at others whom they have long  known only in name and in deed.


Heroic Measures
The noble sandwich is the epicurean leitmotif of summer.
Baseball and the beach, picnics and idle afternoons are predicated on mobile, hand-held meals, meals of infinite variety as well as reassuring familiarity.
Though the Earl of  Sandwich is credited with inventing the snack between the bread, his creation reaches its apogee in America, where it continues to evolve thanks to the recent proliferation of some very fine baking.
In fact, after decades of tuna on rye, cooks are rising to the challenge of spongy focaccia, crusty sourdough and densely seeded buns, attempting to create  -- with a panoply of stuffings -- a true inner life.
Anne Rosenzweig, the chef and co-owner of the Arcadia restaurant in Manhattan, led the charge nearly 10 years ago when she confected a smoked lobster club on brioche with slabs of bacon and lemon mayonnaise.
Alice Waters of Chez Panisse in Berkeley, Calif., brought up the rear with sandwiches of toasted peasant bread stuffed with grilled vegetables and bitter greens.


Nostalgia for the Days When Streets Were Clean
To the Editor:
In response to the question posed in your July 3 F.Y.I. column, "What is the  point of street sweepers?" you state that the machines are "routinely checked before the workers head out," and that the machines "occasionally" squirt "a little water on the street."


Corrections
Three pictures on July 24 with an article about Malden Mills, a Massachusetts textile maker, were published in error.
The workers pictured, David Austin and Lori Morrison, are employees of Wickers Sportswear in Wolfeboro, N.H., not Malden Mills.


The Same Old Same Old
To the Editor:
Did we see the same movie?
Caryn James, in her essay "The Woman in 'True Lies,' a Mouse That Roared" [July 17], highly praises the new Arnold Schwarzenegger film, going so far as calling it a "comic-action version of 'Scenes From a Marriage.' "


Polo Anyone?
Benefiting the Museum of the City of New York, in 'sporting or spectator attire,' July 20.


Developers and Environmentalists Join Forces on Wetlands
Developers and environmentalists, two groups that typically clash over land use, have found common ground in efforts to restore the largest remaining wetlands in Los Angeles.
Once a fertile habitat stretching across 2,000 acres of the California coastline, the Ballona wetlands have over the years been reduced to a 200-acre marsh choked with pollution and threatened by drought, neglect and urban sprawl.


Frugal Choices
To the Editor: Regarding your recent article by Susan Spano, "Penny-Wise in Paris: Right Bank Choices" (June 5), it was a lesson on where not to stay in Paris.
Why does Ms.
Spano believe that most people would want a $59-a-night hotel room where the hotel's only attribute is an unappealing foyer or one where, for  $45 a night one could revel in the knowledge that the room had not been renovated in 40 years.
I don't understand Ms.
Spano's fascination with finding a 10-room hotel without elevator that didn't scream "Holiday Inn." Could one envision a French tourist at a B &amp; B in Soho being overjoyed that it in no way resembled the Hotel de Crillon or Plaza-Athenee?


A Creation Myth or Jelly's Last Laugh?
IN THE SUMMER OF 1938, ONE OF THE greatest of American autobiographies was improvised and dictated, with piano accompaniment, into a portable disk recorder at the Coolidge Auditorium of the Library of Congress.
In the five weeks that the pianist and composer Jelly Roll Morton took to do it, he authored the closest thing we have to a Creation Myth of jazz.
Morton was an epic figure whose story stretched from an apprenticeship in New Orleans's red-light district during the century's first decades to fame and riches in Chicago and New York during the 1920's to a lonesome, penurious death  in Los Angeles in 1941.
He was a pool hustler, cardsharp, sometime pimp, master  monologist and jazz's first great composer.


The Luxury Home Market Carries On
THE aerial view of Seven Springs calls to mind an English village.
A Georgian-style mansion set on 200 acres of rolling meadows, woodlands and apple  orchards is surrounded by 15 outbuildings, including a Tudor residence, a rambling farmhouse plus various barns, a greenhouse and accessory buildings.
The estate, once owned by Eugene I. Meyer Jr., the Wall Street millionaire and onetime head of the Federal Reserve Board who bought The Washington Post in  1933, was completed for the family in 1919 at a cost of $2 million.
Mr.
Meyer was the father of Katharine Graham, who took over the reins of the Post in 1963.


Bronx Not Buying
To the Sports Editor:
I am inexplicably a diehard Yankee fan, and have been for 50 years.
I'm wondering how long Thad Mumford has lived away from New York?
The answer could explain why his well-written article tended to support the Yankees at the expense of the good folks in the Bronx.


Sensuous Spaces Armored in Brick
THIS COLUMN IS SUPPOSED TO be about Rafael Moneo, but it may turn out to be just as much about Paul Rudolph.
For the new Davis Museum and Cultural Center on the Wellesley College campus, the first building outside Spain designed by Mr.
Moneo, one of the world's most respected architects, is right next door to the Jewett Arts Center, the first major building erected anywhere by the eminent American, Mr.
Rudolph.
The Jewett, now 36 years old, is a building of no small importance to American architecture.
And it is not easy to build in the shadow of.
I have always thought of the Jewett as the design in which Paul Rudolph managed to achieve what Eero Saarinen spent most of his career trying to do, which is to create a version of modernism that would be rich, textured, almost picturesque, and comfortable in its relationship to older buildings around it.
Mr.
Rudolph's art center sits beside the historic Gothic structures of Wellesley with comfort and ease: this building of red brick and stone trim with concrete grilles is secure enough to eschew the extremes of either imitation or defiance.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 31, 1994
Weeks This
On Week  List Fiction


Conscience &amp; Courage'
To the Editor:
As one rescued from the Holocaust by a Christian, and as a student of the subject, I was disturbed by Peter Hoffmann's review of Eva Fogelman's "Conscience &amp; Courage: Rescuers of Jews During the Holocaust" (June 12).
Several of his criticisms either are inaccurate or missed the point of the book.


North Koreans Marry, See Movies and Complain, Like All of Us
To the Editor:
I visited North Korea three times, in 1979 as a Newsweek bureau chief and again in 1991 and 1992, and came away with a slightly different perception of Pyongyang than "North Korea: What We DO Know" (The Week in Review, July 17).


Streetscapes/The Brooklyn Paramount;Once a Rococo Palace, Now a Citadel of Learning
A MODERN axiom is that the movie palace of the 1920's has vanished.
But many  survive -- as performance halls, as churches, as multiplexes and, at the Long Island University campus in downtown Brooklyn, as a basketball court.
Now, after three decades of ad-hoc alterations to the 4,124-seat Brooklyn Paramount, the university is beginning a $5 million program designed to finally change a palace for fantasy into one for learning.


Send in the Marshals
The killing of a doctor and his security escort at an abortion clinic in Pensacola, Fla., on Friday was not just a coldblooded murder.
It was an indictment of all those in the anti-abortion movement who have looked the other  way as the violence escalated -- and a call to arms for responsible government officials to crack down on what President Clinton aptly described as a "form of  domestic terrorism."
The violence, reprehensible in itself, is also a political act aimed at depriving women of their constitutionally protected right to an abortion.
It requires a strong Federal response, including deployment of Federal marshals to  protect people at clinics in known trouble spots, like Pensacola, and vigorous Federal investigations to identify the perpetrators of all anti-abortion violence and determine whether there is an organized conspiracy.


In a City's Shadow, An Island Empire
Greater New York is an archipelago, a vast community of islands, some of them rich in human history but as unknown and abandoned as the indigent dead on Hart  Island, off the northern Bronx.
Many are unpopulated except for rare birds nesting amid junglelike vegetation, crumbling buildings, or rotting piers and ships on forgotten shores.


This Week's Numbers


Military's Growing Role in Relief Missions Prompts Concerns
For the Rwanda crisis, as for disasters from the hurricane in south Florida in 1992 to starvation in Somalia, the world has been calling on the Pentagon as  its relief force of last resort.
The military's gigantic transport capacity and  logistical expertise make it well suited to the role, but that does not mean the armed forces always like it.
The military has embraced its relief missions with some ambivalence.
Battle-hardened generals boast of their ability to turn their war machines around to help the sick and needy.
Troops are trained to rebuild cities, handle  vast medical emergencies and whisk life-saving equipment and supplies to far-flung crisis scenes on a few hours' notice.


TRANSACTIONS
Football


Fashion Shows, Art and Music: Celebrating a Culture
Harlem Day, the celebration that started 20 years ago to change negative views of Harlem, is now called Harlem Week, but it actually spans three weeks -- starting tomorrow.
"We're still trying to change the image of the community," said Marko Nobles, a Harlem Week spokesman, "especially in the media."


Cheers for a Small Place With Big Taste
HAVING braved the weekend crowds browsing along the streets of Mystic, we were rewarded with the serendipitous discovery of Restaurant Bravo Bravo, a tiny gem near the bridge.
Next to it on the corner is the open-air, seasonal Cafe Bravo, which shares the same ownership but has a different menu, kitchen and more casual mien.
Restaurant Bravo Bravo is minuscule (seating only 50).
With oak floors and tabletops, white walls alternating with dark green ones, a window wall on the street and ornately framed mirrors, it exudes simple stylishness.


Montecatini
To the Editor: William Weaver's "Taking the Waters in Tuscany," while comprehensive, made this exquisite town sound more like an infirmary than a spa.
I don't think it is true, even for Italians, that most visitors come to improve  their health.
Most of the people we saw were clearly on holiday.
For my mother,  my sister and me, a visit in 1992 was a joyful celebration of Mother's 80th birthday.


Robin Goldberg, Michael Psaros
Robin Elissa Goldberg, a daughter of Melvin and Joan Goldberg of Edgewater, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael George Psaros, a son of George and Mary Ann Psaros.
The Rev.
Robert G. Stephanopoulos performed the ceremony at the Greek Orthodox Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.
The bride, 27, is a marketing copywriter in Manhattan with the Bank of New York.
She graduated from George Washington University and received a master's degree in marketing from Fordham University.
The bridegroom, 27, is an associate at Keilin &amp; Bloom, an investment bank in New York.
He graduated from Georgetown University.


You Weren't at the Men's Shows?
IT may sound oxymoronic, but glamour has come to men's fashion shows.
"It's not just the press and buyers anymore," said J. Stanley Tucker, the men's fashion director of Saks Fifth Avenue.
"There's an energy in New York that you used to find only in Paris and Milan. The men's shows are becoming social events, which bring excitement. American designers and manufacturers are becoming more competitive on the world fashion scene."


After 6 Deaths, Rally Prompts Traffic Change
The timing of lights on a strip of Webster Avenue in Morrisania has been changed to slow down traffic after residents of the Borgia Butler Houses rallied last week to protest the sixth pedestrian fatality in as many years on their block.
"The cars now stop at every other light," said Janie Harris, 50, whose 33-year-old son, Raymond, was killed crossing Webster.
"If one is green, the other one will be red before they can get over there. This is the God's honest truth -- this is the best I've slept in the last three years since my son's death."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER WEST SIDE Not for Children Only: Rediscovering the Puppet


Diana E. Busch, Michael E. Levy
Diana Ellen Busch, a daughter of Linda and Bertram Busch of East Brunswick, N.J., is to be married today to Michael Edward Levy, the son of Shirley and Theodore Levy of Rochester.
Rabbi Bennett Miller is to officiate at the Ocean Place Hilton in Long Branch, N.J.
Rabbis Andrew Busch and Debra Pine, cousins of the bride, will take part in the ceremony.
The bride and bridegroom, both 27, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a partner in Busch &amp; Busch, a law firm in North Brunswick, N.J.
Her mother is an environmental planner at the Middlesex County Planning Board in New Brunswick.


Few Words, Many Deeds, Pave Carlton's Path to Hall of Fame
Perhaps Tinker, Evers and Chance formed a more famous partnership than did Steve Carlton and Tim McCarver.
But that famed double-play combination, which feuded and fussed throughout their playing days, could not rival the pitcher and catcher in terms of friendship.
Which is why it will make it strange today when Steve Carlton is enshrined in the Baseball Hall of Fame and McCarver -- his longtime designated spokesman, defender and caller of signals for so many of the left-hander's 329 victories -- will be in attendance but will not be acting as his interpreter at the podium in Cooperstown, N.Y.


SUNDAY, July 31, 1994;Kudzu Cures
Perhaps no plant besides poison ivy has been more vilified than kudzu, the Asian vine that runs rampant in the South.
It can grow a foot a day and cover a  car in a few weeks and a house in a summer.
Fortunately, humanity continues to look for commercial uses.
Some new possibilities:


Cape Cod, Seen Through Field Glasses
CAPE COD has a way of turning birding skeptics into enthusiasts.
Through most of the year, I am only a now-and-then birder (the term is preferred to bird watcher by the cognoscenti), satisfied to scrutinize the species that visit my feeder or fly across my path.
Yet even before I cross the Sagamore or Bourne Bridge over the Cape Cod Canal, I am already scanning the skies and salt marshes of southeastern Massachusetts for the first harbingers of the birding bonanza to come.
The flexed and outthrust arm of the Cape offers some of the finest birding on the Atlantic Coast since the Outer Cape's position makes it the first landfall on the major north-south Atlantic flyway.
It also benefits from the protection of its diverse terrain by the Cape Cod National Seashore.


Tommy Eagles, 45;Basketball Coach
Tommy Joe Eagles, the former Auburn University basketball coach who became coach at the University of New Orleans in May, collapsed while playing basketball today and died a short time later.
He was 45.
Eagles was visiting with the Phoenix Suns assistant coach Scotty Robertson and several of his former Auburn players, who were participating in the Rocky Mountain Revue at the Delta Center.


July 24-30;A Desert Blooms; Now It's a Park
For at least 15 years, Congress has recognized that the California desert needed protection from the encroachment of humankind.
The explosive population growth in the nation's biggest state was threatening one of the world's rarest ecosystems.
The California desert includes 90 mountain ranges, sand dunes as high as 700  feet, the world's largest forest of cactus-like Joshua trees, the only known dinosaur tracks in the state and rock paintings left by the earliest Americans.


The Nation;New Role for Presidents Cuts 2 Ways on Health
WHEN Congress considered Medicare in 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson had made the bill a major priority, and he was continually involved in twisting arms to get it passed.
Yet his name rarely appeared in newspaper or television accounts of its progress on Capitol Hill.
Neither the bill's occasional setbacks nor ultimate passage were generally thought of as good or bad for Johnson.
There was fierce debate, to be sure, but  it was about whether a government-paid system of medical care for the elderly was a good idea.


Correction
A letter on July 3 from Stephen H. Miller, objecting to the choice of the reviewer of Christina Hoff Sommers's "Who Stole Feminism?" was printed in error.
The letter was intended for the editor of the Book Review personally.
The Book Review ordinarily asks the sender whether a letter is intended for publication;  in this case, the check was overlooked.


Keeping It Simple, and Straight From the Garden
THE other day a friend who was giving me a lift into the city told me that he loved to cook but confessed that he was sick of reading recipes he described as  "weird."
"I'm not interested in polenta sandwiches or coriander pesto," he said as we  left the rolling hills of northwest Connecticut behind.
"I want to read recipes for simple, straightforward dishes -- and preferably ones that don't cost a lot of money and don't take long to cook."


The President's Past
A good place to begin thinking about how Bill Clinton became who he is today  is the Arkansas town of Springdale, where a short, red-faced man known as Mr.
Chicken sits in a room modeled after the Oval Office of the President of the United States (although not precisely; the White House's Oval Office does not have doorknobs shaped like hen's eggs) and tells a story about the political education of a bright young fellow.
It may seem an act of considerable vanity for a chicken farmer to build himself a copy of the President's office.
But Don Tyson is a realist to his thick fingertips, as befits a man who presides over the largest abattoir the world has ever seen -- every week, Tyson Foods reduces 25 million chickens to plucked and gutted shadows of their former selves -- and he sees politics as a series of unsentimental transactions between those who need votes and those who  have money.
His office decor is an accurate, not immodest statement about where, in a world where every quid has its quo, power lives.


Suspect in Abortion Clinic Killings Is Charged
Paul J. Hill, the Pensacola man charged in the slayings on Friday of an abortion clinic doctor and his volunteer bodyguard, appeared today in court for  the first time, exhibiting a cheerful insouciance as he talked of not understanding the legal system and, in earnest tones, asked the judge for advice on what he should do.
Dressed in the forest green jumpsuit worn by inmates at the Escambia County Jail, Mr.
Hill, 40, appeared in a tiny, first-floor courtroom at the jail as scores of reporters watched via a television monitor.
After he was charged with  two counts of first-degree murder and one count of attempted murder, he was ordered held without bail until an arraignment on Aug. 19, when he is expected to enter a plea.


Putting the Special Into Effects
AS the Phoenix Theater Company prepared for the first technical rehearsal of  the "Crucifer of Blood," now being staged at the Performing Arts Center of Purchase College here, the props and sets, not the actors, were the center of attention.
Would the glass eye sparkle like a diamond?
Would the candle blaze on cue, before the blood pellet melted in the scoundrel's mouth?
Was the dagger bright enough?
The fog thick enough?
The darkness dark enough to chill the audience on  a hot summer night?


French Council Eases Language Ban
France's constitutional watchdog today struck down some major provisions of a law promoting the French language that banned the use of foreign words in broadcasting and advertising.
The nine-member Constitutional Council ruled that while the use of French was compulsory, the Government had no right to impose official French translations of foreign words on private citizens, companies and the news media.
It said the  Government could only require their use by public authorities and public-sector  companies other than radio and television.


Sweating, Then Strutting
AT Chanel's recent haute-couture show in Paris, the designer Karl Lagerfeld showed a body-binding corsetlike bustier as the basic element to be paired with  his current variation on the classic Chanel suit.
Over the last few years, Mr.
Lagerfeld has became famous for mining street trends to update the Chanel look -- showing them with everything from black leather motorcycle jackets to Rollerblades and high-top platform sneakers.
Now,  it seems, he has been inspired by history books rather than contemporary street  culture.


Mexican Candidate's Crash Called Accidental
The authorities have arrested the driver of the truck that smashed into the campaign vehicle of the main opposition candidate for Governor of Chiapas on Monday, severely injuring the candidate and killing three campaign workers.
Based on the driver's testimony and other information, the authorities said they had determined that the collision was an accident.
The candidate's family still asserts that it was a deliberate attempt on his life.


Tenant-Owners Discover It's Tough To Be a Landlord
When they started their journey in March with a newly minted lease and an abundance of enthusiasm, the tenant-owners of a dilapidated building complex on  Broadway Terrace had one immediate goal: a new superintendent.
"We had to get rid of that guy, get him out of the building, off the block, out of our lives," said Sergio Cruz, an electrician by trade and the president of the eight-member board of directors that now controls the building.


World Markets;In Mexico, a Case of Political Jitters
UNCERTAINTY is getting to be an unwelcome economic fixture here.
Last week offered a mirror image of last year.
Through most of 1993, Mexico's stock exchange and money market were whipsawed by the changing fortunes of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The Government of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari had so much riding on passage of the pact that when any obstacles arose, the Mexican stock exchange plummeted.
The more likely approval seemed, the more spirited was trading on the floor of the Bolsa Mexicana de Valores.


The Curse of Incessant Cursing
JOE TORRY DANCES HIS WAY TO CENTER stage, dressed in a white T-shirt, black leather vest and black pants, to welcome his theater and television audience to  "Russell Simmons's Def Comedy Jam." Five minutes later, he completes the routine, which is largely about his feelings that the women in the audience should have more active sex lives.
In the process, he uses at least 63 words considered unprintable here.
That's one profane or vulgar term every 4.7 seconds.
Can a showcase become a ghetto, perhaps partially by design?
Consider "Def Comedy Jam," a platform for black comics that on Fridays at midnight (with reruns on Thursdays and Saturdays), has been extremely successful for Home Box Office since its debut in March 1992.


On Sunday;First Banana: A Welcome To a New Land
FOR some reason, when the tired, the poor and the wretched look back after an immigrant's lifetime in America, they often linger on the long-ago memory of seeing and eating their first banana.
The shipboard misery of migration is always detailed to interviewers, of course, and the glowing greenness of the Statue of Liberty's welcome is never forgotten.
But, too, a reliably recurring episode in many sagas remains "my first banana": How it came to be wondered at and finally possessed, then puzzled over until shy observance of veteran Americans revealed the need to peel it before that first taste of sweet substance set memory's measure of the New World's exotica.


Fat Times Are Over for Premium Ice Cream Makers
ACROSS America, there are still whole-pint gobblers.
Armed with a spoon and a craving, they polish off an entire pint of Haagen-Dazs or Ben &amp; Jerry's ice cream in a single sitting.
Often, they have favored techniques.
Some like to grip the ice-cream container with an oven mitt to keep their holding-hand warm.
Others advocate zapping a pint for a few seconds in the microwave to quickly soften the rich, fat-laden ice cream.
The ice-cream gourmands may be a hardy breed -- or foolhardy, health experts  say -- but their numbers are dwindling.
And more and more, shoppers browsing the freezer cases of the nation's supermarkets are likely to resist grabbing a carton of Chunky Monkey, Triple Brownie Overload or some other flavor of super-premium ice cream.
Super-premium is the top tier of the ice cream market,  where the prices ($2.70 a pint on average), the calories (270 or more in a four-ounce serving) and the fat content (up to 23 grams of fat) are highest.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Meter's Ticking for Costly Simpson Defense
How much will O. J. Simpson have to pay for his ever-expanding defense team of lawyers, investigators and experts?
Many outside lawyers answer with a question of their own: How much money does he have?
"A defense like this will cost your net worth -- whatever it is, they'll take it," said John Shepard Wiley, a professor of law at the University of California at Los Angeles.
"I'm just staggered at the number of lawyers and scientists and  investigators that are being daily added to the team."


Ship Terminal At a Crossroads: Forecast Unclear
Twenty years ago, Mayor Abraham D. Beame proudly opened the new Passenger Ship Terminal as "the most modern available anywhere to ocean travelers." Planners hoped the terminal, on three Hudson River piers from 48th to 52d Streets, would fortify an ebbing industry that was once a local mainstay.
Instead, passenger totals fell from 626,368 in 1973 to 495,451 in 1974, and the  years since have been even worse.
Now the terminal is at a crossroads.
Its $40 million in construction bonds are being paid off this year, and the Port Authority's operating lease is expiring.
Because the terminal loses money -- earning $7 million and costing $12 million last year -- the authority says it will not stay, at least not under the current terms.
"We can't continue this kind of loss," said Victoria Cross Kelly, the authority's acting general manager.


SPECTATOR SPORT
Dinosaurs are not extinct.
At least one is alive and well and romping through the pages of The American Spectator.
After all, who but a dinosaur would write essays praising alcohol, tobacco and fatty foods?


Profile;The Job, Thankless; the Challenge, Huge. Let's Go.
FORTUNATELY, Jeffrey C. Barbakow likes challenges, because he recently faced  the challenge of a lifetime.
A year ago, National Medical Enterprises was speeding toward disaster.
Besieged by charges of kickbacks, fraud and patient abuse at its psychiatric hospitals, the company was -- in one of its own lobbyists' words -- "radioactive." It stock had sunk to $6.50 from $25 just two years earlier.


On High Road and Low, Scottish Lodgings
AFTER visiting Glasgow last July, we drove into the countryside, east toward  Perth and north to the Grampian region, over to the Highlands and down the western coast, staying at country-house hotels both grand and homey.
A few elements were common to most: a long, rhododendron-lined drive (Scotland's love  of the rhododendron is limitless), a good wine selection, a view of sheep or cattle from the house and in the bedroom, invariably, a skirted ladies' dressing table.
One Devonshire Gardens
Three grand 1860's town houses, part of a tree-lined Victorian terrace, make  up this splendid 25-room, two-suite hotel in a residential section of Glasgow.
The houses are not broken through, so if you stay in one of the two others, you  come outside to enter the house where the dining room is located and where we stayed.


2 Plays on Lindbergh Kidnapping
FOLLOW every breathtaking mile of Lindbergh's monumental trans-Atlantic flight," reads a recent blurb for a travel film with Robin Williams as narrator. After space expeditions and encounters of a more breathtaking and monumental kind, how can a 1927 rerun maintain the capacity to arouse?
And surely the kidnapping and the killing of Charles A. Lindbergh's 20-month-old son, Charles Jr., from his nursery five years later comes up against other contenders for the title "crime of the century." And more sordid courtroom sagas rival what has also been called "the trial of the century."


More White House Damage Control
Last week's Whitewater hearings before the House Banking Committee numbed the senses.
That was the way committee Democrats and the White House planned it.
Restricted by rules imposed by the chairman and frustrated by a well-drilled White House defense, Republicans gained very little traction with their charge that the White House and the Treasury Department had conspired to shape a Federal investigation into the collapse of an Arkansas savings and loan.
But the Administration's own self-portrait was an alarming one.
Its main line of defense was to blame the media for all those meetings about what was supposed to be an arm's-length Federal investigation into whether funds from Madison Guaranty were illegally funneled into the Whitewater Development Corporation and Mr.
Clinton's 1984 gubernatorial campaign.


Letters Are Acts of Faith; Telephone Calls Are a Reflex
IN 1920, when my mother was 18 years old, she worked in the accounts department of a large wholesale bakery in lower Manhattan.
The chief bookkeeper  was, like herself, a European immigrant who read books and listened to music.
Mr.
Levinson (an unhappily married man who lived in the Bronx) saw in my mother  (a soulful young woman who lived on the Lower East Side) a kindred spirit.
When  they parted at the end of the working day his need for her conversation had often not run its course, and he fell into the habit of writing to her late at night.
These letters were remarkably varied in mood and content.
They might begin reflectively at the point where the discussion had ended that day, or announce suddenly that he'd been to the theater and was drenched in longing for he knew not what, or that a child was sick, the apartment in chaos and his life a hell.
The language might be poetic in tone or cynical or despairing: variations of response he allowed himself only in writing, never face to face at the bakery.


The Disappearing Duchess
HER LEFT EYEBROW IS RAISED AND beckoning.
A tantalizing half-smile, just one  quiver short of a full pout, plays across her lips, and beneath the huge cocked  hat her glance is mischievous.
In one hand she grasps a blooming rose and in the other, pinched suggestively between thumb and forefinger, a ripe pink rosebud.
1785: PORTRAIT OF A LADY


July 24-30;Serbs Test International Resolve
The Serbs last week tightened the noose around Sarajevo again, cutting off the one land route out and firing at both United Nations planes and a convoy of  British soldiers.
But their squeeze was as much on the United States and its partners in the quest for a Bosnian peace as it was on the weary citizens of the Bosnian capital.
In effect the Serbs have declared that they cannot accept the territorial settlement proposed by the coalition of the United States, Russia, Germany, France and Britain and that they do not believe in the cohesion of the group or  its ability to apply significant military pressure.


What'll He Try Next?
Jose Pretlow doesn't let just any cross-dressing, sex-addicted teen-ager who's suing his own parents qualify as a guest on Geraldo Rivera's talk show, "Geraldo." Mr.
Pretlow, who has worked as the show's senior producer for two years, has his rules:
*Never advertise.
"I have found that, in my mind, that invites a certain degree of phoniness," said Mr.
Pretlow, who prefers more democratic means of looking for guests, like going to shopping malls and listening to people's conversations.
"Ads encourage a number of people who have nothing better to do than somehow ham it up and get on TV and come on your program. These are the people who will be on one show talking about the fact that they married their first cousin and then a week later they're on a different show saying how much they hate their mother."


SUNDAY, July 31, 1994;Owl Pellet Biology
Children and teachers who have second thoughts about dissecting frogs in the  name of science can breathe easy.
Owl pellets are becoming the teaching tool of  choice in schools across the country.


Sally R. Cohen, Andrew Alameno
Sally Rose Cohen, the daughter of Phyllis Romm of New York and Judge Richard  S. Cohen of Plainfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Alameno, a son of  Dr. and Mrs.
Carmen Alameno of Wildwood Crest, N.J.
The bride's father, a judge  in the Appellate Division of State Superior Court in New Brunswick, N.J., officiated at the Forsgate Country Club in Jamesburg, N.J.
Rabbi David Cohen, the bride's brother, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Cohen-Alameno, 31, is the assistant director of admissions at the Brearley School in New York.
She graduated from Drew University.
Her stepfather, Alan Romm, is an insurance broker in New York.
Her stepmother, Pamela Hattem, is an associate at Dughi &amp; Hewit, a law firm in Cranford, N.J.


Balancing Act: When Play and Parking Clash
Like hundreds of organizers who oversee Police Athletic League play streets across the city each summer, Diana Peterson is well acquainted with the difficulties: enlisting neighborhood support, keeping troublemakers away, cleaning it all up every night when the children go home.
But in Washington Heights and Inwood, organizers like Ms.
Peterson have for many years had a much bigger headache.
In an area where a housing police officer was killed as he responded to a disturbance last October during a city car-towing operation, her efforts to clear a stretch of Sickles Street have met  with stiff resistance.


Political Notes;Decisions? Others Make Them, Say Candidates for Governor
The buck stops -- well, not here, apparently, when here is the office of the  candidate running for governor in New York, and that seems to apply to both the  Democrats and the Republicans.
Both Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the Democratic incumbent, and State Senator George  E. Pataki, his Republican challenger, acted last week as if they had no role in major decisions made by their campaigns.
The candidates, it seems, are like disembodied heads, having no contact with or responsibility for the hands and legs of their operatives.


Interface;An I.B.M. Outlet? The Price May Be Right
ACROSS from the Levi's outlet, around the corner from Bass Shoes and Prestige Fragrance and Cosmetics, is an I.B.M. outlet store.
In the tradition of day-old bread, these are months-old computers.
Many are the manufacturer's overstock, things that failed to sell while they were still current.
That has been a growing problem for I.B.M., which last week announced layoffs and other changes in its PC business intended, among other things, to reduce its inventory buildup.


At Center of Abortion Shooting: an Avid Protester and an UncertainMartyr
Paul Jennings Hill preached but, until Friday, police say, did not practice.
The man he is accused of killing, Dr.
John Bayard Britton, practiced but did not preach.
The conundrum is at the heart of the collision of the two men's lives outside the Pensacola Ladies Center.
The police say Mr.
Hill fired at least three shots from a 12-gauge shotgun just before Dr.
Britton was to go inside and perform his regular Friday rounds at the abortion clinic.


Too Small to Play, Right Size for Hall
Phil Rizzuto was driven to Ebbets Field in his Uncle Mike's car -- "one of those old cars, with the balloon tires," Rizzuto recalled.
And he carried in a little bag with his glove his Richmond Hill High School baseball uniform.
It was 1936, Rizzuto was 18 years old, and he was going for a tryout with the Dodgers, the team he loved, having grown up at Dill Place and 78th Road in Brooklyn, now a part of Queens.
He was small, at 5 feet 5 1/2 inches, and weighed about 150 pounds, but he was filled with determination and confidence.
After all, he had been a very good high school player, and even turned down athletic scholarships to Columbia and Fordham because of his dream to one day play major league baseball.


Jodi A. Green, Craig B. Werner
Jodi Ann Green, the daughter of Esther and Harry Green of Howard Beach, Queens, is to be married today to Dr.
Craig Brian Werner, the son of Nessa and Israel Baron of Abington, Pa.
Rabbi Rafael Saffra is to perform the ceremony at  the Rockwood Park Jewish Center in Howard Beach.
The bride, 33, is a vice president in marketing at Dean Witter Reynolds, the  securities brokerage in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.


P. A. Meiselman, Bertrand Boulet
Pamela Abbe Meiselman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Frederick Meiselman of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Bertrand Boulet, the son of Claudine Boulet of Conflans-Ste.-Honorine, France, and the late Bernard Boulet.
Town Justice Katherine Cahill of East Hampton, L.I., performed the ceremony at the summer house of the bride's parents in Bridgehampton, L.I.
The bride, 28, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College.
She is the assistant to the director of Karin Models in Paris.
Her father is an oral and maxillofacial surgeon in Elizabeth, N.J.


KIM PHILBY AND THE AGE OF PARANOIA
St.
John Philby was not, in fact, the first Westerner to have crossed the Empty Quarter ("Kim Philby and the Age of Paranoia," by Ron Rosenbaum, July 10).
His extensive mapping exploration in 1932 was preceded by that of Bertram Thomas, author of "Arabia Felix," in 1931.
St.
John learned of Thomas's successful expedition just as he was about to begin his own.
Wilfred Thesiger, another archetypical British explorer, wrote that St.
John's was the greater and more difficult trip, but that St.
John had advantages denied to Thomas, such as the backing of Ibn Saud's authority and the protection given him by the fact of his being a Muslim, and said that the names  of Thomas and Philby would be to Arabia as Amundsen and Scott are to the South Pole.


The Corpses and Curses Of a Victorian Thriller
EARLY in "The Crucifer of Blood," imperial India (where the prologue untangles) is said to have "an uncanny way of bringing out the extremes in people." And it isn't long before strange things require extreme measures in this play of six scenes.
An untouchable kills a leper, or thinks he has.
English officers and Hindus are plotting.
They talk of the runaway rebel maharajah; the time of the mutiny is upon them.
What anyone will do to get a hold of a chest of precious gems knows no limits.
"It gives me the willies," a conspirator says.
"It is Kismet,"  another announces.


Anne Rasmussen, John Zaccaro Jr.
Anne Elizabeth Rasmussen, a daughter of Ginnie Weyerhaeuser Record and William R. Rasmussen, both of St.
Paul, was married there yesterday to John Anthony Zaccaro Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Zaccaro of Forest Hills, Queens.
Msgr.
Terrence J. Murphy performed the ceremony in the Weyerhaeuser Memorial Chapel at Macalester College.
Mrs.
Zaccaro, 30, is a marketing consultant in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is the president of Nu-Star Inc., an industrial machinery manufacturer in Shakopee, Minn.
Her mother serves on the board of the Weyerhaeuser Foundation.
The bride is a great-great granddaughter of Frederick Weyerhaeuser, a founder of the Weyerhaeuser Company, the lumber and forest products concern.


Graduate's Speech Brings Effort to Have Harvard Bar Him
A high school administrator here has tried to punish a Harvard-bound student  who strayed from his written remarks in a graduation speech, prompting the school board to consider a more liberal speech code.


Man Held in Killing Of Wife and Child
A heated argument led a Queens man to kill his wife and their 3-year-old daughter with a meat cleaver on Friday evening, the police said yesterday.
The man, Ramon Rodriguez, 29, had told the police that he called for help after finding the bodies of his wife, Francesca, and daughter, Alexa, in a pool  of blood when he arrived home.
But he made statements that led to his arrest after hours of questioning in the 109th Precinct, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
He was charged with two counts of second-degree murder.


U.S. Considers Suing 3 Who Fought a Project for the Homeless
Alexandra White did not want the Bel Air Motel, a seedy flophouse behind her  house, converted into rooms for the homeless.
So she complained, at meetings, in a newsletter and in a lawsuit she filed, detailing her worries that more drug users and mentally ill people would be in the neighborhood.
Ms.
White lost her battle and the conversion will soon begin.
But now she finds herself in yet another fight, this time with the Federal Government.


July 24-30: Angst in Anchorage;Exxon Will Pay $20 Million to Alaskans
Last week Exxon agreed to pay $20 million to Alaskan native villagers who are among the plaintiffs seeking billions of dollars in a mammoth Federal lawsuit.
The agreement, which affects 3,500 people, is meant to pay for damage to fish, seals, kelp and other foods that native Alaskans in 18 villages harvest from coastal regions polluted by the country's worst oil tanker spill five years ago.
The settlement helps solidify an evolving legal theory in environmental law: that a price tag can be put on natural resources harmed by pollution.


The Royal Ballet Does a Little Ghostbusting
ANTHONY DOWELL, the Royal Ballet's director, persuasively banished the ghosts of the Royal past in his provocative and ultimately satisfying new production of "The Sleeping Beauty."
The disordered and flamboyant world that the designer Maria Bjornson revealed at the Metropolitan Opera House this month was embodied in a clash of compositional forms.
The set's perspective was deliberately distorted: a whirl of circular shapes within a huge oval frame drew the eye upward, while boldly tilted pillars at the sides closed in on the choreography's traditional diagonals and symmetry.


Save the Marriage
To the Sports Editor:
As a matrimonial attorney, I find Thad Mumford's comparison between divorce and the Yankees leaving the Bronx interesting.


Julie A. Buckley, Matthew R. Groves
Julie Anne Buckley, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome Buckley of Denver, was married there yesterday to Matthew Ray Groves, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray J.  Groves of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Patrick Tierney performed the ceremony at the Holy Ghost Church.
Mrs.
Groves and her husband, both 23, graduated from Boston College.
They are law students in Chicago, where she is studying at John Marshall Law School and he at Loyola University Law School.


Trevino Tied With No Ordinary Amateur
In a milieu of golfing legends and outstanding former club pros, a 50-year-old career amateur would seem an unlikely prospect to overtake Lee Trevino in a tournament.
But Jay Sigel was no ordinary amateur.
And he was good enough to catch up with Trevino today in the second round of the 54-hole Northville Long Island Classic with a five-under-par 67 that tied them for the lead in the $650,000 Senior Professional Golfers Association event.


On Rafting Trip, Running Into Trouble
ENCOURAGED by the river guides I had spoken to, I wasn't overly concerned with sinkholes or hidden rock beds.
Fear is part of the thrill of river rafting, I figured, so I didn't dwell on the possibility of anything more serious than getting frostbite from April's unseasonable cold.
That was, until the moment we  stood on the lawn of the Lone Birch Motel in Indian Lake, N.Y., in our borrowed  wet suits and my husband turned to one of our guides and facetiously asked, "Any deaths lately?"
"Yeah," answered Dave Breglia, the owner of the company, Northern Pathfinders.
"Yesterday." But the man who died, he added, was on a trip with another outfitter.


Radon Tests Urged in Day-Care Centers
While scientists are debating the accuracy of household tests for the gas radon and even questioning whether existing safety standards are too strict, New Jersey environmental officials are urging day-care centers throughout the state  to test for radon.
The state asked the 2,500 licensed centers to conduct the tests after a pilot study showed that 10 of 22 centers tested had readings above the level recommended by the Federal Government.
Radon, a naturally occurring radioactive  gas that has no odor or color, is linked to increased risks of lung cancer.


Dressed For Heroism
To the Editor:
Caryn James asserts that "in the course of 'True Lies' Jamie Lee Curtis changes from a mouse to an action hero." However, the primary purpose of Ms.
Curtis's character seems to be to parade around in a tight dress with a plunging neckline while being barked at by excited authoritative males.
If this kind of behavior is heroic, then the fashion page should be retitled "Heroines Anonymous." MARCUS MATTHEW BOCCHINO Hillsdale, N. J.


Interstate Commerce Commission Comes Under Siege in Congress
The 107-year-old Interstate Commerce Commission is coming under siege in Congress, but an unusual alliance principally made up of the businesses under its supervision is fighting to rescue the agency.
The nation's railroads and trucking companies rolled to the defense of the commission after the House voted 234 to 192 last month to eliminate its $45 million budget starting on Oct. 1.


Corrections
An article on July 17 about the New York Stage and Film Company misspelled the name of the author of the play "Amazing Frogs and Toads." She is Terri Minsky, not Terry Linsky.
A schedule listing with the article misspelled the surname of the author of "The Quilling of Prue," a work in progress.
She is Mary Gail, not Gall.


J.A.L. Service Comes at a High Price
To the Editor:
Susan Fishman Orlins asserts that "auto makers are not the only ones who could learn from Japan" after she compares customer service in trans-Pacific flights on United and Japan Airlines (Viewpoints, July 3).
But Ms.
Orlins neglects to mention that J.A.L.'s service comes at a high price.


